





























































Hansard: June 09, 1998


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1787 
 June 9, 1998 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have 
a petition to present on behalf of many people in Saskatchewan. 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action to ensure that the required level of 
service in radiology is maintained in the North Central 
Health District and the priorities of its board be adjusted 
accordingly. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the signatures to this come from many 
communities in north-central Saskatchewan, communities like 
Melfort, Nipawin, Tisdale, Kinistino, Gronlid, St. Brieux, Star 
City. I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present today on behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions come from the Carievale and Carnduff areas in 
the south-east, Mr. Speaker. I so present. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As well to present 
petitions in regards to the Plains health care centre, reading the 
prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to put 
an immediate halt to all plans of closure of the Plains 
Health Centre. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the petitions I’m presenting today are signed 
by individuals from Prince Albert, Lebret, Fort Qu’Appelle, 
Carievale, Gainsborough, Carnduff, Redvers, certainly across 
the province. I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. 
The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 

immediate action to ensure the required level of service in 
radiology is maintained in North Central Health District, 
and the priorities of its board be adjusted accordingly. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

The communities involved, Mr. Speaker, are Melfort, St. 
Benedict, Pleasantdale, Tisdale, many corners of the province. I 
so present. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I too rise to present a petition, 
and these are signed from people from Parkside, Shellbrook, 
Vonda, Edam, and basically from communities all over 
Saskatchewan, and the intent of the petition is to request the 
cancellation of the severance payments to Jack Messer. I so 
present. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise on 
behalf of citizens from all through the north-east — Melfort, 
Kinistino, Star City, Tisdale, Nipawin, Pleasantdale, and even 
Regina, Mr. Speaker — concerned about adequate funding for 
radiology service in Melfort. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action to ensure that the required level of 
service in radiology is maintained in the North Central 
Health District and the priorities of its board be adjusted 
accordingly. 
 

I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
to present today from the people in rural Saskatchewan 
regarding the Carrot River Hospital asking the government to 
cause . . . to take immediate action to ensure the survival of 
their hospital. The people who have signed this petition are 
from Arborfield and Carrot River. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 
petitions on behalf of citizens concerned about inaction on the 
part of this government with respect to completing the twinning 
of the Trans-Canada Highway in this province. And the prayer 
reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call upon the provincial and 
federal governments to meet immediately and conclude a 
cost-sharing agreement on the twinning of the 
Trans-Canada Highway in Saskatchewan so that twinning 
of the remaining portions of the Trans-Canada Highway in 
Saskatchewan can be begin at the very earliest possible 
date. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Those who’ve signed these petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from 
all across this province. I so present. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise to 
present petitions on behalf of northern Saskatchewan people, 
and the prayer reads as follows: 



1788 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 1998 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to take immediate action to 
allow the North to join the rest of Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And the people that have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are 
from Canoe Lake, Saskatchewan. They’re from Uranium City, 
Saskatchewan; from Camsell city, Saskatchewan and from all 
throughout the land, Mr. Speaker. And I so present. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud to rise 
again today on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan to present 
a petition. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to: (1) change the law to allow 
Saskatchewan citizens to erect a cross if they so choose 
where their loved one was killed; and (2) establish safety 
guidelines to ensure that is done properly. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition has been signed by people right 
across Saskatchewan and I’ll just quickly go through a few just 
to show the expanse of support that this petition has from the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Signatures on this petition are from the communities of 
Mankota and Glentworth. Mr. Speaker, they’re from the city of 
Regina. They’re from the city of Moose Jaw, from Rockglen, 
from Fir Mountain. They’re from Milestone. They’re from 
Weyburn. They’re from Coleville, from Prince Albert, from 
Christopher Lake. They’re from Togo, Mr. Speaker. They’re 
from Strasbourg. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they are from Strongfield. They are from Viceroy. 
Mr. Speaker, they’re from Riverhurst. They’re from Briercrest. 
They’re from Elbow. They’re from Saskatoon. They’re from 
Yellow Grass. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that’s a good indication of the support that 
this petition has and I so present. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise on behalf of 
concerned citizens from right across the province with respect 
to the closure of the Plains Health Centre: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And the signatures on these petitions, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
great communities of Ituna, Fenwood, Homefield, Goodeve, 
Willowbrook, Hubbard, and Wadena. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I rise with petitions on the 
dangerous practice of night hunting. And your petitioners 

requesting that night hunting be banned come from Moose Jaw, 
Assiniboia, Vibank, Pilot Butte, Regina, Davin, Melville, 
Stockholm, Killaly, and Bengough. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
bring forward petitions in the people’s efforts to stop the 
closure of the Plains hospital here in Regina. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed these petitions are 
from Assiniboia, Limerick, Rockglen, Lisieux, Ponteix, 
Moose Jaw, Coronach, Big Beaver, Lipton, Fort Qu’Appelle, 
Indian Head, Lemberg, Melville, Balcarres, more from Ituna, 
several from Regina, Kelliher, and several from the 
constituency of Regina Albert South. I so present. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
rise again to present petitions and honourably so, on behalf of 
those who are concerned with and seeking justice for men 
and women who have lost spouses in work-related accidents. 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to have the Workers’ 
Compensation Board Act amended for the disenfranchised 
widows and widowers of Saskatchewan, whereby their 
pensions are reinstated and their revoked pensions 
reimbursed to them retroactively and with interest, as 
requested by the statement of entitlement presented to the 
Workers’ Compensation Board on October 27, 1997. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The people who have signed these petitions today, Mr. 
Speaker, are mostly from Regina, from Cupar, and Regina 
again. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — I thank you, Mr. Speaker, I rise today to 
present the petitions as usual and I’ll read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reach necessary agreements with other levels of 
government to fund the twinning of the Trans-Canada 
Highway in Saskatchewan so that work can begin in 1998, 
and to set out the time frame for the ultimate completion of 
the project with or without federal assistance. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These all come, Mr. Speaker, from Fox Valley, Piapot, Maple 
Creek, Lancer, Hazlet, Cabri, Shackleton, Abbey, Leader, 
Prelate, Lancer, Fox Valley, Golden Prairie, Mendham, 
Liebenthal, Prelate, Gull Lake, Webb, Tompkins, Eastend, 
Consul, Frontier, Robsart, Vidora, Shaunavon, Swift Current, 



June 9, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1789 

Medicine Hat, Burstall, and Richmond, along with several 
hundred thousand other names from all across the land. And 
I’m happy to present them today, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the 
people of Saskatchewan, Alberta, and Manitoba. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk:  According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby 
read and received. 
 

Of citizens of the province humbly praying: for the 
twinning of the Trans-Canada Highway; for the 
government to work with aboriginal Metis leaders in an 
effort to end the practice of night hunting; for the ban on 
the practice of night hunting; praying to cancel any 
severance payments to Jack Messer and to call an 
independent public inquiry surrounding the Channel Lake 
fiasco; praying to have The Workers’ Compensation Board 
Act amended to reinstate pensions for disenfranchised 
widows and widowers; praying to relocate Highway 40 at 
the entrance of North Battleford; praying for action to 
allow Steve and Kimberley Walchuk to remain in the 
custody of their maternal grandparents; praying for action 
to allow the North to join the rest of Saskatchewan; and 
finally praying for the government to take immediate 
action to ensure that service in radiology is maintained in 
the North Central Health District. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, 
SELECT, AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
Standing Committee on Crown Corporations 

 
Ms. Lorje: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my privilege to 
present the seventh report of the Standing Committee on Crown 
Corporations which is as follows: 
 
Your committee recommends that upon completion of the 
committee’s investigation into the acquisition, management, 
and sale of Channel Lake Petroleum Ltd. by SaskPower and the 
payments to Mr. John R. Messer when he ceased to serve as 
president of SaskPower, the Assembly do authorize the 
committee to table its report thereon intersessionally by 
submitting the same report to the Clerk of the Assembly, 
whereupon such report shall be deemed to be tabled. 
 
And further, that upon receipt of the report of the committee, 
the Clerk of the Assembly shall: a) cause a copy of the report to 
be delivered to all members of the Legislative Assembly; b) 
distribute the report publicly as directed by the Standing 
Committee on Crown Corporations; and c) make the report 
available for public inspection during normal business hours in 
the Office of the Clerk. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do now move, seconded by the member for 
Regina Coronation Park, that: 
 

The seventh report of the Standing Committee on Crown 
Corporations be now concurred in. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was being 
deferential, as always, to my other colleagues, but it is my 
pleasure to introduce to you today another group visiting us 
from Massey School. There was a group here yesterday. I am 
very pleased to recognize in your gallery today a group of grade 
5 students from Massey, and they’re here to observe the 
proceedings, and I’ll have a chance to meet with them 
afterwards. So if you would join with me in welcoming them, 
I’d appreciate it. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you, sitting in the east gallery here this afternoon, is a group of 
grade 8 students — 22 of them if my count serves me well — 
from the Herbert Elementary School. Sitting with their teacher, 
Darryl Walls; chaperon Jim Wright or Jim White, I’m sorry; 
and the bus driver Brenda Schulz. 
 
So I’d like everyone to join with me this afternoon in 
welcoming them here to the legislature and I hope that you 
enjoy your tour. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I’d like to introduce to you and through you to 
members of the Assembly, Rose Rothenburg who has worked 
in my constituency office in Prince Albert since 1986 when I 
was elected. Along with her is her son, Tyler, and I want to 
welcome them both to Regina and to the legislature and I hope 
they enjoy their stay down here. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Forest Fires in the North 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The forest fire 
situation has taken a turn for the worst. Ile-a-la-Crosse had its 
road closed and heavy smoke hangs over the community. I’m 
going home tomorrow to review the situation and help in any 
way I can. 
 
What distresses me, Mr. Speaker, is the lack of understanding 
from the member from Cannington and his party have about 
forest fires. Yesterday he suggested ways to get water to a fire 
area, and I quote from Hansard: 
 

. . . it was in a movie sometime I saw where helicopters 
were actually dumping the water into the fire-fighting 
equipment from the air. 
 
. . . if your helicopters are so good they can drop a marker 
within a few yards of the fire, surely they could dump a 
couple hundred gallons of water in the back of a vehicle 
. . . 
 



1790 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 1998 

Then in regard to the safety of fire fighters, he said: 
 

. . . if they are busy fighting a fire they wouldn’t mind 
getting a little water on them once in a while; it would 
probably be . . . refreshing. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the force of the water alone would be enough to 
crush vehicles and kill people. He was suggesting fire-fighting 
costs are a waste of tax dollars and our fire-fighters don’t know 
how to do their jobs. 
 
People and communities are threatened by fires, properties will 
burn, and the forestry industry is affected. These matters are 
serious and need support from all parties. This is not Backdraft; 
this is real life. 
 
Our province was burned once by his Tory Party and I can 
assure you, Mr. Speaker, that people of the North are going to 
pour cold water on their future hopes as well. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Twinning of Trans-Canada Highway Begins 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
inform the legislature, and especially the people of south-west 
Saskatchewan, that our government today announced the 
awarding of two contracts that signal the start of twinning work 
on the Trans-Canada Highway west of Gull Lake. 
 
Cee Gee Earth Moving Ltd. and Wappel Construction Company 
Ltd. have each been awarded 1.4 million contracts for grading 
work on a total of 27 kilometres of new highway just west of 
Gull Lake. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the total value of both projects is estimated at 4 
million, including materials and resources. It is expected that 
the two grading projects will be completed by the end of 
October this fall. 
 
The paving contract to complete this 27-kilometre project is 
expected to be tendered this winter and paving work should be 
completed by the fall of 1999. Mr. Speaker, this twinning work 
is being done totally at provincial expense. There is no federal 
money in this project. 
 
And that is a shame, Mr. Speaker, because if we had a 
meaningful cost-shared national highway program from the 
federal government we could complete our twinning program in 
7 or 8 years rather than the 15 years we have committed to. 
 
As a member from south-west Saskatchewan I know I speak for 
everybody in the area when I say this project will benefit the 
people of Saskatchewan — from the tourist to the trucker and 
all other motorists. 
 
With these twinning contracts and with the commitment to 
spend 2.5 billion over the next 10 years to improve our roads 
and highways, I am pleased to offer my congratulations to the 
government and to the Minister of Highways and 
Transportation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Saskatchewan Roads 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, this morning I watched the BBS 
(Baton Broadcasting System) program, the Vicki Gabereau 
show. Today famous Canadian singer John McDermott was a 
special guest. John McDermott, as you know, tours all over the 
country from coast to coast and knows a lot about travel 
throughout our country as a result. 
 
Well Mr. McDermott was noticeably limping on the show and 
when host Vicki Gabereau asked him what caused the problem, 
he unfortunately related the condition back to our province of 
Saskatchewan. Now the Health minister might worry that this is 
another health horror story but he can rest at ease here; it isn’t. 
It’s a highway horror story. 
 
On nationwide TV, Mr. McDermott said: 
 

I was just outside of Regina when I fell in what people in 
Saskatchewan would call a pothole but what the rest of us 
would call a canyon. 

 
This is just another reminder to the whole country of just how 
bad our roads are. Yes, sadly our roads are the laughing stock of 
this country. 
 
When a nurse spoke up against the government, you tried to 
silence her with harsh criticism. When a doctor spoke up 
against the government, you tried to silence him with an 
investigation into his professional background. Now that a 
musician has the nerve to criticize this NDP (New Democratic 
Party) government, I wonder if the minister responsible for 
culture will now try to silence one of our country’s finest 
singers. This is becoming an all-too-familiar tune, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Open House at Pacific Regeneration Technologies 
 
Mr. Langford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Pacific 
Regeneration Technologies (PRT) is holding an open house at 
the Prince Albert forest nursery on June 17. By working with 
the Minister of Environment, officials from SERM, and forest 
companies, PRT have established a major nursery for 
reforestation in central Canada. 
 
Since 1997, 2.5 million square feet of greenhouses have been 
constructed. The entire greenhouse complex is filled to capacity 
with 8 million seedlings. This has created significant 
employment in the Prince Albert area and will continue to do 
so. 
 
Mr. Speaker, PRT has plans to expand in the future. This is 
good news for Prince Albert and good news for Saskatchewan. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Party Lines 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I suspect that members 
of the Saskatchewan Party expected me to get up sooner or later 
and ridicule them for the sheer coincidence of the fact that when 



June 9, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1791 

people try to reach the Conservative Party, they actually get the 
Saskatchewan Party. And when they look at a phone book, the 
Tories and the Saskatchewan Party have the same address. 
 
I know those Sask Party members probably thought I was going 
to get up and bring attention to that pure coincidence. But, Mr. 
Speaker, I decided it was best I didn’t bring attention to the pure 
coincidence of the Tory and Sask Party sharing the same phone 
numbers and addresses. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Bengough Health Centre Anniversary Fair 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week I 
mentioned the partnership between the South Central Health 
District and the Deep . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order! Order, order. I 
remind all hon. members that the members’ statements are not 
debatable. Order, order, order. And I will ask for the 
cooperation of all hon. members to permit the members who are 
making statements to be heard. And it has been a bit restless 
here today and I’ll ask for the cooperation of the House to allow 
the hon. member for Weyburn-Big Muddy to be heard. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week I 
mentioned the partnership between the South Central Health 
District and the Deep South Personal Care Home in Pangman as 
a fine example of community-based health care. 
 
The integrated Bengough Health Centre in my constituency has 
also been providing excellent health care and services. The 
centre offers assessment, observation beds, convalescent, 
long-term care, and recently added palliative care. As well, the 
doctor’s office is in the centre. 
 
The long-term care services have been offered for 30 years in 
this community. On June 11, this Thursday, there will be a 
health fair, open house, and barbecue to celebrate this 30th 
anniversary of long-term care. 
 
For a small town, Mr. Speaker, Bengough is planning a big day. 
There are booths where you can have your blood pressure taken 
or learn about the expanded emergency services offered in 
Bengough and other communities. You can learn about the 
work of the Alzheimer society or the government residential 
rehabilitation assistance program. The RCMP (Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police) will be talking about child safety and the rural 
health counselling group will be talking about rural initiatives in 
health care. 
 
And there is music and there is food. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, two special people will be honoured. Kay 
Kleven is the only original staff person still with the centre, 
working there for the entire 30 years. And Mrs. Lena Vienneau 
is the last original resident. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Bengough have a great deal to 
celebrate and I look forward to joining them on Thursday. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Integrated School-Linked Services 
 
Mr. Whitmore: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’re aware of 
the importance of the quality of education for our young people. 
As part of the child action plan, a program of integrated 
school-link services has been established. Integrated 
school-linked services involves creating collaborative culture 
among service providers and encouraging new approaches to 
service delivery that are comprehensive and integrated. 
 
Integrating services and coordinating the work of other agencies 
has been identified internationally as one of the most promising 
comprehensive solutions for addressing the needs of children in 
families at risk. 
 
Nutana Collegiate in Saskatoon is a small inner-city academic 
high school with a student population of about 600 students 
from grades 9 to 12. Nutana attracts a large number of at risk 
youth from all areas of the city and also serves students from 
the Whitecap Dakota Sioux first nations. 
 
Sask Education, Social Services, Health, Justice, Saskatoon 
Action Circle on Youth Sexuality, Saskatoon Tribal Council, 
Saskatoon Indian and Metis Friendship Centre, Wanuskewin, 
Saskatoon District Health, U of S (University of Saskatchewan) 
College of Nursing, and the Saskatoon Friends of Students and 
Kids have worked together to find innovative school programs 
with the aim of providing leadership and training enabling 
students to become partners in the very important process of 
giving at risk young people an opportunity of leading fulfilling, 
productive lives. 
 
These kinds of initiatives give at risk youth population a chance 
to improve the quality of their lives. As such they are an 
integrated part of our government’s commitment to young 
people of our province. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

New Column Proposed 
 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, every Monday all 
members eagerly await their Leader-Star paper of choice and 
turn immediately to the “In The Corridor” or “Not in Hansard” 
column. In a world of uncertainty and mutability the column 
reassures us by its consistency. It is consistently unattributed, 
consistently half-baked, and consistently half-accurate. 
 
But when we have read the last fictional scrap of “In The 
Corridor” we know, as poet Robert Browning said, “God’s in 
his heaven — All’s right with the world,” or as Murray 
Mandryk would say, that hypocrite Browning. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, if imitation is the sincerest form of flattery, I 
propose that we flatter our refugees from correspondence J 
school by initiating our own column on them beginning next 
session, and that all members be expected to contribute as long 
as no names are used. And that our irregular newsletter be 
called Inside the Buzzard’s Nest. 
 
As with our model, there will be few but stringent rules, like 
overheard half sentences in the halls or cafeteria are simply 
lines waiting to be completed by a leap of faith; like incidents 



1792 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 1998 

that are imagined or dreamed assumed credibility of revelation; 
like no aspect of a reporter’s life is too small. On second 
thought, all aspects of a reporter’s life are too small. 
 
Finally In the Buzzard’s Nest will have no editor because that 
would suggest forethought; no proofreading, because that 
would suggest sober second thought; and no relevance because 
that would suggest thought. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Pasture Land Lease Rates 
 

Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, my questions are for the Minister of 
Agriculture. Mr. Minister, this morning we learned of your plan 
for dealing with the terrible drought conditions in pasture lands 
in this province. In a letter to leaseholders you outlined your 
solution is to gouge farmers and ranchers even more. 
 
Mr. Minister, your department is sending out letters raising its 
pasture land leases by 25 per cent. Most of these pastures are 
already in terrible shape. There’s hardly a blade of grass on 
them. Cattle ranchers and farmers are in desperate shape just to 
find enough feed for their cattle, and what is your government 
doing to help them? Jacking up lease rates by 25 per cent. This 
is a typical NDP response. The farmers and ranchers of this 
province are down because of drought, so you give them a good 
kick. 
 
Mr. Minister, you should be dropping lease rates at a time like 
this. Why are you gouging farmers and ranchers who are 
already having enough problems finding feed for their cattle. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, the member knows how 
the rates are set. The rates are set through a formula every year 
that includes the price of cattle. Now if you’re in a situation 
where the prices were up last year, of course the formula 
dictates the leases are going to go up this year. We held it to 25 
per cent; it could have gone up way more than that — way more 
than that. 
 
And so . . . but because of the conditions . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well, Mr. Speaker, the parties opposite say, 
you know, get government out of your life and then . . . But 
now they say, but make government dictators in your life. And 
we’re not doing that. 
 
What we’re doing is trying to be as helpful as possible in terms 
of all the programs we have with pastures in terms of water, 
water pumping. I’ve written the federal government. We’ve got 
close monitoring of our community pastures and these rates . . . 
the member knows it is very opportune political timing for him 
to say that. He knows how the rates are set. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Minister, on behalf of the farmers and 
ranchers, thank you oh Grand Exalted One for all of the help; 
25 per cent rate increases in pasture lands and the farmers are 

supposed to thank you for that. That’s what your plan is, is to 
attack farmers once again. What have you been doing for the 
last three months of this session, Mr. Minister? Have you been 
sleepwalking the entire time that the session has been going on. 
 
Farmers and ranchers are telling you all over this province that 
pasture lands and crop land is in serious condition and you get 
up and say that you’re going to stop the increase but it’s only 
going to be a little bit less — 25 per cent, we’re only going to 
jack them up by —you have no plan to deal with this. 
 
Mr. Minister, immediately after question period we’ll be calling 
for an emergency motion on agriculture, calling on you and the 
federal government to immediately start developing a 
contingency plan to deal with the growing threat of a poor crop 
and a trade war. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you wake up, help the farmers of 
Saskatchewan, the ranchers of Saskatchewan, and agree to the 
debate this afternoon? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, as the member knows, 
when the motion is put forward we’ll decide at that time 
whether we agree to it or not. But I’m not disagreeing totally 
with this member. 
 
Because of the process in which the rates for leases are set, I 
didn’t think were totally fair. So what I’m doing, having the 
department do is review this rate-setting system. Because the 
problem becomes . . . if a year is such that the cattle price was 
high the year before, then we get a condition like we have now 
with drought, the lease rates go up and the problem is there’s no 
pasture. 
 
But the opposite could also be true, where you might have low 
cattle prices one year and then you could have lots of grass and 
your rates would actually go down in a better situation. 
 
So the process here is not quite right, so I’ve asked — I 
appreciate his concern — I’ve asked my department to do a 
review in this. We will be trying to formulate a new rate-setting 
mechanism that allows farmers to budget more accurately when 
they are putting their cows in pasture. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Minister, in the meantime the lease payments 
are still due. For the past few weeks you’ve been sending out 
notices to farmers and ranchers. This gentleman’s is for $2,048 
increase, this gentleman is $514 increase, $249 increase, and 
they go on and on and on. That’s the kind of help that you’re 
offering to the farmers and ranchers of this province. 
 
You don’t seem to have any plan other than to gouge them even 
further than you already are. You don’t seem to be concerned 
about it at all. Jacking up leased lands at this time is immoral. 
Drought conditions, no grass, no feed, and you jack up the rates. 
 
The farmers I spoke with this morning were absolutely livid. 
They tell me they don’t even have cattle on some of these leases 
because there isn’t a blade of grass on them. The pastures are as 
barren as your promises to help them, Mr. Minister. 
 



June 9, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1793 

Why, Mr. Minister, are you launching into another attack on 
Saskatchewan farm families? How can you possibly jack up 
land lease rates when farmers and ranchers are already facing 
desperate conditions? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve just outlined to the 
member what we’re doing because I didn’t think the process 
was quite right. This is set by formula and the problem, the 
member knows, like that . . . the old Conservative attitude is 
that you know, just do what seems to be convenient at the time. 
 
We do have a plan. We do have a plan to try to make this . . . 
the lease rate setting more efficient. If the farmers don’t have 
. . . There’s a crow in the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a situation where we’re not gouging 
farmers. There’s a problem with the land; if the cattle aren’t in 
the pasture, of course they won’t be paid. These rates are 
payable in October, Mr. Speaker. So if the cattle don’t utilize 
land for the right period of time, there won’t be a full charge. 
 
The fact of the matter is this is the process we have to date. 
We’re going to try and improve that process and we’ll be 
monitoring the situation. Trust me — I tell the member we’ll be 
monitoring very closely. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Out-Migration  
 

Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 
the Minister of Economic Development. Madam Minister, 1997 
was a fairly good year for the Saskatchewan economy with no 
thanks to the NDP government. We can credit the low interest 
rates, we can give thanks for strong potash, uranium, grain, and 
oil prices, and we can even thank low inflation. And we can 
thank the strong international markets. 
 
But no thanks, Madam Minister, to the NDP and your sky-high 
tax burden, the highest tax burden in all of Canada. No thanks 
to the NDP’s unwavering commitment to gouging people with 
increases in their power bills, in telephone rates, their gas bills, 
and their insurance premiums. 
 
Madam Minister, the sad truth is that despite a decent year for 
the economy, last year Saskatchewan posted a net out-migration 
of 1,765 people. Madam Minister, if things are so great — and 
you keep telling us they are — why are people still moving out 
of this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, to the member 
opposite, first of all, thank you for the question and the 
opportunity to talk about the economy. The member is right: 
1997 was a great year for Saskatchewan — more people 
working than ever before in our history, almost all of the jobs 
— full-time jobs — the vast majority going to young people. 
 
And I would say as well to the member opposite the population 
of Saskatchewan is increasing; it’s increased by about 18,000. 

More people have health care cards now than in the past. 
 
And I would say to the member opposite, probably the most 
important indicator is what’s happening with our youth. 
Recently, Saskatchewan was chosen as the province where the 
opportunities for young people are the best of any place in 
Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — So what I say to the member 
opposite is, we have record employment, record jobs, record 
opportunities for young people, and we will continue to work 
with the people of Saskatchewan to make the future even better. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the reason why we have an 
increase is because there was 4,565 more births than deaths last 
year. It doesn’t matter how much NDP rhetoric you can come 
up with. The fact is the NDP has inflicted the highest taxes in 
Canada on the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
The fact is that last year Saskatchewan suffered a net 
out-migration of 1,765 people. The fact is the NDP’s massive 
tax burden is chasing people out of this province. People are 
casting judgement on the NDP with their feet. They’re just 
leaving the province. And there’s one simple reason, Madam 
Minister — high taxes. Saskatchewan people pay the highest 
taxes in the entire country. 
 
Madam Minister, do you know how a young engineering 
graduate can get an immediate $2,000 pay increase with no 
change in salary? Move to Alberta. 
 
Madam Minister, it’s time to stop the brain drain. Madam 
Minister, what is your plan for digging out from under the 
NDP’s mountain of taxes and keeping our young people in this 
province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, to the member 
opposite, I hate to say that the members opposite are a little 
slow on the learning side, but we’re into day 60-something and 
they’ve suddenly discovered taxes in the economy — 
wonderful. 
 
What I would say to the member opposite is what her basic 
premiss is, is absolutely false. We do not have the highest taxes 
in Canada. In fact if you looked at it, we’re at about the middle 
of the pack — we’re about the middle of the pack. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Now hon. members will 
appreciate the fact the minister is not located that far from the 
Chair, and the Chair is having some difficulty being able to hear 
the answer being provided. Order. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — And what I would say to the 
member opposite . . . on the tax side is we made a commitment 
to the people of Saskatchewan that first we would clean up the 
fiscal mess, which we did. The minute we could afford major 
tax reduction we would do it, and we did — in 1997, a 



1794 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 1998 

non-election year, not close to an election, a dramatic reduction 
in the sales tax. 
 
We continued with income tax cuts this year. We have targeted 
tax cuts to business sectors where there has been growth and 
jobs. 
 
So I say to the member opposite, her basic premiss is false. This 
province is in good shape. Our economy is booming, there are 
more jobs, our taxes are coming down, and our fiscal house is 
in order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Payment of SGI Death Benefit 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
for the minister responsible for SGI (Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance). Mr. Minister, last year Karen Rodenbush of Oxbow 
was killed in a tragic car accident. Her family is supposed to be 
entitled to a $15,000 death benefit from SGI. That’s hardly 
compensation for the loss of a life, but that’s all that’s paid 
under your no-fault insurance. 
 
However, Karen’s husband Ron was told that the family would 
receive no benefit whatsoever from SGI because they were 
receiving a small benefit from Workers’ Compensation. 
 
Mr. Minister, how is that fair? Karen Rodenbush paid the 
premiums into both programs, her family should be entitled to 
the benefits from both programs. 
 
Mr. Minister, why is your no-fault insurance program so unfair? 
Why is it using Workers’ Compensation as an excuse to weasel 
out of providing the benefits to Karen’s family and denying her 
SGI benefits? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the issues the member 
raises is important and a serious issue. It deals with a specific 
case. I’ll take notice of the issue and report back to him. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Waiting-lists for Cancer Patients 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
month the Liberal opposition tabled a report from the Saskatoon 
Health District which confirms that cancer victims are forced to 
wait an average of 20 days for surgery. 
 
On two occasions in the past week, we have raised a specific 
case involving Alick Paterson who was diagnosed with cancer 
on May 15 and was told he would have to wait until June 11 to 
see an oncologist. However, Mr. Paterson could not wait. His 
pain became so severe he was admitted to Royal University 
Hospital last week. 
 
My question is to the Minister of Health. Why is it that care is 
provided only when the pain of a cancer victim becomes so 
severe that he must be admitted through emergency? 
 

Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, first I want to say to 
the member opposite that we have always said in Saskatchewan 
we have one of the best cancer services in the country. And I 
want to say to the member opposite that that has again been 
reinforced by the report that just came out of Maclean’s . . . just 
a couple of days ago. And I want to read to the member 
opposite what they said. They said, Saskatchewan has fewer 
cancer deaths — 171.6 per 100,000 — than the national 
average. And they also go on to say that . . . 184 fewer heart 
disease deaths which is 173.7 per cent of 100,000, which is less 
than the national average. 
 
And I say to the member opposite that what he needs to start to 
do in this province is he needs to start talking about all of the 
good things that are happening in health care. Because when 
you look at what Maclean’s reported and then you look at what 
the Leader-Post and the media has reported in this province — I 
have in front of me here 43 front page and third page articles 
that talk about how health care in this province is in a crisis, 
which you dramatize and the press leak. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Member, when you read the Maclean’s 
article which is a leading-edge piece of information that 
Canadians have across the country, where does our story of 
Canadian . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Next question. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Perhaps the 
minister should stop looking at national averages, show some 
leadership, and deal with the hundreds of people that come 
before this legislature to get their health care needs met. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Liberal opposition has received two letters in 
recent days about this issue, one from the director from the 
department of radiation oncology. In this correspondent, Dr. 
Mohamed writes, and I quote: 
 

 . . . the increasing workload and the shortage of 
oncologists makes it impossible for us to provide the 
service as rapidly as we would like. 
 
Waiting, for a cancer patient, is most distressful but under 
the present circumstances it is a reality. 
 

Mr. Minister, cancer victims and their families don’t find this 
situation acceptable, cancer specialists don’t find this situation 
acceptable, so why do you? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I say to the member opposite 
that we don’t find this acceptable and we’ve done some things 
to enrich, in this province, the health care system and to ensure 
that we can enhance cancer treatment and cancer service. 
 
Just recently, Mr. Speaker, we signed an agreement with the 
physicians in this province that have said to us that they will 
help us recruit additional specialists. And they’re helping us 
today recruit oncologists that will work in cancer clinics in both 
of our two centres in the province. 
 
We’ve just announced an additional 600,000 new dollars that 
will go to the cancer clinic which will help enrich the number of 
people who are working within the system. And I say to the 



June 9, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1795 

member opposite that if he were to continue to look at or should 
look at the report that Maclean's has highlighted, which I say to 
you has the facts about what’s happening in health care across 
the nation. And we talk about the number of enrichments that 
we’re making today in both physicians, in nurses, the number of 
bed reductions which is less than anywhere in the country. 
 
And you’ve been going around and espousing on a regular basis 
the number of bed reductions and they’ve been appearing on the 
front page of the newspapers in this province. And what 
happens when we get a good story, when we get the facts about 
Saskatchewan? They appear on the eighth page of our 
newspapers in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
perhaps what the Minister of Health should be doing . . . Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker, for bringing them under control. 
 
Mr. Speaker, perhaps instead of quoting from some magazine 
what they would like to quote from and read from will be a 
couple of letters sent from doctors outlining this situation. I’d 
send this over to the Premier and to the Health minister now 
please. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the executive director of the Saskatoon cancer 
clinic also has issued a letter, one of these, noting what he calls 
a major problem at the Saskatoon Cancer Centre. David White 
explains that staff are trying to cope, they’re trying to priorize 
cases, and apologizes for the fact that cancer patients are forced 
to wait. 
 
He explains, and I quote, “Waiting, for a cancer patient, is never 
acceptable, but under the present circumstances in 
Saskatchewan, it’s a reality.” 
 
Mr. Minister, this situation is going from bad to worse. One of 
six oncologists on the staff recently retired, and another is 
preparing to retire at the end of this month. As a result, the 
waiting period for treatment threatens to get even longer. 
 
Cancer victims and their families are looking for . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. The hon. member has 
been extremely lengthy in his preamble and I’ll ask him to go 
direct — order, order — I’ll ask him to go directly to his 
question now. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, what 
immediate steps are you going to take to find a solution to this 
crisis? And what are you doing to attract oncologists to this 
province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I believe that I’ve answered 
that question to the member but I’ll attempt one more time to 
try to do that. 
 
I want to say to the member opposite that we understand as he 
understands that in this province any family or individual who 
suffers from cancer is a tragedy, Mr. Speaker. It’s a tragedy. 

And what we do in this province is we provide the best services 
— as reported by many national researchers of cancer treatment 
— in this province at the two centres of Saskatoon and Regina. 
Some of the best services in the country, I say to the member. 
 
Say to the member opposite when he asks me what we’re doing 
— we’ve just added, Mr. Speaker, just added $600,000 to help 
with the nursing professions in the two cancer clinics in 
Saskatoon and Regina. 
 
We’re working very closely with the Saskatchewan Medical 
Association and the district health board to recruit more 
oncologists for the sites of Saskatoon and here in Regina. That’s 
an undertaking that the department has made, it’s an 
undertaking that SAHO (Saskatchewan Association of Health 
Organizations) has given, and it’s an undertaking that the 
district health board has given because we know the kinds of 
issues that cancer patients across this province are facing. And 
we’re working to ensure that we can fix that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Storage of Blood from Umbilical Cords 
 

Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, during pregnancy the umbilical 
cord serves as a lifeline between mother and child. But medical 
research has found that blood contained in the umbilical cord 
provides a potentially life-saving material and this can be used 
later in a child’s life to treat a variety of life-threatening 
diseases such as leukemia, other forms of cancer, and genetic 
disorders. 
 
Unfortunately the only time that cord blood can be collected is 
immediately after the birth of a child, and then it has to be 
stored. 
 
My question is to the Minister of Health: Mr. Minister, what are 
you doing to ensure that expectant parents are aware that this 
process exists? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the member 
opposite that this is a very, very important question that he asks 
because, as our health system evolves into the future, we know 
that the importance of storage of our own blood . . . is 
extremely important for future treatment. 
 
And the member identifies correctly that in the treatment 
particularly of leukemia, the umbilical cord blood is very, very 
rich in a very specialised cell configuration. And that 
configuration of course is used today in the future for the 
treatment of leukemia. 
 
And today obstetricians across the country are made aware of 
that process. The education process may not be as broad as 
we’d like it to be. We’re attempting to work with the college of 
physicians and surgeons to ensure that that medical information 
gets revealed across the country and certainly to the people 
within our province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



1796 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 1998 

Multiple Sclerosis Treatments 
 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My questions are 
for the Minister of Health. I have tried my very best to discuss 
serious health issues with the minister behind closed doors, and 
I’ve done so because I believe that it is in the interest of patients 
to protect their anonymity and respect their confidentiality. I’ve 
also tried to point out approaches to addressing the issue of the 
treatment for multiple sclerosis based on reason and not 
emotion. 
 
Now the minister has had ample time to review how well he 
thinks his government-appointed panel is doing with it’s 
Solomon-like power in determining who does and does not get 
approval for different drugs for MS (multiple sclerosis). And I 
wish for him today to please tell this Assembly, Mr. Minister, 
how fair and just your government’s method of approval is. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — First, Mr. Speaker, I want to extend my 
appreciation to the member opposite in the manner in which 
we’ve been able to deal with a number of very serious concerns 
that she’s had about individual patients and clients that she’s 
been working with and constituents across the province. 
 
I think that’s the appropriate process in the way in which we 
deal with very difficult situations. And I want to thank the 
member for us being able to deal with those behind closed 
doors, unlike what have been other situations in this House 
during this past session that I’ve had to deal with. I appreciate 
that, Madam Member. 
 
I want to say to the Madam Member that the approach that 
we’re using today in the determination of who’s eligible for the 
two drugs that we have under the plan, that criteria has been 
designed by other provinces of which we’ve simply adopted. 
The criteria is relatively simplistic in its fashion and clearly the 
administration of that criteria is now done by a panel that has 
been selected — from experts or professionals across the 
province — and they’re the ones that are making the 
determinations. We have an appeal process beyond that that 
they use, and from time to time that’s been the case. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Mr. Speaker, I want us to take a moment 
and just have us examine what is really transpiring. MS patients 
are being denied treatment by a panel that does not even see the 
individual. 
 
And as a panel, as a group, they have no licence to practise 
medicine. Their decisions have been deemed, and I quote, “too 
arbitrary and utterly ridiculous” by neurologists who have 
posed the following questions. 
 
Since a major criterion for approval is being able to walk 100 
metres unassisted, what if the patient can only walk 99 metres? 
And will you admit, Mr. Minister, that such requirements are 
motivated only by monetary costs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
member opposite that a number of comments that she’s made 
are not accurate. First and foremost there are three people who 
sit on the committee today, and two of them, Mr. Speaker, are 

in fact people who are practising medicine today. 
 
One is a neurologist and the other is a general practitioner, both 
practising medicine in Saskatoon, they’re both on the 
committee, along with a pharmacist and Dr. Hader, who of 
course is a physician as well, and is a renowned individual who 
works with MS clients across our province for years and years. 
 
I want to say to the member opposite that the criteria that we’re 
using today is criteria that we’ve adopted that’s being used in 
other provinces that in fact have ensured both Betaseron . . . in 
this province both Betaseron and Copaxone. So I say to the 
member opposite that the criteria that we’re using today is ones 
that we haven’t developed but are using in comparison and in 
continuity with what’s happening across the country. 
 
And if in fact an individual is rejected by the panel and isn’t 
satisfied with that review that the doctor has done on their 
behalf, they will be referred to another individual who will 
either be a neurologist or a family practitioner who will do a 
further assessment and provide a determination of information 
to the panel. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would ask leave 
to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To 
you and through you I’d like to introduce to members of the 
Assembly some special guests in your gallery. These are the 
representatives for “Let’s Root for Canada” Youth Ambassador 
program. This is the second year that the Tree Canada 
Foundation is doing this tour across country. 
 
This program has gained international recognition and will be 
adopted by Ireland in 1999. And we are very pleased to have 
four representatives from Ireland on our Canadian tour this year 
and perhaps those four individuals could stand up. Thank you 
very much for joining us here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — The youth ambassador program has 33 
young ambassadors with representatives from each province 
and territory. Two of these ambassadors are from 
Saskatchewan. We have Leah Laxdal from Prince Albert and 
Allison Sanborn from Drinkwater. We’re also very pleased to 
have Alan Appleby and Murray Little acting as hosts and 
coordinators for the Saskatchewan leg of the tour with us today 
as well. 
 
TREEmendous is a non-profit organization that was started 
jointly by the Saskatchewan Forestry Association and SERM 
(Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management). 
When this organization started, the objective was to plant one 
million trees. Today we celebrated this milestone at 
Government House with His Honour Lieutenant Governor Jack 
Wiebe. 



June 9, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1797 

Please join me in thanking SaskPower Shand Greenhouse for 
supplying over 1 million seedlings. And we also congratulate 
Leah and Allison and all of the ambassadors from all across 
Canada for their contributions to our environment, our country, 
and our future. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before orders of the 
day I rise pursuant to rule 46 to ask leave of the House to move 
a motion of urgent and pressing necessity. 
 
The Speaker: — The hon. member from Kindersley requests to 
introduce a motion of urgent and pressing necessity under rule 
46. I’ll ask the hon. member from Kindersley to very, very 
briefly outline why he feels this is a matter of urgent and 
pressing necessity justifying setting aside the normal business 
of the House and to advise the House briefly of the motion he 
wishes to introduce. 
 
(1430) 

MOTION UNDER RULE 46 
 

Deteriorating Agricultural Conditions in Saskatchewan 
 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Conditions in 
agriculture across this province continue to deteriorate. Pasture 
lands are dried out, crop land is dried out in many areas, crops 
have been frozen, re-seeding is taking place across the province. 
Because of the very serious conditions, there is an immediate 
need to take action. We would want to then move the following 
motion, Mr. Speaker: 
 

That this Assembly urge the federal government to assume 
its responsibility for international trade and immediately 
develop a contingency plan to protect Canadian farmers 
from falling grain prices in the event of an international 
grain war. And that this Assembly urge governments to do 
everything possible under the crop insurance program and 
other available programs to address the deteriorating crop 
conditions in Saskatchewan caused by poor moisture 
conditions and frost. 

 
The Speaker: — Hon. members have heard the description of 
the member from Kindersley as to why he would like to see the 
House set aside its normal business and the nature of the motion 
he wishes to introduce. Leave is required. Is leave granted? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Across the province 
today, we are seeing a very, very serious situation develop in 
agriculture, Mr. Speaker. The crop conditions are deteriorating 
almost on a daily basis. Rains haven’t come to many areas of 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
First affected of course is the areas that contain a large acreage 
of pasture land across Saskatchewan. The next area of concern 
obviously is with the spring-seeded crops. Many of the 
spring-seeded crops have been seeded into very, very dry 
conditions in large areas of Saskatchewan. 
 
On top of that, Mr. Speaker, many, many areas that had a pretty 

good emergence of the crop have been very seriously hit with a 
series of frosts, some of them extending several evenings and 
early mornings in Saskatchewan. We have heard reports that in 
some areas of north-eastern Saskatchewan, the weather 
conditions were so severe that we have seen up to minus 10 
degrees conditions, which would seriously affect if not kill a 
crop out entirely. 
 
Seeding conditions have been further compounded by the fact 
that re-seeding benefits from the crop insurance program are 
woefully inadequate and you just have to talk to farmers across 
Saskatchewan to find that out. 
 
The other day in the Assembly the minister talked about it being 
adequate and his only solution, his only advice, was to tell 
farmers in Saskatchewan not to fertilize their crops. How 
ridiculous is this Minister of Agriculture? When it comes time 
to help out agriculture and help out farmers in this province 
that’s the kind of advice he offers up. 
 
All you have to do is check with an agrologist and any one of 
them will tell you that under very difficult conditions, 
particularly at this time of the year with seeding dates being 
backed up as late as they are, if you’re re-seeding a crop, 
putting a little bit of phosphorous, a fertilizer that is not mobile 
in the soil, is a very good idea — to try and get the maximum 
pop-up benefit for your crop to get it up and off to a good start, 
particularly given this late seeding time. So that’s his advice to 
the farmers of Saskatchewan. 
 
We are saying, Mr. Speaker, and to the Minister of Agriculture, 
that this is a serious situation. Farmers and ranchers are very, 
very concerned about it. We’re getting increasing numbers of 
calls all of the time from farmers and ranchers across this 
province. 
 
Today in question period we outlined some of the concerns with 
respect to pasture lands, one of the areas of course that is first 
affected any time you have a drought . . . or pardon me, an early 
season drought, Mr. Speaker. Pasture lands require early spring 
rains. They just didn’t happen in many areas of Saskatchewan. 
 
And part of the concern obviously is to them, that they won’t 
have feed for their cattle. The minister’s advice again has been, 
sell your cattle herd now and then. Well that’s a pretty poor, 
pretty poor solution to a very, very serious problem, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Cattlemen and women across this province have been building 
up herds over recent years because of relatively good prices in 
the cattle sector. And now the minister’s advice is — after 
you’ve started building up a savings account essentially of 
cattle — is to just simply sell them off and that’s their solution 
to the problem. But we are saying that the solution to the 
problem involves things like coordinating some trucking, 
coordinating some trucking of cattle to where there is feed, 
coordinating of some trucking where there’s feed, to where the 
cattle are that are suffering because of drought conditions. 
 
There’s a lot of things that this government could be doing to 
help out this very, very serious situation. But unfortunately their 
solution, Mr. Speaker, has been to simply jack up the rates for 
pasture land in this province for the leaseholders. We have been 



1798 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 1998 

contacted by a number of people this morning, and I would ask 
agriculture producers across this province to continue sending 
your faxes, continue sending your copies of the letter that you 
received from Saskatchewan Agriculture and Food. In about 
May 28 approximately these letters were sent out across 
Saskatchewan. 
 
This producer phoned me this morning telling me that his, on a 
relatively small parcel of land . . . is going to go up, his pasture 
land, 25 per cent increase — $249.70. He told me there isn’t 
$249.70 worth of grass on that pasture. He hasn’t put any cattle 
on that pasture at all this spring because there isn’t anything for 
them to pick away at out there these days, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The next one that I had a copy sent to me this morning was 
from another fellow, in the Perdue area. Many of them are 
coming from areas like Perdue, around Saskatoon, out to 
Rosetown, certainly down in the south-west part of the province 
— Val Marie, areas like that — extending up to the north-west 
through the Lashburn, Lloydminster, right up to Meadow Lake 
areas of the province of Saskatchewan . . . have been 
dramatically affected. 
 
In this particular situation, Mr. Speaker, this farmer-rancher’s 
increase is $514.08 plus GST (goods and services tax), and your 
billing notice will indicate the actual rent change. And can you 
imagine this. They say the increases would have been 33 per 
cent but we are such good guys that we’re going to hold it down 
to 25 per cent. 
 
At a time when the farmers and ranchers of this province 
desperately need some compassion and some help from this 
province, what do they get from the Minister of Agriculture 
here in Saskatchewan? A big fat kick in the teeth when they can 
least afford to try and reach into their farming operation or their 
ranching operation a little bit deeper to try and eke a living out 
— this is what kind of support they get from this government. 
 
And always what we’ve been hearing to date in the Assembly, 
Mr. Speaker, and all through this session is the provincial 
government getting up and slamming the federal government 
every opportunity they get with regard to problems in 
agriculture. Certainly there was a role for the federal 
government in all of this, but there is also a role for the 
provincial government and the member from Rosetown-Biggar 
should be aware of that. 
 
He recalls the kind of absolute mistrust that his government has 
built with agriculture producers and ranchers across this 
province because of some of the experiences and some of the 
problems he inflicted on the agriculture community not too 
many years ago. Mr. Speaker, this is an extremely serious 
situation. 
 
Another gentleman from the Perdue area sent me a notice of his 
increase in land pasture rental — $2,048.29. Again, another 
very serious, serious situation; a problem that cannot simply . . . 
we cannot simply sit and wait for this government to finally get 
off its hands and do something. 
 
There is a need for immediate action on this. Farmers are 
already facing tremendous concerns, and now on top of all of 
that we have the concern about an international grain war taking 

place across the world. 
 
The federal government has responsibility in this area. 
Obviously the provincial government has responsibility in this 
area as well. We are seeing the European community has 
already started massive subsidy programs with respect to barley 
exports, and we hope that’s just not the thin edge of the wedge. 
 
We’ve seen up to $70 per tonne rates of subsidy from the EEC 
(European Economic Community) in the last few weeks, Mr. 
Speaker. And in some cases that’s more than the entire crop 
would be worth here in Saskatchewan. So there’s tremendous 
concern about those levels of subsidy coming from the EEC 
these days. 
 
And what happens, what happens . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . I hear the member from Lloydminster chirping back in the 
corner over there, Mr. Speaker. At a time when farmers and 
ranchers are particularly impacted in a constituency like that 
one, what are the comments from that member? Where’s the 
help from that member? Where’s the concern from that 
member? She chirps from her seat, well we’ll just get into the 
kind of conditions we had back yesteryear. 
 
Well, Madam Member, the farmers and ranchers in your 
community, in the communities where you are representing, 
Mr. Speaker, that that member represents, should be upset with 
those kind of flippant comments from that member. 
Unfortunately that’s the kind of thing we’ve learned to expect. 
That’s the kind of thing we’ve learned to expect from an NDP 
administration. 
 
At a time when farmers and ranchers are down, jack up the rates 
and then make fun of them on top of it all. Make fun of the 
agriculture producers, saying that they’re looking for more help 
from the government. Well after all, what are you government 
for but to try and do something to help the people of this 
province. What is your role? What is the role of government in 
these situations, Mr. Speaker? Obviously there’s some tools at 
the government’s disposal. 
 
There are tools at the government’s disposal, Mr. Speaker. They 
should be utilizing some of those tools. We’ve been advising 
this government on many things that they could be doing, 
starting off with opening up the NISA (Net Income 
Stabilization Account) program to allow for people — ranchers, 
farmers, across this province, to withdraw monies from that 
program. 
 
We understand that the administration has taken some steps in 
that area and we very, very much appreciate the fact that 
they’ve moved to try and address a very, very serious situation 
here in Saskatchewan and have moved in that regard. 
 
But when it comes to re-seeding benefits nothing from this 
government. When it comes to helping in transportation, 
nothing from this government. When it comes to helping in 
terms of grain marketing, nothing from this government. In fact 
what do you do? You stand in the way in many of the areas that 
are of concern. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the situation continues to be of grave need here in 
the province of Saskatchewan. Farmers and ranchers are 



June 9, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1799 

contacting us. As I’ve said, any farmer and rancher that is 
hearing our concerns being brought to the table in the 
legislature here today, I urge them to send your complaints to us 
about the administration here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the motion that we have put forward before the 
Assembly today is of urgent and pressing necessity. It’s an 
emergency situation. That’s why we have called for an 
emergency debate here in the legislature. I hope members of 
this government would be prepared to speak about the issue. 
And most importantly as well, I would hope that other members 
of this Assembly, particularly Liberal members, will be 
prepared to put their views on the table today. They have a role 
to play in this as well. Their federal cousins aren’t helping out 
very much these days as well. 
 
The federal Minister of Agriculture and the one responsible for 
— or pardon me — the former minister of Agriculture, the one 
responsible for the Canadian Wheat Board is not helping — Mr. 
Goodale — not helping the situation at all. Vanclief, Vanclief, 
what’s he doing these days to help in terms of transportation, to 
help in terms of agriculture? Strangely silent. 
 
And another concern that farmers have is, yesterday the Prime 
Minister of Canada was in town wanting to speak to people 
representing urban and rural governments. And what did he 
have to say when it comes to agriculture? Absolutely nothing. 
 
Where was the Minister of Agriculture, where was the Premier 
of Saskatchewan standing up for farmers and ranchers? Totally 
absent from the debate, weren’t prepared to talk, weren’t 
prepared to debate the issue that we put before the House 
yesterday on transportation. 
 
When you have the Prime Minister in your own back yard, now 
is a pretty good time to try and twist his arm a little bit, I would 
suggest. But where were the government? Where was the 
Premier of Saskatchewan? Getting ready to organize a cocktail 
party or something for him, or a little dinner perhaps? 
 
Where was the help? Where was the Premier of Saskatchewan 
when the farmers and ranchers most needed him yesterday — 
when the Prime Minister was in town? I don’t recall seeing him 
when it comes to anything to do with this situation. 
 
That is why, Mr. Speaker, we would move the following 
motion: 
 

That this Assembly urge the federal government to assume 
its responsibility for international trade and immediately 
develop a contingency plan to protect Canadian farmers 
from falling grain prices in the event of an international 
grain war, and this Assembly urges governments to do 
everything possible under the crop insurance program and 
under other available programs to address the deteriorating 
crop conditions in Saskatchewan caused by poor moisture 
conditions and frost. 

 
I would move the following motion, seconded by my good 
friend and colleague from Saltcoats. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

(1445) 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, I have a few words to say 
on this but I know one member wants to introduce guests so I’ll 
do that. But I just wanted to get my place in the debate. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — May I have leave to introduce guests, 
please? 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
today to introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
legislature, in the west gallery, my niece, my brother Ralph’s 
daughter Bethany. I ask Bethany to stand, Bethany Nilson and 
her friend Rochelle Leonard. 
 
Bethany’s just graduating from grade 12 at LCBI (Lutheran 
Collegiate Bible Institute) in Outlook and she is a student, was a 
student at Campbell Collegiate in Regina. She’s from Regina. 
 
But I think the important part is that she has decided to go to 
Norway next year to study at Sand i Ryfylke to learn about the 
language and the culture and to continue the traditions in our 
family. 
 
So I’d ask all members to welcome them to the gallery today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 46 
 

Deteriorating Agricultural Conditions in Saskatchewan 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, the member certainly put some of his thoughts on the 
record. And I’d like to say that, you know, we’re at day 63 I 
think, and I bet I can count on one hand how many times that 
group over there has asked questions in agriculture, and all of a 
sudden it’s an emergency. 
 
We’ve been working. I’ve written to the federal government 
and I can table the letter. I don’t have it with me but I can get it, 
if members . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Now the floor is available 
eventually for all members to put their remarks on the record. 
And I would urge them to put their remarks on the record rather 
than debating spontaneously across the House while members 
are on their feet. Order! 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Well I can’t help but think that I hit a 
nerve. And members on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, 
like the member from Lloydminster, have made members’ 
statements on the drought and the concerns that we have. 
 
And one of the big problems that the members opposite have, 
Mr. Speaker — and that speaker before me — the big problem 
that he has, is he has no presence in Ottawa, all he can do is 



1800 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 1998 

chirp from his seat here. And that’s the problem with this Tory 
government. They’re isolated in Canada; they’re isolated in 
Canada, and all of a sudden . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Now hon. members will recognize the Chair 
just rose a few seconds ago to ask for the cooperation of the 
House to enable the minister to be heard. I ask again for the 
cooperation of all members of the House . . . Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I guess I 
rest my case about hitting a nerve. 
 
Anyway, members on this side of the House . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . There they go again. Well I’ll talk anyway. 
Most people won’t be able to hear over the drone over there but 
— many members on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, have 
spoken on the drought in agriculture. 
 
And the member talks about a number of things in his 
statement, talking about the leasing situation for cattle. I gave 
him that explanation today. He knows how it works. But the 
members over there just work on an ad hoc basis and you can’t 
operate that way. 
 
Cattle prices are still decent. We know there’s no hay. If they 
don’t put their cattle in the pastures, they don’t get charged. The 
payments don’t have to be made until October. So then we’re 
working on that because we understand. 
 
And the difference between this side and that side is I’ve been 
working on it for over two months now and they just, day 63, 
start to think it’s an issue. Well, that’s a little bit hypocritical. 
 
And I also want to say just, Mr. Speaker, I also want to say, Mr. 
Speaker, that we have a long list, two pages, of information at 
agrologists’ offices across this province to outline what’s 
available for the drought situation. 
 
One of the things that’s key though on this, one of the things 
that’s key in this whole debate, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that our 
federal Liberal friends — now the Liberals in this province are 
in a very tough situation because nobody’ll listen to them and 
won’t even listen to Mr. Goodale, the representative out here — 
but they allowed, in their genius, they decided that the Crow 
benefit of $320 million a year should be eliminated right after 
the WTO (World Trade Organization) negotiation’s last round. 
 
Did the U.S. (United States) eliminate the export enhancement 
program? No. Did the Europeans eliminate their programs? No. 
They reduced them by 36 per cent over five or six years, as was 
the agreement. 
 
What did the genius Liberals in Ottawa do? They come home 
and say, oh it’s for your own good, we’re going to cut this 
subsidy. So now we sit, we’re the only ones without subsidies 
while the other countries are playing this game. 
 
Europe selectively imports barley into Florida and California to 
stick it in the U.S. face. Now the U.S. do 30,000 tonnes back to 
selected parts in Europe, subsidized, and guess what? We’ve 
got the Liberals wringing their hands and saying, didn’t you 
guys learn anything? You shouldn’t do this. 
 

Meanwhile our farmers out here are paying one-third of the 
initial costs of grain, of wheat, as transportation costs because 
the Crow benefit’s gone. 
 
That’s the problem in this country. Right now the input costs of 
transportation is killing the profit line — killing it. And we have 
to, as governments across Canada, work on that, and I have 
written the federal government on this issue and continue to talk 
to them about this issue. 
 
And we’re going into another round of WTO, and again we’re 
asking them to be partners in the negotiations. And it’s a 
struggle. We are struggling but we are getting our word across 
that we have to have ourselves heard as representatives of 
Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the federal representation in this country has 
thrown up their hands on agriculture. We see the international 
grain trade wars, and here’s the situation. The federal 
government cuts the subsidy. Grain costs per shipment go up. 
The international grain war brings down the price of grain. 
 
And we have a government sitting in Ottawa doing what? 
Saying you shouldn’t do this. Well of course they shouldn’t do 
it, but they’re doing it. And just because Ottawa’s abdicated 
responsibilities to the farmers of this country is no reason for 
them to continue in that vein and wring their hands and say you 
shouldn’t do this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s important — and I won’t go on, although I 
could because it’s a very important subject — it is important 
that this House at least, I’ll tell you, we will give the Tory Party 
a bridge to Ottawa, if they so desire, if they come onside and 
help us in supporting the farmers of this province. 
 
And we will give them that bridge because they don’t have that 
bridge there themselves. They have no representation in 
Ottawa, and they know that when they can sit and chirp here. 
 
We will accept the Liberal Party as partners if we can come 
together, and if they write letters, like we have, to the federal 
government saying the international grain trade war is creating 
zero margin for producers, and Ottawa, you have to do 
something about it — you have to be able to have us compete. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I will support this motion. Two reasons: 
number one, I agree with the first part that we have to be 
unified. Secondly, as far as crop insurance is concerned, we are 
doing all we can. We’ve lowered the price of crop insurance 
premiums by 33 per cent over the last two years. 
 
Do they stand up and say thank you for that on behalf of 
farmers? No, no, it’s always the negative side. And I understand 
that’s their problem. 
 
But if we want to solve this problem, and it’s a serious 
situation, we’re going to have to work together on it. I’d ask the 
members to swallow their pride and come and work together 
with us on this issue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Well, thank you, Mr. Speaker, for the 



June 9, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1801 

opportunity to rise on an occasion such as this when there is a 
topic of such significance to be discussing here this afternoon in 
terms of what our farmers are facing in this current growing 
season. 
 
And wasn’t it inevitable, Mr. Speaker, that some day it would 
come to this in this province, weather being the way it is; how it 
was bound to happen. We’ve experienced it in the past; we 
should learn lessons from days gone by. We’ve heard this 
government talk before in terms of their entire government’s 
operations as far as establishing what they would call rainy-day 
funds in their Crown corporations. What happens to the 
frosty-day funds, you know the dry-day funds. We’ve saw a 
government across here who, since coming to power, has gutted 
— literally gutted — the budget for agriculture in this province. 
Now what is that doing, what is that doing to establish a fund 
for eventualities — for what we’re talking about here this 
afternoon? 
 
Now we’ve heard the Minister of Agriculture talk about the fact 
that we don’t have an inordinate, an unusual amount of crop 
insurance claims to date. He likes to talk in terms of 2,200-some 
claims to date. But what is the significance of those claims in 
terms of the number of acres they represent and the financial 
impact, the severe financial impact that they could mean for 
producers in this province. To express them only in terms of a 
number of claims is not to do them full justice. 
 
We’ve urged the Minister of Agriculture to make all attempts, 
and he’s given us his commitment earlier — or late last week I 
believe it was — that he would look into this further as the 
weeks wear on. We, yesterday, asked the Minister of 
Agriculture also to commit, to do as we have and visit some of 
these areas that have been severely affected. Try and get some 
ideas from some of the producers that are most severely 
affected by this situation. Try and find out what they think 
should be done to assist them when they’re needing a 
government finally. 
 
These are groups of people, farmers and ranchers, who don’t 
like to come to governments cap in hand. They never do that; 
they’re proud people. They don’t like to view their governments 
provincially or federally as their keepers, somebody to come 
asking for assistance. So the Minister of Agriculture certainly 
isn’t going to have his door knocked down or his phone ringing 
off the hook from these people. But none the less that doesn’t 
make it any less significant, the fact that they need help 
desperately. 
 
And I think that everybody here in this House has a 
responsibility to try and find out what is best done to 
accomplish what needs to be done for producers in this 
province. If that means enhanced safety nets looking down the 
road, then certainly we’re there. If a year like this is going to be 
the kind of year that highlights where the loopholes are, where 
the shortcomings are, of programs that are in place to assist 
people in agriculture, then certainly now is the time to impress 
upon all levels of government that changes are needed. 
 
But it has to be mentioned because we can’t emphasize enough 
that this government cannot completely get off the hook in this 
matter. We saw this government, as I said earlier, slash the 
Agriculture budget since it’s came into power. We saw them rip 

up GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) contracts to 
producers, worth 188 million, $200 million. And all with the 
idea that it was always going to be tall grass and fat cattle in 
this province. But we all know that the way the weather is in 
this province, it just isn’t going to happen. 
 
And all the producers would have asked of a government, 
provincially and federally, is that they have programs in place 
that would have kicked in to help them when disasters of large 
proportion, like what we could be facing here this growing 
season, that things will be taken care of to the point that they 
don’t have to worry about — in the face of international grain 
trade wars and rising input costs — that the cost-price squeeze 
on the farm or on the ranch will be their undoing. 
 
And believe me, there’s people out there right now who are 
teetering on that brink right now, even before the problems with 
weather kicked in this spring. And I think the Minister of 
Agriculture across from me is as aware of that as we are here in 
the Liberal opposition. But this is the kind of situation that tests 
the resolve of governments, provincially and federally. These 
are the sorts of times that we could be coming into right now in 
agriculture when we can see if a government is there when 
people actually need them. 
 
And believe me, Mr. Speaker, we sitting across here are hopeful 
and optimistic that this level of government and the federal 
government will be there for producers in this province if we 
need them. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m most happy to 
be able to stand and discuss this particular issue on behalf of the 
farmers of the south-west corner of the province. I’m most sad 
that we have to be here as a result of the weather to even have 
to address these issues, but the fact of the matter is that we do 
have these conditions, and the fact of the matter is that the 
people from the south-east part of the province, around 
Weyburn and Estevan, have already suffered through what the 
rest of the province is starting to go through now. 
 
So they’re in for their second year while of course farmers in 
the south-west started to experience the drought problems 
earlier this spring. We had hoped that a big rain would come 
and prove that we weren’t going to have to address this issue 
before the rest of the province. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, to the other members, through you, 
that I have travelled a considerable amount in the province over 
the weekend — as far north of course as Saskatoon line and east 
over to Regina. There’s a small pocket around Regina and 
Moose Jaw where the crops aren’t in too bad a shape. But the 
rest of the province has some very serious problems. And 
there’s no fooling that we have to support this resolution and 
that we have to prepare for some very serious problems. 
 
The grain in the fields, while it has survived the frost, Mr. 
Speaker, as a result of the accompanying drought, has had the 
effect that for some reason the leaves on the crops, while 
they’re still green in most cases, have taken to a bit of a curled 



1802 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 1998 

up appearance, which makes them appear to be sort of 
hunkering down and heading towards the ground again. 
 
And it’s a condition that we’ve seen very seldom, but it is a 
condition that if you lived long enough you’ve seen before. And 
I have had the experience of seeing crops that look like this 
before and I suspect that history will repeat itself. Although we 
can always hope that a lot of rain will fall and we’ll have a late 
fall and that things will turn around and that history won’t 
repeat itself. But most likely it will. 
 
And what it tells me is that the minister should be prepared to 
pay out some crop insurance claims this fall because the crop 
won’t be a bumper crop. It probably, at very best from my 
experience, would be an average crop and no better. And we 
can at least hope that we’d get that. 
 
People in the south-west, Mr. Speaker, of course still are among 
those that grow fall rye. Fall rye of course was headed at the 
time that the frost hit. Winter wheat of course is not a crop that 
we grow a lot of, but there is some of it. 
 
Anybody that says that minus two degrees Celsius is not a very 
bad frost had better think again if they had fall rye or winter 
wheat that’s headed because at this stage of the development 
this grain is going to be feed and no better. And that’s a given 
— there’s no way getting around that if those fields were hit by 
the frost. 
 
Now if they happen to be in an area where they’re up high or 
something like that and the frost missed, that’s fine. So we have 
that combination, Mr. Speaker, of drought and frost. 
 
I would have to talk for a few minutes about the drought 
conditions for the ranchers in the south-west because we do 
have a lot of ranch land in the south-west. Some of them are 
fairing not too badly, and I want the minister to know that this 
is a kind of a hit and miss situation, as always, in Saskatchewan. 
There are some ranches that have had some rainfall. The 
showers have hit and their grass is holding on not too badly. 
Unfortunately, probably over half of the ranches have hills that 
look now as though they looked in October, and that really isn’t 
enough grass to feed a gopher, let alone a cow. So the drought 
in the area will be severe for those people that haven’t had rain, 
and for some, they’re going to get by for a while. 
 
I want to impress upon the minister that this problem is serious. 
It is serious also because we are at a time in history when the 
six-year moratoriums have come due. And the banks of course 
that have been holding land, and the people that have been 
farming land as a result of those protections that were given to 
them in the early ’90s — those special exemptions that were 
provided for — those things have ended. And an awful lot of 
farmers are going to end up now losing their land because with 
the drought and the frost and the low commodity prices, those 
things all tied together with very high input costs most certainly 
will end up having a lot of farmers in serious financial trouble, 
and I just can’t see any way but that they will probably go 
broke. 
 
Agriculture is still the backbone of this province, Mr. Speaker. 
All of these other things that we have are very important and 
very necessary and we’re always glad to have them, but we 

have to remember, that as the backbone of this province, it will 
seriously affect all other segments of our economy. 
 
The Asian flu that has hit — and of course that is the reference 
they make to the economic collapse of the Asian countries — 
that is impacting Saskatchewan farm commodity prices. It will 
continue to do so for this year at least, according to the experts 
that I’ve listened to and talked to. 
 
And of course the net effect immediately is that machinery sales 
have dried up. Communities of course like Humboldt and those 
communities that have small manufacturing for farm machinery 
are suffering an immediate impact. People are being laid off. 
Training programs that had been designed to bring people 
on-stream to work in those kinds of factories and in those kinds 
of workplaces, now are finding themselves with employees that 
no longer have a job because there are lay-offs happening and 
cut-backs happening in those areas as a result of the dried up 
machinery sales. 
 
And so what that tells us, Mr. Speaker, is that Saskatchewan, 
always by tradition, has been first into a recession, last out. We 
are starting in, and there’s a recession definitely starting to 
develop. And I hope that the people in charge of running our 
country, not our province but our country, who are in the most 
beneficial position to be able to try to circumvent this, are 
listening to the reality that a recession is beginning. And unless 
they nip it in the bud, it’s certainly going to happen and it will 
affect the entire nation. 
 
So this is where it begins. We can identify it for them. All we 
have to do is get them to listen to it. 
 
The other problem that we’re having coupled with frost and 
drought and all of these other high input costs, Mr. Speaker, of 
course is the rail-line abandonment that’s going on. 
 
And the Minister of Agriculture’s indicating that he would like 
a copy of the information that I’ve gotten for the transportation 
problems. So rather than to read the several hundreds of pages 
of documents I have, I’m going to offer to send them over — 
ask the pages to photocopy them so that he can have copies — 
and table the other copies. 
 
In here, Mr. Speaker, the minister will want to note very 
quickly that in these reports are all of the documentations that 
go back to the history of the railroad. The history of all of the 
times that farmers, the taxpayers, and the people of this country 
have paid for the railroad; the way that they paid for the railroad 
system in terms of land grants — all of this material was 
supplied to me by the library, and I want to thank the officials 
there for doing such a great job of rounding up all this material. 
 
I want to thank them of course in general for all of the work that 
they’ve done for me in this past session. It’s phenomenal the 
ability they have to gather information. 
 
And I really appreciate the fact that we can supply for the 
Minister of Agriculture all of this information that will fortify 
his debate and his ability to go to Ottawa and fight for the rights 
of farmers because he needs to have the ammunition to be able 
to fight this battle for us, and we’re going to supply him with all 
the ammunition he needs starting with these documents and 



June 9, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1803 

carrying on with whatever else is needed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of the south-west are a hearty lot. And 
given that the drought is so severe in the east Rosetown area 
and other parts of the province, all I can say is I sympathize 
with those folks up North that haven’t had these experiences too 
often. 
 
We know what it’s like in the south-west. It doesn’t mean we 
like it, but we are hardened and we are conditioned, and most 
likely the folks in the south-west will continue to survive 
because that’s the kind of hardy people they are. 
 
A lot of people though that aren’t used to it, depend on regular 
incomes from year to year to pay their bills, and they’re not 
conditioned for this sort of thing and it will affect them much 
more adversely. 
 
So I call on the Minister of Agriculture, not only to support the 
motion but to carry it to Ottawa and take it wherever it has to 
go, and certainly I want to pledge my support on behalf of the 
people of the south-west to go along with that. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Very briefly, the 
member for Thunder Creek has already very well put our 
party’s position on the record, but coming from the area of the 
province that I think has been most hit by adverse weather this 
spring, I would like to put some comments on the record. 
 
Of the 16 rural municipalities in the North Battleford area, 14 of 
them are reporting poor conditions. I understand that they are 
not allowed to report conditions as very poor but if that was a 
category many of our rural municipalities would fall into it. The 
area of the province, which falls into the poor conditions 
category, is expanding, almost on a daily basis. 
 
Now the minister told us today that those who do not take cattle 
to the community pasture will not be charged even though rates 
for the community pasture this year have increased 
dramatically. My understanding in the North Battleford area is 
that the farmers have been told they may well have to remove 
their cattle from the community pasture within the next two 
weeks if there is not significant rainfall, or in the alternative 
they may have to start bringing feed into the community 
pasture. 
 
My question for the minister is, will those farmers be charged if 
they’re not really getting service from the community pasture, if 
they have to either remove their cattle early, or in the alternative 
haul feed into the community pasture? It seems to me they 
should not have to be paying the full cost of community pasture 
pasturing. 
 
Net income for Saskatchewan farmers last year plummeted to a 
negative 79 million from 1.2 billion in 1996. Now the 
projections for this year are not encouraging, and with the 
increasing drought and frost, and the prospect of a second 
germination in much of my area because the first germination 
was less than half the crop, we know that there are going to be 
very serious pressures. The hay crop in my area is virtually 
non-existent. So feed for cattle is going to be very serious even 
if we do get a grain crop. 

We, in the Liberal opposition, are anxious to join hands with 
other members of this Assembly in pressing the needs of 
Saskatchewan farmers on the federal government. But I would 
like to close with just one brief comment though, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When the Saskatchewan Party was formed, the members of the 
new party told us that one of the advantages of the new party 
was that seeing as it wouldn’t be linked to any federal party 
they would be able to grouse and complain no matter who was 
the federal government. Now that seems to me not a terribly 
productive view. We have to push the needs of Saskatchewan 
and of Saskatchewan agriculture on the federal government. We 
need to be able to . . . we need to speak up forcefully about the 
requirements of Saskatchewan agriculture. But for a party to 
say that our big advantage is we can always be in the position of 
complaining because we will never have to work with a federal 
government to try and make the situation better, it strikes me 
that that is not a particularly productive attitude to take. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wasn’t going 
to rise but this is becoming an interesting debate. Here we have 
a lawyer from North Battleford telling us how we’re supposed 
to be running agriculture, indicating that another lawyer from 
Regina is the Ag minister who knows all about it. 
 
Mr. Minister, if in Justice — a farmer was to be the Minister of 
Justice — every lawyer in the province would be up in arms . . . 
every lawyer in Canada. But we in agriculture, Mr. Minister, 
are prepared to accept that perhaps lawyers do know a little bit 
about agriculture; unfortunately that’s never proven the case. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
(1515) 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Speaker: — Before orders of the day I wish to table, 
pursuant to section 25(1) of The Members’ Conflict of Interest 
Act, the annual report for 1996 of the Saskatchewan Conflict of 
Interest Commissioner. Also I table the report of the Chief 
Electoral Officer on the returns of election expenses by 
registered political parties and candidates, pursuant to section 
211 and 218 of The Election Act in conjunction with the North 
Battleford by-election of November 19, 1996. 
 
And finally I report the Chief Electoral . . . table the report of 
the Chief Electoral Officer on the amounts of reimbursements 
to registered political parties and candidates pursuant to section 
223 and 225 of The Election Act, in conjunction with the North 
Battleford by-election of November 19, 1996. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I table the answer 
to written question no. 72. 



1804 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 1998 

The Speaker: — The answer to question 72 is tabled. 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With leave, I 
would hereby table the answers to questions 73 to 80. 
 
In doing so, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank the administration 
who got all of these answers ready to be able to, in the interests 
of open and accountable government, provide that to the 
member requesting it. 
 
The Speaker: — The answers for questions nos. 73, 74, 75, 76, 
77, 78, 79, and 80 are also tabled. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the 
Assembly, I move that the Assembly now proceed to 
Government Orders. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, I move: 
 

That the Assembly now move to Government Orders. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Highways and Transportation 

Vote 16 
 
The Chair: — Before we start today, I would ask the minister 
to introduce her officials again please. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To my immediate 
right is my deputy minister Brian King; to my immediate left is 
George Stamatinos, who is the executive director of the 
southern region. Behind Brian King is Barry Martin, who is the 
executive director of engineering. And behind myself is Lynn 
Tulloch, the executive director of central services. 
 
Subvote (HI01) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Welcome, Madam 
Minister, and your officials. 
 
Madam Minister, I just have one quick question that I want to 
raise with you and that question is in regards to Highway No. 
16 going through Kipling. I’m wondering, Madam Minister, 
who’s responsible, who has ownership of Highway 16 through 
Kipling? Is there a co-ownership agreement with the town and 
Department of Highways — or is it strictly under the 
Department of Highways? And who’s responsible for 
maintenance and repair? Pardon me, Madam Minister — 
Highway 48. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, the town of Kipling is 
responsible for that, the piece of highway that goes through the 
town; if there’s over 1,000 people and population, then the town 
is responsible. 
 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Minister, 
we’ve gone over most of, I think, our questions in Highways. 
But what happened yesterday, I would really like to get an 
answer or a response from you. 
 
We came up and we proposed a rule 46, an emergency debate 
on a national highways program, and it totally amazed me when 
your government voted this down. To me this was nothing more 
than just a good lob to your side of your House, because if we’d 
had got an all-party concession we must have more clout than 
what your government has been doing because you’ve been 
getting nothing out of the federal government. 
 
We hear continual whining on that side of the House in question 
period; in every speech we hear about federal funding whether 
it’s in Health, Education, Highways, whatever it is, you’re 
always dumping on the federal government. Yesterday you had 
an opportunity with the Prime Minister in the city of Regina to 
completely — all parties — put some pressure on the Prime 
Minister and you chose to not do that. 
 
And I’m wondering why, Madam Minister? And I would like 
you to somewhere along the way try and explain that to me. I’m 
beginning to wonder if it’s on account of the Premier and the 
Prime Minister are such good friends, and the Premier doesn’t 
want to hurt his appointment to the unity brigade in this country 
once he retires from politics in Saskatchewan. 
 
You know, Madam Minister, there was premiers in this 
province that I was proud of and didn’t believe in their politics. 
And you know a name that you’ll remember very well is 
Tommy Douglas. He was one of the people that I respected for 
one reason — he stuck up for Saskatchewan people in Ottawa. 
You didn’t have to like his politics, his social conscience 
programs that he came out with quite often, but you had to 
respect the man for sticking up for this province when it came 
to dealing with the federal government. 
 
The Premier we have today, Madam Minister, does not fit in 
that category. He is friends with the present Prime Minister and 
above all that seems to outweigh anything that we get. Whether 
it’s for agriculture as we talked today, whether it’s for our 
highway programs, we never hear our present Premier hollering 
for Saskatchewan. 
 
And Madam Minister, I’d like you to comment on that and why 
you would vote down a rule 46 yesterday, when what we were 
really doing is lobbing you a good one over there to all go 
together and put some pressure on our present Prime Minister to 
honour our twinning of our highways, which I agree with you, 
the federal government should be putting money into. They’re 
obligated to put money into, we need that money, and if they 
would put into that we would have more money here to put into 
our secondary highways. Madam Minister, will you please 
respond. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, I am glad to have the ability 
to respond to this, or have the chance to respond to this. 
 
We have sent, and we have done everything, the Transportation 
ministers . . . the Premier has at the very top level spoken to the 
Prime Minister, has lobbied the Prime Minister. We have 
worked in every aspect on trying to get more money for 



June 9, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1805 

national highways but also to address the grain transportation 
strategy, and a lot of other issues at the national level. 
 
And yesterday our Premier was at the Canadian Federation of 
Municipalities. He spoke there; he certainly put forward again 
the importance of a national transportation strategy, the 
importance of a national highway system. And he actually got a 
standing ovation of over 1,500 people at the Canadian 
municipality meeting there yesterday for how he was standing 
up for this province and also standing up for Canada because he 
also thinks it’s important that we have a country that is unified. 
 
But he certainly has the interests of Saskatchewan people at the 
top of his list in priorities. And transportation, agriculture 
issues, all of those issues, the Premier has raised over and over 
at the federal level. We certainly wish we knew that the 
provincial levels were also helping us with that. 
 
But we have made every chance possible, and we certainly will 
be looking again at hosting. I mean that we’ve talked with the 
western premiers to look at the type of lobby that we need to 
organize out of western Canada. Our Premier is on top of this 
issue. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Madam Minister, Mr. Chairman, I 
commend him for being there and lobbying the Prime Minister, 
but what I am saying is, once again he did it very quietly behind 
the scenes, kept it really out of the media for all intents and 
purposes so nobody would hear him. And can you tell me then 
if he did all this lobbying on behalf of our province, what 
commitment he got out of the Prime Minister yesterday for 
infrastructure money for this province? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — When he was at the meeting yesterday, 
the media was there, and one of the frustrations is is that the 
media doesn’t carry the coverage, doesn’t take the coverage of 
the positive news that was there. 
 
The Premier, as to my knowledge, has had no commitment at 
that level. But that does not mean that we’re not going to 
continue to lobby and put as much pressure as we possibly can 
on the federal government. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, Madam Minister. 
Welcome to you and your officials. I have — not unlike 
everyone else in this Assembly it seems like — areas that are a 
tremendous concern about the condition of their highways, 
specifically highways 317 in my constituency, 30, and 44, and 
the one through Dodsland-Plenty areas. 
 
I’m certainly — coming from that area of the province — and 
certainly familiar with the conditions with those highways in 
absolute horrible repair. Highway 30 from Eston, south to the 
Riverside Park there, there was construction done on that one 
last year. And I think my hired man probably put it the best way 
anyone could — the highway used to be in poor shape but now 
even the ditches are in poor shape. 
 
What they did was they came in and filed that pavement — 
what little pavement there was — off into the ditch. Rocks and 
chunks of pavement and everything like that. A number of 
farmers, because they want to maintain the ditches themselves 
— have mowed them for years there — now find that they can’t 

even mow the ditches because of the big chunks of pavement 
and the rocks that are there. 
 
And then the highway is in absolutely horrible shape. I mean, 
we’re talking a highway that is holes throughout. And we’re 
wondering if there’s any plans on that one. 
 
The highway leading from Eston west to Glidden, again is in 
absolute terrible repair. They’ve monkeyed around out there a 
little bit trying to do something, but basically it amounts to 
making it worse rather than better. We’re wondering what’s 
happening in that area. 
 
The highway out in the west side of my constituency, 317, is in 
terrible condition. It’s not a paved highway; it’s a gravel 
highway. And the people in that area have been calling for 
some assistance for years on that one. The ministers of your 
administration, through successive ministers, have been out 
there on numerous occasions and yet nothing happens. 
 
Madam Minister, I wonder if you would care to comment at this 
point. 
 
(1530) 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, in response then, the Eston 
west, the Highway No. 44, — it will be receiving above average 
work on it and intensive preservation will be done on that piece. 
 
Now the piece Eston south, now that’s the piece I think there 
that they’ll be working on to keep it safe, serviceable. And if 
that’s the piece in which you said there was chunks in the 
ditches and so on, they are going to check that and try to clear 
that up because that shouldn’t be case. They should definitely 
pick up those pieces if there are pieces in the ditches then. 
 
And on Highway 317, again that’s the gravel highway that you 
were talking about, certainly there will be maintenance on that. 
We are buying a gravel pit in the Macklin area for future work 
in that area. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — So am I to understand you, Madam Minister, that 
Highway 44 will have a . . . from Eston west will be repaired 
this summer? And am I to understand that Highway 30 south 
will be repaired this summer? I want to know what your 
definition of repair is too. 
 
We’re talking about sending a truck up and down it to have a 
look at it. That’s not what I call repairing it. I call having a crew 
come in and oiling it again is what’s needed to be done there, 
filling in all of the potholes, which basically are 15 miles in 
length, right starting at Eston and leading down to Riverside 
Park. You got one pothole lasting 15 miles there. You better 
have a look at it. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, on Highway No. 44, that’s 
the piece that will get more intensive work and we will be in the 
areas that are needed, again depending what work it needs. It 
could be putting on more oil, but it’ll be more intensive work. 
On Highway 30, which is south of Eston, in that it’ll be more of 
a routine maintenance. But certainly, I mean, filling potholes 
and so on, but it won’t receive the level, the intensive 
preservation work that Highway 44 will be receiving. 



1806 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 1998 

Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair . . . oh, and 
good welcome. Good afternoon to the minister and her officials. 
 
I’ve got one specific concern on behalf of a constituent of mine 
that I’d like to raise with the minister here this afternoon first 
before getting into some other lines of questioning. 
 
But I believe the minister may be aware of this one. I had sent a 
copy to her just days ago. It’s concerning a gentleman in the 
Vanguard area of my constituency, Mr. Henry Barbier. 
 
His problem is he converted a gravel truck to a grain truck. And 
what his problem is — or I’m sorry, not a gravel, a cement 
truck — but the problem is he’s not allowed to haul gross 
weightwise as much product as similar trucks that are still in 
use as concrete trucks. He feels perhaps he’s being unfairly 
treated in this matter where he’s only allowed to haul 
twenty-five and a half tonnes, he’s being told, gross 
weightwise. There’s concrete trucks in use right now by 
permission of your department that are able to haul 32 tonnes. 
 
He’s utilizing the same tire pressures, as are the concrete trucks, 
which are still in use for that purpose versus the converted use 
that he is having on his farm for grain. 
 
He’s wondering if your department will give him the same 
rights to use his vehicle to these same weights as what you’re 
allowing trucks that are being in use right now for concrete? 
 
Before getting into other questioning, if you might just respond 
do this concern on behalf of my constituent I’d certainly 
appreciate that. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, in response to that question, 
this is one that is fairly complicated, because the permits were 
available back in the mid-’70s for this type of a configuration, 
for these kind of weights for concrete trucks. 
 
And since implementing the transportation partnership program, 
the department has capped the privileges, which are available to 
the concrete industry. Any expansion in privileges will only 
happen if they’re part of that partnership program. 
 
And so even looking back then to your constituent that has 
bought one of these trucks then. Then he could enter into a 
partnership agreement to carry extra weights in which then he 
would receive some benefit, but we’d also receive some benefit 
back to the department, which goes back into the roads. 
 
And it’s one of the things when we went into some of these new 
configurations, new programs, and the trucking partnership and 
so on, we grandfathered some in, but we aren’t going to see any 
more expansion of that unless we get part of that partnership 
agreement. And that’s how we would approach the constituent 
that you have raised this concern about. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, 
just a quick geography lesson on the constituency that I 
represent. As you know, on the west side of the constituency we 
have what is called Diefenbaker Lake, a tremendous resort area 
accompanied by a wonderful golf course, and you name it. 
You’ve probably been there, probably some of your support 
staff around you probably have been there and fished or golfed 

or partaken in many of the activities that the lake provides. 
 
Unfortunately, surrounding the lake there are highways by the 
numbers of 19 and 44, 42, 15; also access via ferry that if it 
isn’t broke down, will be able to get people across the river and 
access to that tremendous tourist attraction. 
 
I wonder, Madam Minister, you are one of the . . . you’re the 
only minister that hasn’t accepted my offer to come out to that 
constituency and look at the state of those roads, and I’m 
saddened to hear that. And I’m hoping that you will change 
your mind and do that some day and not rely on your 
bureaucrats to take and show you the roads that they think you 
should see. 
 
However I’m wondering, Madam Minister, what kind of 
discussions have taken place since you’ve become minister, 
with your department in looking into that area, into those 
highways to get some resolve there so that I can . . . so I don’t 
have to put up with the calls that I get from tourists leaving 
Saskatchewan phoning my constituency office and saying that 
they’ll likely never come back to that area to use the lake or the 
golf course or what have you? And that’s pretty poor 
advertising, as the minister who sits next to you represents the 
constituents on the other side of the lake I’m sure receives many 
similar calls as I do. 
 
He recognizes the problem as do I and we’d like to know what 
you and your department are going to do to address that 
situation. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, on the highways that you’ve 
mentioned, Highway No. 42, there’s 40 kilometres slated for 
intensive preservation. So there is a tremendous amount of 
work being done on Highway No. 42. And actually that is a 
highway that I have travelled. 
 
And Highway 367 . . . you didn’t mention that one, sorry. 
Highway No. 19 is the other highway that you mentioned. 
Hawarden to Junction No. 15 is also getting intensive 
preservation. I don’t know if that’s the area exactly that you 
were referring to. 
 
We are also entered into an agreement with three RMs (rural 
municipalities) to take the potato haul out of the Lucky Lake 
area and trying to avoid damaging Highway No. 19. And so 
we’re working with both in that particular area, and I have met 
with people from that area about the concerns that they do have 
about the road systems servicing both Lake Diefenbaker, the 
potato industry, and some of the other things that are going on 
in that area. 
 
And also in the larger piece, also in the transportation area 
planning, some of those concerns are being . . . and we’re trying 
to work with them on how we do tackle these issues into the 
future. 
 
Mr. McLane: — With all due respect, Minister, your 
consultation processes are about seven years too late. Your 
government’s been in power since 1991 and you’re still 
consulting. Meanwhile the roads are disastrous. 
 
You keep talking about spending money. The rail line from 



June 9, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1807 

Broderick to Moose Jaw is up for abandonment. Canadian 
Pacific Railway has said that they want to sell that line, and the 
farmers and municipalities and communities over there are 
trying to find someone to come there and take over the line. The 
problem is, if that doesn’t happen, the rail line is gone. And No. 
19 Highway then is a major artery along that line, running 
parallel to that rail line. 
 
So the question is, start looking. And you talked about 
preservation; you talked about patching potholes. That doesn’t 
make the road any wider, Madam Minister. 
 
And if the Hon. Agriculture minister would pay attention and 
listen, you’d be able to hear my question. 
 
So that doesn’t make the highway any wider, it doesn’t help the 
safety. I had people in here . . . And your government is paying 
one family in the Central Butte area because of your inability to 
maintain the roads. It’s costing taxpayers thousands of dollars 
to look after that family, and rightfully so. But that’s one of the 
problems with the highway. Patching the holes is great 
day-to-day, but it doesn’t widen the highway and it doesn’t 
make it safe for people to travel on. 
 
The municipalities in that area, in the area of 44, have told me 
that they need No. 44. And for your information in case you’re 
not aware, No. 44 has taken the conservative route and has gone 
back half to gravel. And the farmers are saying and the 
municipalities are saying that they need that artery of 44 to 
access the terminals in Davidson. 
 
Have you undertaken any discussions with those municipalities 
to talk about what you can do on Highway 44 to get it back to 
pavement and get it back so that the truck traffic is able to drive 
on it and keep it off the municipal secondary roads. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, on the questions there — and 
I hope I got them all — first of all we have been working out in 
that area with people, and we’ve actually had some meetings in 
the Davidson area also. 
 
Right now on Highway No. 44 there is no plan to resurface it in 
this year’s budget. We’re certainly though working in the area 
to look at, where is the grain traffic going? Where do we have 
to work together with local governments in order to put the 
dollars together . . . that we do have heavy truck haul routes that 
service areas? 
 
But on the idea of the branch lines and the short lines, we are 
working with communities in areas in order to try to give as 
much both . . . help to see about the viability of the branch lines. 
But what we would call on you, as provincial Liberals, is to 
look to Ottawa, to the federal Liberals on the area of branch-line 
abandonment. It’s certainly not our province that is doing that. 
 
And we’re trying to do everything in our power to work with 
groups to look at the kinds of choices that there ought to be. 
There are tremendous changes going on. We hope that more 
branch lines can stay in place because it will help preserve our 
road system. 
 
(1545) 
 

Mr. McLane: — Yes, thank you, Minister. Yes, I too am 
working with the federal government to try and bring them to 
some consensus with these short-lines. 
 
The problem that I don’t like to hear is — I hear the same thing 
from them as I hear from you and your government. You tell us 
in this House daily and you just said it again, talk to your 
federal counterparts. We talk to them and they say, well talk to 
your provincial counterparts. Why in the world don’t you get 
together and come out and join in with the rest of us that live 
out there and farm, and our livelihoods depend on it, and let’s 
fix this thing. Let’s solve it. 
 
Let’s decide who’s going to save the Imperial subdivision in my 
own community. Who’s going to save that? I’m organizing a 
meeting right now for next week where all the communities are 
coming together and they’re madder than a hatter about what’s 
happening here. There’s no action from you or your 
government. There’s no action from the federal government. 
There’s nothing for them. 
 
You offer assistance. You send out a bureaucrat and they’ll . . . 
yes, you can do this or you can do that. But nobody says we’re 
going to stop this. We’re going to stop the abandonment until 
we get this thing straightened out. 
 
Now you will have some responsibilities in that area after the 
Canadian National rail line in our community abandons that 
chunk of line. It’ll come into your jurisdiction and you’ll have 
some authority then. And I’m asking you then, well talk to us. 
Are you willing to work with us and stop this rail line from 
being abandoned until we get things straightened out with the 
highways and the roads? And that certainly can apply to the 
Broderick to Moose Jaw line as well. 
 
However in the same area, near the community of Riverhurst, 
we have a ferry as you know. And of course we have trouble 
with that thing every fall and every spring and the people in the 
communities on both sides want something done with that 
crossing. My question at the end will be what are you doing to 
make that a year-round crossing? You’ve made some 
commitment. I understand some of your department’s made 
some commitment to the communities out there to look at this 
seriously. Where are you going with that? 
 
But I want you to know that last spring when that ferry should 
have been in operation, your department was busy tearing the 
engine out of the ferry and those people had to wait days and 
weeks until they could use that ferry. Now your member, the 
minister that sits next to you across the way there, was aware of 
this and we looked at it. We tried to speed up the process but it 
was too late. We shouldn’t have to go through that every year. 
 
Why do we have to go through that and what is your 
department going to do to guarantee that those communities of 
Riverhurst and on the west side of the river, to guarantee that 
this thing doesn’t happen again next spring — that when they 
want to use the ferry that the thing is up and ready and running 
and ready to roll? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, now first of all, on a number 
of comments there that were made in the questions, first very 
much I’d like to say to the member of Arm River that we have 



1808 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 1998 

been saying, stop the abandonment. And we have said it, as all 
western provinces, the Premier has said it; it doesn’t make any 
sense to have a review of a grain transportation system as the 
system itself is being torn apart. And then at the end of the day 
there may be different rules, there may be different 
circumstances and you’ve already lost the system. 
 
So we have been saying, stop the abandonment. We don’t have 
the jurisdiction to stop it. That’s the federal government’s 
jurisdiction, and I wished we could do it as a province, but that 
is the jurisdiction of the federal government. 
 
So we certainly have been, and I’m interested that the member 
from Arm River is talking to your federal counterparts. And 
certainly we would hope that there’d be a halt to abandonment 
at least until the end of the review of Estey, and what would be 
suggested after that on how we see a more efficient, effective 
grain transportation system. 
 
More specifically on the Riverhurst ferry crossing, what 
happened this spring was not anticipated so there was an 
unanticipated circumstance. It did not take weeks; it took days 
to get that back in operation. And certainly we’ll try to get it 
operating as . . . to operate as long a season as possible. 
 
We are also doing a review on the whole transportation system 
in that area. Part of that is looking at the feasibility of a bubbler 
system in order to keep that crossing a 12-month operation. 
We’ve done some review of where this is operated in another 
province under cold circumstances. But we’re working with 
Economic Development and looking at what the potato projects 
— and how the development will go in that area — to try to 
meet those needs in the transportation system. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Well, Minister, hope doesn’t save the rail 
lines; hope doesn’t do it. You need action. You need something; 
you need to do something. And you’re talking about hope — 
hope doesn’t do anything; hope doesn’t save the rail lines, hope 
doesn’t build the frigging highways. We want some action. 
 
It’s my understanding — and maybe some of your officials can 
correct me or maybe they don’t know — it’s my understanding 
that once a piece of rail line comes out of the national system, it 
comes under provincial jurisdiction. At that point in time, you 
have the authority then to move in and put a moratorium on that 
piece of rail line. That’s something that you need to check into, 
and I’d like to receive an answer in writing in regards to that 
question. 
 
The other thing on the ferry — you’re off the mark, Madam 
Minister, because they knew full well last fall that that ferry 
needed work on the motor of that ferry, and the work could 
have been done over winter. It wasn’t anything happened this 
spring other than let the ferry freeze into the water. That’s what 
happened. 
 
So don’t stand here today and tell us that. And the people in the 
community are going to receive a copy of this Hansard and 
they know full well that the ferry needed work last fall, and it 
could have been done and should have been done over winter 
time, not this spring when the ferry needed to be used. 
 
Madam Minister, I would just ask that . . . and I asked the 

question earlier and I wasn’t sure that I heard the answer — 
when you talk about working with people in that area. But the 
municipalities that border Highway 44 are talking about, 
seriously about, having that highway built. If that rail line goes, 
that highway is crucial to them to get their grain to Davidson to 
those two huge terminals there that the Saskatchewan Wheat 
Pool and the United Grain Growers have both built there, 
hoping and praying that the farmers are going have to haul their 
grain there. 
 
Have any of those discussions seriously taken place with those 
municipalities? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Okay, Mr. Chair, in response to . . . still 
on the Riverhurst ferry, to the knowledge of the officials here, 
we did not know, we did not anticipate that in the fall, but we 
will certainly give you a written response to that. 
 
The other piece on short-line railways — our unit within our 
own department, the short-line advisory unit, has been working 
with groups right across this province on branch lines and 
trying to see the viability of branch lines and trying to give the 
producers choices so that they do have an opportunity. 
 
We are working with the federal government to look at the 
possibility of some kind of . . . also financial resources that 
could be targeted towards short- line rails. That is looking 
promising, but we do not yet have any guarantee on that. 
 
But certainly there is a lot of changes that we would like to see 
in the Canadian transportation Act that would allow for more 
competition in the rail system, which would allow for joint 
running rights. Those are the kind of pieces that we need to 
have, that will make branch lines, short lines viable in this 
province. 
 
I have had very good response with our short-line unit that does 
go out and work in areas to see the possibilities of what can be 
done to maintain branch lines in this province. 
 
The other pieces — when you’re talking about communities and 
looking at major changes and what dollars are being spent on 
roads, especially those that are going to major terminals, there 
certainly is . . . they have the opportunity to apply through the 
CAIP (Canada/Saskatchewan Agri-Infrastructure Program) 
funding, which was a good program but we need more dollars 
in that. And that’s why we still believe there should be more 
dollars coming in to help build the infrastructure when we see 
this tremendous change happening in grain transportation. 
 
But they do have the opportunity to apply for those kinds of 
dollars that will help address some of the roads that are severely 
impacted by changes in grain transportation. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thanks, Minister. The changes have been 
happening for the last seven or eight years, they just didn’t start 
happening tomorrow, or yesterday, or the day before. 
 
I’ll extend the offer to you once more to come to Arm River and 
tour those highways with me and see for yourself firsthand what 
we’re up against. And we’ll talk to some of the folks out there, 
the real people that live and use those roads along there, and 
look forward to your visit to Arm River. 



June 9, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1809 

Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, I certainly will come out to 
do a tour of Arm River. I was actually in Arm River 
constituency over the weekend. I travelled actually on a number 
of roads, and actually met real people that were from Arm 
River. And actually the roads that I travelled on were absolutely 
in excellent shape. Now I certainly can look at other roads in 
your constituency, but I did meet real people that had a lot of 
compliments on the roads that had been built. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Madam Minister 
and your officials welcome. I just have some brief questions. 
Taking a quick survey on the map — we have something like 
12 main highways, or fairly main highways, coming in from 
Manitoba, eight from Alberta, and about 10 or 12 from the 
States. Do you have any priorities for those particular highways 
that would attract or would carry traffic from outside of 
province, particularly from the U.S. side, from the tourist 
attraction area? Do you give those highways priorities? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, the highways that you’re 
mentioning that go between provinces and also join with the 
United States, of course the highways that are under the 
national highways system would certainly be getting a priority, 
those like No. 1, 16, 7, 39. 
 
Other highways also that are important are provincial highways 
that are designated as provincial highways. We’re certainly 
doing some major work on Highway 39 from Portal. Also 
Highway No. 6, Regway, coming up in that direction because 
they’re meeting with other jurisdictions. They have set some 
priorities and we try to make sure that we are kind of meeting 
up with the priorities of some of our neighbours, especially for 
Economic Development, for tourism, as you have said. 
 
So there is, I think, on a number of the highways that you have 
said, again depending on volumes, how they would kind of — 
the traffic use — those are highways that do get a priority. 
 
(1600) 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Madam Minister, and I’m pleased to 
hear that. I know that you and I have exchanged some 
correspondence, particularly on at least two occasions, about 
Highway No. 47. 
 
That highway is not anywhere near my constituency but a lot of 
folks from my area travel down through Estevan and into the 
U.S. And people coming from the U.S. through Estevan have 
told me on more than one occasion that the stretch of No. 47 
Highway between Stoughton and No. 1 Highway should in fact 
be shut down for safety’s sake because of its deplorable 
condition, particularly at night when it is . . . when the problems 
and the dangers are magnified. People not only have to be 
worried about perhaps running into wild game but the serious 
condition of the broken up hard top or hard surfacing. And I’ve 
had people on more than one occasion . . . and I’ve 
corresponded with you, but I wondered if there was any priority 
being given to that stretch of highway. It was as recently as 
about three weeks ago that visitors from Estevan suggested that 
it was extremely dangerous, particularly from Stoughton to No. 
1 Highway. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, on Highway 47, it’s not one 

of the provincial highways. It would be considered . . . it has a 
little less volume of traffic and so on on that piece. There is a 
number of kilometres, somewhere probably around 30 
kilometres or more that is getting intensive preservation on it. 
And so it has been identified as a piece that does need work and 
there certainly will be work done on that piece this season. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you. I’m pleased to hear that. Just to 
change — switch gears here a little bit. There was some 
correspondence from the town of Fort Qu’Appelle sharing 
concerns with the RM of North Qu’Appelle and Qu’Appelle 
with respect to, in the not too distant future, the building of 
Terminal T-22 near Balcarres and the access to it. And I see 
your officials nodding and are aware of it. 
 
Madam Minister, could I ask what stage of consideration for 
some alternate routes on behalf of that community that you 
might be looking at to ease the pressure or take away the excess 
heavy traffic from right through the town of Fort Qu’Appelle? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, there have been a number of 
discussions around Terminal 22, and actually there seems to be 
. . . we’re working on a solution with the RM there. It look’s 
like some construction of an access that will then avoid the 
heavy traffic going through Fort Qu’Appelle. There are some 
safety concerns about where they want to construct that access, 
but we’re still working with them and hopefully we can get that 
positively resolved. 
 
And we’ll still be meeting also with I think is the Qu’Appelle 
Valley transportation committee that’s going to be out there to 
work on those issues. I think it’s this Thursday. 
 
Mr. Osika: — I thank you, Madam Minister, and I guess that’s 
the kind of assurances that the people would like and 
appreciate. I did attend one of the meetings with respect to the 
concerns over access off No. 10 Highway to terminal T-22, and 
I appreciate that. So I’m encouraged and I’m sure the folks will 
be back in Fort Qu’Appelle that you are already talking about 
alternative transportation routes. 
 
One more question, and if I could just ask, has there been a 
resolution to the situation on Highway No. 1 east, just east of 
McLean, the difficulties or the problems that Wood Country 
was experiencing relative to their accessibility to their facility. 
Has that come to a conclusion as yet or is it still kind of up in 
the air? 
 
I know that I recall that and I very much appreciate your 
addressing and taking personal interest in that situation. And I 
guess I’d just like to know if that has been finalized or if there 
is still a need to do some work to bring it to closure. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, in regards to No. 1 and Wood 
Country, we have no plans to remove the approach, so the 
approach will stay. So I think those circumstances are 
addressed. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Minister, I 
guess there were a few things we didn’t finish the other night in 
estimates. I guess the final question I asked of you the other day 
was to bring a written response — the total number of claims 
and on which stretches of highways and such. Did you bring 



1810 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 1998 

that information with you today? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, to respond to that, we do 
have a vehicle damage claims paid sheet here put together to 
answer your request that I will give you. In putting it together in 
a fairly short time, we think it’s as close as we possibly can get. 
We don’t really have the information system set up to have an 
absolutely accurate . . . well, we hope this is as accurate as 
possible, but there may be some information that’s not all there. 
But we have put this together and I will send over a copy of it to 
you. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well, thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, do you also have the priority list of all the highways in 
the province? We used to get that each and every year and I 
don’t recall seeing it this year as yet. Could I get that? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, what we have right now, we 
still have last year’s list. We don’t have it updated for this year. 
A lot of the unit costs, the construction costs, have changed 
considerably and so it needs to be updated. 
 
So it’s not totally reflective of this year, but we could certainly 
still give you the same . . . it would be the list that you got last 
year, but we don’t have an updated list for this year as yet. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Madam Minister, now just so we’re 
talking about the same list, are you talking about the projects 
that are underway, or are you talking about the list of, you 
know, Highway 13 used to be somewhere about 120 on the list 
of priorities? Is that the list we’re talking of? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: —The list that I’m, Mr. Chair, the list that 
I’m referring to is the benefit-cost analysis project-ranking list. 
And so we still . . . the only list that we have right now is the 
list from a year ago. We do not have the one that would be 
updated; it needs to be done. 
 
As I said previously that there’s been a lot of change in cutting 
unit costs, on construction costs, which would have to go into 
this to have it updated. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Madam Minister, could you send over last 
year’s list. I don’t have mine with me here today. 
 
Now I see on the vehicle damage claims paid list that you’ve 
sent over, there is a number of claims, some 35 claims, from 
flying stone claims. And I guess that’s because of the highway 
patchwork that your department is doing now where you just 
put down a lot of gravel and some of these stretches of gravel 
covering potholes now are getting to be quite lengthy. 
 
I have received today a letter from Mr. Leroy McGillicky at 
Coronach, Madam Minister. I’ll send you a copy over so you 
can follow along. 
 
In this letter from Mr. McGillicky: 
 

On Wednesday, May 20, 1998, the Department of 
Highways were doing their yearly summer job of patching 
Highway 34. That afternoon as we were returning home 
from Bengough we met one of the Department of Highway 
trucks. This person who was driving did not slow down to 

a responsible speed. We were virtually coming to a 
complete stop, but of course we received two stone chips 
on the windshield of our car. 
 
We stopped one of the other trucks after this and told him 
what happened. The answer we received was, “We, the 
Department of Highways employees are not responsible 
for any of these happenings." Yet there are signs posted 
such as men working, loose stones, and slow down. I guess 
it is only the taxpayers that are responsible for any of these 
dealings these days and no one else. 
 
As a result it cost us $25 to have the windshield repaired 
that we don’t have to replace the whole windshield. 
Enclosed is the bill. It is about time the Government of 
Saskatchewan started to take some form of responsibility. 
Mr. Leroy McGillicky. 
 

Madam Minister, you have a copy of the bill. When these 
claims come in, people that have lost their windshields — and 
I’ve had three of them myself knocked out because of those 
gravel stretches on what should be a paved highway — can you 
tell us the process as to what happens so that the costs are 
picked up by the Department of Highways, or your department? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, just on this specific letter, 
certainly George Stamatinos here is the executive director of the 
southern region; we will look into this. 
 
And certainly, I’m not just sure exactly where the quote came 
from and which employee, but that is not how we like to deal 
with complaints. 
 
Now I’ve said various times here if there . . . we monitor roads; 
we try to have them signed and flagged. And if we are not 
responsible at all for damages, then it would go through SGI. If 
we feel there is total responsibility because of the condition of 
the roads and so on, we’re then liable for that or we pay that. 
 
(1615) 
 
Sometimes we do get into those areas where there is some 
question, and we are looking at how our claims are being dealt 
with. We are going to do a little bit of a pilot process. But the 
process is usually that it has gone to an area manager, which 
then may go to an executive director of each region. And then 
sometimes it moves up. 
 
But we do try to make settlement in which we feel we are 
responsible for. 
 
We are going to look at trying to give a little more standardized 
process so that everybody is absolutely clear. We’re looking at 
the possibility, if someone doesn’t agree with the settlement, of 
setting up kind of a third person that would be like a referee to 
look at the claim also. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — So, Madam Minister, when people have 
stone chips, what exactly is the process? What do they have to 
go through, you know, to get your department to pay for it? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, normally we would not pay 
for stone chips if the road is marked, and it’s known to have 



June 9, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1811 

stones on it, and it’s marked. People are to slow down and 
understand those conditions. If it is not marked and we are 
responsible, or if it is because of one of our vehicles, then we 
might be paying the claim then. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — So if there’s no small red flag or danger or 
bump or whatever the signs are today, and someone comes 
along and they hit a stretch of gravel on a paved highway where 
they’re not expecting to see gravel and stones, you will pay — 
correct? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, again we have to check and 
investigate each one. Now if it’s . . . like I said, if it was 
because of we did not have a gravelled area marked, that was 
definitely a stretch of gravel that we did not have marked and 
flagged, then we may be responsible. But like every stone chip 
— we’re not responsible for. 
 
And it’s hard to know how a stone got on a piece of pavement 
or whatever, so that’s why we look at them on each individual 
case. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — But, Madam Minister, where you’d have 
some problems, perhaps the person that received the stone chips 
could be near stopped. In fact, that’s what happened in my case. 
And the vehicle that was coming towards me was speeding on 
this paved highway, Highway 13. You don’t expect to get your 
windshield taken out on paved highways. 
 
Now when that vehicle goes by and you lose a windshield, well 
whose fault is that? You know the other vehicle isn’t stopping 
to pay up. And really if you’re travelling on a paved highway, 
you can hardly blame the person that lost their windshield. And 
I see here . . . I mean you have made some claims on . . . well 
some as low as it looks like $35, some $50 claims. So you’re 
admitting that on some of these highways there is a serious 
problem. 
 
By how do the people out there determine when it’s fair for 
them to bring forward a bill or not, and who do they give that 
bill to? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, as I said previously, normally 
we do not pay for stone chips. But if it’s . . . we try to have 
signing out there that would say slow down, take care, protect 
your windshield, those kind of warnings. So now if somebody 
feels that there was not adequate warning and they feel it was 
the responsibility of the Department of Highways, then they 
raise that concern to the area manager in that area in 
Transportation and Highways, and that’s where it will get dealt 
with — the area manager for each area from the Department of 
Highways. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Have you made this public where people 
can take their claims for windshields or other damages? Have 
you advertised it in the newspapers or let people know by way 
of a letter from your department what they should do? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, we’ve had a reasonable 
number of claims, which is . . . and I mean and we hope that we 
would always get them down in numbers. Last year I think 
there was somewhere around, you know, 200-and-some claims 
and we paid out about 100 claims on it. 

We have over 700,000 vehicles registered in this province. 
There is, I think, over 7 billion kilometres driven. It hasn’t been 
a huge, huge issue. 
 
But certainly I think there has been enough coverage, media 
coverage, and so on that people do recognize if they have valid 
concern . . . and I think people are very reasonable. If they 
really do believe it was the condition of the highways and roads 
that they do know to contact either our department directly, 
which we do sometimes get calls, or they go through an MLA 
(Member of the Legislative Assembly), or they can go, like I 
said, to the department, the area, the people that they probably 
know in their local areas. 
 
So we certainly . . . it doesn’t have to go to the local area. If a 
concern comes to us at a minister’s level, at any level in our 
department, we take it seriously and we look into it. 
 
And I think most people are very reasonable and do contact us 
if they think there’s . . . they need . . . that they have a claim that 
is valid. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well, Madam Minister, I agree, people are 
reasonable. 
 
But I know in my own case, and I’ve been the critic of 
Highways, I was led to believe by the government before — I 
won’t get into which minister informed of this, but he’s sitting 
in here today — that in fact stone chips weren’t covered. 
 
I myself have three vehicles that have had the windshields 
knocked out in the last year because of the highways in the 
south-west which are 25 per cent gravel. And that’s unfortunate. 
But who do we send these bills to? I’m not going to send one 
in; I’m not going to. 
 
But you know what? As the MLA, if I didn’t know that you 
weren’t advertising this . . . until today you weren’t making this 
known to anyone that you were paying for stone chips. But 
somehow certain people can phone into your department and 
get their bills paid. And you think that’s fair? You think, 
Madam Minister, that there are only 35 vehicles that have had 
this happen to them in the province in the last year. You 
probably have 35 a month. 
 
That’s why I’m saying on your claims, when you don’t go into 
your cabinet meetings and fight for the department that you 
represent, and you don’t get these highways fixed, at least 
would you advertise in the papers . . . I mean, you’re running 
millions of dollars worth of ads each and every year as a 
government — you know, promoting things, you know, your 
monopoly Crowns and such — that people don’t have a choice 
in. Well why wouldn’t you just run an address of your phone 
number in the legislature, or the Department of Highways 
number, or your deputy’s number? 
 
Of course, you and I both know there’s far more than 35 stone 
claims. 
 
Madam Minister, the claim that you have with this letter today, 
would you feel it fits in with this plan of yours that the ones that 
are fair would get paid for? Or what is the process after this? 
Now that you’ve received the letter and the bill, what do these 



1812 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 1998 

people have to prove — who they talked to, or which truck? Do 
they need license plate numbers? What do they need? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, first of all, I want to say very 
clearly: normally we do not cover stone chips. We’ve said that 
clearly. 
 
What we have said is, if there are claims that come in because 
something was totally not signed, there was some condition that 
was not expected, we look at the claim, and we try to deal with 
them carefully. But as I said before, normally, we do not cover 
stone chips. 
 
I also want to say that in the area which you represent, that 
there’s about 3 per cent of gravel surfaces there. People that . . . 
on gravel surfaces, if they know that the surfaces are there, 
there are chances that there will be stone chips. Those will not 
be covered. 
 
What we have said is, if there’s a claim that comes in, then — 
because there had not been signing, that people did not know 
that there was going to be a section . . . or there needed to be 
some repair and there was damage to their vehicle that was a 
result of us not giving the proper kind of warning — then there 
may be some coverage. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Madam Minister, did I hear you say, in the 
south-west part of the province, in the constituency I represent, 
because you’re not putting proper monies into the highway 
system and you’re throwing gravel on top of pavement, that in 
that area you wouldn’t recognize any claims? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, where it is signed, where it 
says there’s a change of surface, no, those will not be covered. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well, Madam Minister, I can’t think of 
one location on Highway 13 where it says slow down and save 
your windshield, or there’s a change of texture on top of the 
road. Now there’s a lot of those little red flags. They look like 
New Democrat lawn signs in a small version. Do those suffice, 
in your view, if there’s a change coming up? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, if the surface has changed 
into gravel there would be sign, if it was a significant stretch. If 
it’s a very short piece, or something that’s going to be fixed 
later, it may just be flagged. But there would be indication of 
the conditions that it’s time to slow down. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — So, Madam Minister, we’re sort of back to 
where we were about 10 minutes ago. You know, if I’m driving 
down 13 and we see these red flags — and there are a number 
of them — are you then saying if I slow down but somebody 
else that I’m meeting does not slow down, and I lose a 
windshield on these ridiculous highways that you’re in control 
of, that somehow the victim should be at fault? That I wouldn’t 
have my claim recognized? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, as we have said, or as I have 
said previously, if you feel that there was some responsibility 
on it, the claim would be looked at and we’d look at the 
circumstances which it was under and there’d be some 
adjudication of that. And like I said, clearly we try to have the 
surfaces marked. And if the surface is marked, then we would 

say that people are to slow down and take caution on those 
pieces. 
 
Now if you say there’s a circumstance when somebody else was 
responsible, if it was the Department of Highways responsible, 
we would look at that claim. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well dealing with the first claim then of 
Leroy McGillicky, you read the letter, you look at the bill, am I 
to assume that this is one you’re going to pay through your 
department? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, we will investigate that claim 
as we do any claim that comes in, and I will not judge it here in 
the legislature. It will be dealt with as other claims are. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — All right, Madam Minister, one that you 
have had for some time, and this is the letter from Mr. and Mrs. 
Todd Coburn at Shaunavon. They have a bill here for just about 
$900, and that was chunks of pavement, not stone chips — 
chunks of pavement flying through the grill of their vehicle. Is 
this one that you could as minister say, you bet; you know 
you’re driving down the road and you got 10, 12 pound chunks 
of pavement coming through the grill, I think it’s safe to say 
that there will be a claim paid. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, certainly we will be looking 
at the claim. That one is being dealt with now by the people in 
Department of Highways. And that one will be looked at. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Perhaps, Madam Minister, when we take a 
look at the number of claims coming in, and I recall last year 
dealing with some of these questions, the problem we had last 
year. Of course we had to go through freedom of information to 
get the answers to these. But I think it was something . . . last 
year you had ordered through your department 7,000 of those 
little red danger flags, whatever they are, bump flags. Seven 
thousand you ordered last year, and would you be able to tell 
us, are those enough? How many thousands have you ordered 
this year? 
 
(1630) 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, last year was ordered, if I 
think if I understand what you’re talking about, the diamond 
reflectors that are a little bit brighter, is that what you were 
talking about? I think that’s the one you’re talking about that 
was ordered. Anyways, that has been handled for a number of 
years. They are just a better reflector and they can be seen at 
night. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well no, the ones that we were talking 
about last year, I don’t think they were a special reflector of any 
sort, they’re just that little red . . . do they reflect? I don’t think 
they reflect. I don’t think they really do the job either. In fact 
you’d be amazed, Madam Minister, I’m sure your office gets 
the same calls we get. 
 
I’ve seen flags where, you know, there was no bump. It’s like 
somebody had some extra flags and they just wanted to plant a 
few to say okay, there’s none on the truck. 
 
And then you’re going along . . . Well, Madam Minister, come 



June 9, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1813 

to the south-west and take a drive around — you sit there 
laughing; you’re laughing really in the face of the people of 
south-west Saskatchewan — but take a drive down there and 
you’re going to find what I guess you would call a bump. The 
pictures that I sent to you a few weeks ago during question 
period, that was my vehicle that we drove into that supposed 
pothole, which is about 30 feet long and covered the width of 
the highway and was 8 inches deep. And you’re saying, like a 
red — one of those little red stakes that’s enough. 
 
Somebody coming from Weyburn travelling down 13 and 
they’re hitting these bumps and perhaps it’s not, you know, real 
enjoyable, but that same flag, that same little red flag is going to 
signify one thing at Weyburn, and yet another in that area 
around Admiral-Scotsguard where the pavement is gone and 
it’s 8, 9 inches deep? 
 
I have suggestion perhaps that could resolve some of the 
problems here, Madam Minister. You’re using the red flags 
perhaps too much. What you need is a colour coding. You 
know, yellow, blue, green — to show the severity of the hole or 
the crater. 
 
Now would you be prepared . . . You know in a sense it’s 
amusing perhaps to a few of you. But in another way it’s not. 
Because the day I was taking that picture of my vehicle that I 
had in that hole, a fellow came through with a mini-van from 
Saskatoon and he just about ripped the bottom off his mini-van 
about a quarter mile before he got to where I was out taking a 
picture. He had some nasty things to say about the Premier. 
 
Now would you consider colour coding flags to let people know 
just how ridiculous some of these holes are? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, if there’s a flag put up — or 
as I said we are starting to replace those flags with these 
reflective ones that are little bit easier to see at night — it 
certainly means to slow down, that there is a problem with the 
surface of the highway, and so that’s what that’s indicating to 
people. And if there are larger stretches or a break where there’s 
work being done, those are also signed appropriately. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well, Madam Minister, I think you’ve got 
to get out of Regina. I know cabinet often gets into a bubble 
here and you want to, you know, stay away from the public 
because you’re not very popular. 
 
But the fact of the matter is those holes that I’m talking about 
on Highway 13; they’re not a bump. So don’t let on like this is 
some little nuisance as you’re driving along at 100 kilometres 
an hour. These, in fact, if you hit them at more than 10 
kilometres an hour, you rip wheels and rims off your vehicle. 
 
And it’s the same little tiny red New Democrat lawn sign or 
flag there as where you just have, you know a slight bump in 
the road. So I suggest to you, go with a colour coding system. 
So at least if people see a certain colour, they know it’s much 
safer to get off your highways which you refuse to put money 
into and which you refuse as a rural cabinet minister to defend 
the people out there. Right? Go with a colour coding system so 
that people know it’s better to get into the ditch if they have to. 
 
Or else, Madam Minister, start to advertise your phone number 

of your office here and start to pay these bills. 
 
You can’t have it both ways. You’re collecting half a billion 
dollars in fuel tax and motor license vehicle fees in this 
province and you’re putting about 40 per cent of that back into 
the highway system. You maybe think that’s fair. You may 
think, as a rural cabinet minister, it’s fine to let your urban 
colleagues, you know, suck up all the money for their projects. 
 
But I’m telling you the people in rural Saskatchewan think that 
you’re doing a ridiculous job because those highways cannot be 
driven on. And it’s about time you took some action. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, we do sign appropriately. We 
could certainly look at the suggestion you have made. I do want 
to remind you that I actually travel the highways and roads 
nearly every day and I certainly do not stay or live in Regina. 
 
And actually last year when we put our transportation strategy 
together, we put a plan together for good planning, but we also 
put more dollars in. We put $30 million in last year. We had 
another 10 per cent increase in our budget this year of $20 
million. And there are a lot of good highways right across this 
province. There are certainly some that we need to work on and 
we will be doing that. 
 
And I do also want to say that within the Department of 
Highways and Transportation, the people that are out there 
working on these highways, I think, have been doing a 
tremendously good job . . . certainly wishing that we could get 
more support from some of the other levels of government, 
especially the federal Liberal government. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Good afternoon, 
Madam Minister, and I do welcome your officials. I have a 
couple of brief questions for you. I don’t think they’ll take just 
too terribly long. 
 
Madam Minister, my concern is that I was notified that there is 
some confusion as to why, I guess, proper information or a 
vehicle or a way to allow the public to know about the new laws 
that are associated with snowmobile safety. Specifically that 
last year I guess there was a law passed in the legislature that 
indicated that 12- to 16-year-olds who do not have a valid 
driver’s licence must take a course, a snowmobile safety course. 
Now I understand that it’s snowmobile clubs that would notify 
the people in their areas. However, Humboldt does not have a 
snowmobile club. 
 
And so I’m wondering how people are to know that this safety 
course must be taken and how they’re to receive the 
information that in effect would give them some indication as to 
where the courses are held and what must be taken. It’s my 
understanding that the RCMP didn’t even realize that this 
course was a must. So could you please comment on that for 
me? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, this actually comes under 
SGI, but I certainly will pass that information on because I 
know there’s been the changes with the safety courses like you 
say, and also some other changes with the licensing provisions 
for snowmobiles. And I know one of the things that are very 
important is communication of that. So I will pass those 



1814 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 1998 

concerns, and get answers back to you, through our Minister 
responsible for SGI. 
 
Ms. Julé: — I thank you, Madam Minister. I wanted you to 
know though that it was presumed that SGI would be the body 
that would give some direction with this. And they gave my 
office the indication that until the Saskatchewan Gazette 
published the law that they in fact could not advertise it. But at 
the same time, the law was in effect January 1 of ’98, so that 
caused some problem for SGI. 
 
And the Saskatchewan Safety Council did indicate that they 
would take the names of people that would like to take the 
course. But that still didn’t allow for anyone within that 
community to know who to contact, possibly a hall to have that 
course in, or who would get the snowmobile or whatever the 
case may be if there wasn’t a snowmobile club there. So there is 
some confusion as to how that safety course could take place in 
communities for those youngsters, especially where there are no 
snowmobile clubs. 
 
And the other thing I would just like to mention while I’m on 
my feet is, I see that sitting in the Assembly at the present time 
is the Minister of Agriculture. And I would be, through you to 
him, would like to relay that the No. 20 Highway between 
Lanigan and Humboldt is really in very, very wicked shape. 
And I guess I would ask you if there’s any plans on doing 
something with that highway. I’m not sure if the Minister of 
Agriculture has relayed the same message to you, but if there’s 
anything that is being done this season, I would like to know 
about it. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, on the piece of highway that 
you mentioned — No. 20, Lanigan to Humboldt — the decision 
there is being made. There will certainly be maintenance of that 
road. Now whether or not to then be putting dollars in for 
intensive preservation . . . or maybe a major upgrade may be 
happening on that road. So it’s certainly identified as one of the 
priorities, be dealt with . . . trying to have good maintenance 
probably this year but it looks like some work for next year. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and welcome, Madam 
Minister, to yourself and your officials. I’m looking forward to 
bringing up maybe 10, 12 points in the next 20 minutes or so. 
 
Before I begin, Madam Minister, I want to say that over the past 
20 years northern Saskatchewan has had a number of problems 
and a number of challenges with their highway system. And 
during the ’70s we certainly had the NDP government in power, 
and certainly during the ’80s we had the PC (Progressive 
Conservative) administration in power. And again in the ’90s 
we also have the NDP government again in power, and yet the 
roads in northern Saskatchewan continue to be forgotten, and 
many people in northern Saskatchewan again have at times 
been very, very frustrated, Madam Minister, with the lack of 
action on our highways. 
 
And it’s been to a point where, Madam Minister, the frustration 
is shown in a petition that I had circulated, and by accident the 
petition was sent up to the good people up in Stony Rapids. And 
the highway actually dealt with . . . Highway 155, which of 
course goes from Green Lake north through Beauval, Buffalo 
Narrows, La Loche, and on to Cluff Lake. And by all means, 

you know, we try to get all the people in northern Saskatchewan 
to cooperate and coordinate on their battles, you know, for 
recognition of their problems. 
 
And we got the petition back, and the petition was filled from 
names of Stony Rapids, and of course Stony Rapids is not 
anywhere near Highway 155. But the people of Stony Rapids 
signed the petition in support of the communities along the 
Highway 155, which include Patuanak, Turnor Lake, Dillon, 
Ile-a-la-Crosse, Buffalo . . . and so on and so forth. 
 
So I guess I’m going to send this petition to you just to basically 
show you that the people of northern Saskatchewan, no matter 
where they are, have a common bond and certainly have 
displayed common efforts to try and bring these problems to the 
forefront. 
 
Madam Minister, I guess the first question I have for you today 
is, we have been receiving reports back from the communities 
that there’s been a rumour — and I wish you could substantiate 
the rumour yea or nay, and the reasons behind if it is a true 
rumour — that half of the budget allocated for our particular 
region, which is Meadow Lake north, has been cut from the 
Highways budget. 
 
And I want to say today, is this a rumour? Is this a fact? And if 
it is a rumour, will you again stand up today and say that if that 
is a rumour, displace it at this point in time. If it’s a fact, then 
turn around and say no, we’ll not reduce the budget by 50 per 
cent for Meadow Lake and Points North, particularly the 
highway route around 155. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, from the money that was 
being identified in this year’s budget for that area, there has not 
been any cut in that. So I’m not just sure exactly what the 
rumour is that you have heard, but as far as our knowledge here, 
no, the dollars are being spent that were budgeted for, for that 
area. 
 
(1645) 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Okay, from the allocation we have here in 
terms of 155, there’s been an indication that there’s at least a 
minus 32 per cent cut from the budget that we had from last 
year. Could you give me the specific numbers if there has been 
a cut, if there has not been a cut? And if there has been a cut, 
what the amount is? Is that a fair assessment to make? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, I think possibly there’s 
maybe some dollars in . . . like the last year there was an 
exceptional amount of gravel that was higher than usual, so 
some of that may have come down. And also some of the 
maintenance levels might have come down, like the dollars 
being spent there. But what has happened is that there is a lot 
more dollars gone into major capital work. So overall there’s 
more dollars actually being spent. 
 
Now this is . . . now I don’t know if I’ve got it down to just 
your region exactly, but in the northern area, the major capital 
projects from 1998 budget was at 11.443 million, those are 
estimated for . . . But anyway what I will just say, I won’t get 
into all the specific numbers, but is that the dollars more in 
capital have gone up. There may be some areas . . . And maybe 



June 9, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1815 

some of it is in some of the routine maintenance; there may 
have been some less dollars if there had been increased gravel 
last year in some of that area. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — So I guess the point I want to make, if it’s a 
yes or no, Madam Minister, what you’re saying to me at this 
point in time for the Meadow Lake area . . . Is the Prince Albert 
area is different? Meadow Lake is of course Green Lake north. 
You’re saying to me this evening that there is no cut to the 
budget overall for the highway construction programs or the 
highway maintenance programs for Green Lake north. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — From the item that I have here on the 
expenditures for . . . that’s 4,620 kilometres of highways and 
airports in the northern NAD (northern administration district) 
area which would be the Meadow Lake area north. In major 
capital projects, it’s gone up from, last year from 11.433 million 
to 16.415 million. So it’s gone up in that area. 
 
The partnership expenditures that we have has gone up from 
330,000 to $2.66 million. From last year in preservation 
projects it’s gone up from 3.287 million to 3.55 million. And in 
other surface preservation, that budget has also gone up. So I’m 
just not sure exactly where you’re getting these other dollars 
from. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Okay, Madam Minister, I just wanted to hear 
from you because the source that we got the information from 
of course is a couple of northern leaders. And they’ve been 
hearing a lot of these rumours that the highways allocation for 
our particular area has been drastically reduced. We want to 
make sure that there’s no evidence of that, that it was never 
entertained, and that it’s certainly not true. 
 
And I can basically see from the figures you’ve given me today 
that in fact that may not be true at all. And I want to ensure 
people out there that we want to alleviate those concerns and to 
nip these particular challenges in the bud before they get to 
become a problem area. 
 
The other particular area we have a concern, Madam Minister, 
is what we refer to as the proposed construction of a super 
highway in our particular region. And I spoke to you behind the 
bar about this particular problem. Fort McMurray, of course in 
Alberta, we have been trying to make a connection to Garson 
Lake and on to Highway 155, La Loche area. 
 
And to date we have seen a tremendous amount of money being 
spent on an alternate route, that route going from the Meadow 
Lake area into the Canoe Lake area, then on to the Dillon area, 
and now they’re pushing through to the Grizzly Bear Hills 
which is west of the main route feeding all the Highway 155 
communities. 
 
So what we see happening here in the northern part of 
Saskatchewan is that we see the potential for a link from Fort 
McMurray directly into Meadow Lake as a result of the 
tremendous amount of money being poured into that highway 
which is 903. And that impression we’re getting is further 
supported by the fact that Highway 155 is getting a meagre 
amount of money for maintenance compared to Highway 903 
which is primarily a logging road. 
 

So my question to you, Madam Minister, is the millions of 
dollars that these communities have invested into infrastructure, 
to the homes of many people in Buffalo Narrows, the business 
people of Ile-a-la-Crosse, and Beauval, of Green Lake . . . all 
those people in all those communities would be displaced. 
They’d be in fact as short as 10 years from now, could be off 
the beaten track if Highway 903 becomes a super highway and 
connects Fort McMurray, Alberta directly into Meadow Lake. 
They could in essence bypass all these communities. 
 
And Madam Minister, that’s a great concern to all the residents 
in my constituency because I’ve talked to many businesses in 
Buffalo Narrows and many people there. And again if that 
happens, if that shift happens, Madam Minister, then all the 
communities along that route will be severely, adversely 
affected. 
 
And I want your assurance today that Highway 155 will remain 
the only vital link for the transportation of goods, will remain 
the only vital link serving the north-west today so that 10 years 
from now we don’t see that development happening. Could you 
give us that assurance in the House today, Madam Minister? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, on both of these stretches that 
were talked here now, on 903 there’s no plan to build a super 
highway there. There is some work being done on it as there is 
some work being done on Highway No. 155. At this point there 
. . . like I’m not sure if the timber companies or somebody else 
is planning to make a connection off of 903 over, like you say, 
to Garson Lake, but we don’t have that plan. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Well, Madam Minister, it’s a grave concern 
as I mentioned to you before. The communities and the people 
are quite riled up about this whole scenario, so I want your 
assurance that, as Minister of Highways in cooperation with the 
Minister of SERM, in cooperation with the Premier, that any 
effort to develop a super highway that could have any adverse 
effect on these west-side communities that you will ensure that 
these highways are closed to general traffic and that this will 
not be someday opened up as a main route to serve the west 
side. 
 
And that again, as I mention, is a grave concern to the people of 
the Athabasca constituency, in particular those communities 
that are served and connected by Highway 155. And that’s why, 
Madam Minister, the frustration on the level of service to the 
main highway . . . We don’t want to see that highway become a 
gravel road. We don’t want to see it become a road that only 
small traffic can travel on. We want to see that road built up and 
developed to a proper level so that people can travel in relative 
safety and in comfort. 
 
And this is why there’s been a great amount of concern. 
 
They’re quite frankly afraid that that Highway 903 will become 
a super highway . . . that in its current state now it’s in better 
shape than our main route feeding all these communities. That 
is why there’s a concern. And in fact we’re seeing that there’s a 
heck of a lot more dollars pumped into that Highway 903 than 
there is in Highway 155. 
 
So I don’t know if it’s a conspiracy amongst private business 
people in Meadow Lake or Fort McMurray, but I want you to 



1816 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 1998 

ensure the people of that particular area that that main highway 
will not be changed from 155 to 903. 
 
And the other point, Madam Minister, once I have that 
assurance from you, we need to see evidence of that through 
constant injection of dollars into that main route so that 
people’s concerns can be alleviated. Can we get some of those 
comments on that particular issue, please? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, to address those questions I 
just want to reassure you that on Highway 903 there is some 
major upgrading happening up to, I guess, about where that — 
Canoe Lake — where that intersection is there, and that’s to 
carry the heavy truck haul. But after Canoe Lake on, there is 
just . . . it’s not in the plan to put major dollars in that or to look 
at any kind of connection up to Garson Lake. I mean that’s just 
not in our plan at all. 
 
Certainly the connection from Cole Bay . . . I think it is here, 
over also to Highway No. 155, there is some upgrading 
happening there because there’s access into a number of 
communities and resort communities there. But certainly 
Highway No. 155 is still seen as a major road for connection of 
those other communities and for a road that will be certainly 
worked on into the future. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Madam Minister, and this is the 
reason why if somebody were to ask me, as the MLA (Member 
of the Legislative Assembly) for Athabasca, what’s the one 
road you want to see built, and the road of course, Madam 
Minister, would be the road from Garson Lake on to Highway 
155, La Loche area. And that’s the primary reason because if 
we want a connection from Fort McMurray, we want that 
connection to go through Garson Lake, La Loche, and on to the 
main route. And then the tourism will flow, and the benefits 
will flow along that area, and that you would not see the 
Meadow Lake, Fort McMurray connection. 
 
So I guess the other point that we raise is that Garson Lake is a 
very important road to all the west-side communities. They 
understand that. And, Madam Minister — if I’m incorrect, 
please correct me — but you’re assuring the House today that 
it’s not in your plans to have the super highway developed 
thereby alleviating some of the concerns and I’m glad to hear 
you say that. 
 
The other factor, Madam Minister, is that some of the 
communities like Turnor Lake, Patuanak, Pinehouse, and Dillon 
area, they have been for years asking to have the roads fixed up. 
And I see some work being done in the Turnor Lake area, and 
I’m sure many people appreciate that work and are going to 
hopefully see the benefits of some of that commitment. 
 
But the other point I wanted to make, is there any indication 
that your department may be looking at a training program, a 
massive training program over the next 10 years, of taking 
people that are perhaps on social assistance or taking people 
that are unemployed or taking people that maybe are wanting to 
train, to see if you can take 10 or 15 people from each of the 
communities and train them on heavy equipment to rebuild 
these roads? 
 
Imagine for a minute, Madam Minister, if you have all these 

people training on heavy equipment, rebuilding these roads, 
perhaps one day we may see a very well-built and 
well-maintained highway system in northern Saskatchewan. 
Have you ever considered that as a departmental objective and 
something that you could priorize as Minister of Highways? 
 
(1700) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Why is the Minister of Justice on his 
feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — With leave, to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, it’s my pleasure to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
legislature, Dr. Irvin Waller who is in the front row. Dr. Waller 
is the director of the International Centre for Crime Prevention 
in Montreal. And he’s a friend from many years back when we 
worked together on the Church Council for Justice and 
Corrections in Ottawa. He’s in Regina today to work with the 
city of Regina on various crime prevention initiatives and bring 
his broad experience from around the world to deal with some 
of these issues in Saskatchewan. 
 
He’s accompanied, behind him, with Terry Mountjoy, who’s 
the director of social development for the city of Regina; and 
Craig McLean, who is a crime prevention officer. I’d ask all 
members of the legislature to welcome Irvin to Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Highways and Transportation 

Vote 16 
 
Subvote (HI01) 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, I think a number of your 
suggestions there are very worthwhile. And some of those we 
have been working on. And there’s two areas I just want to 
touch on . . . is that we’ve had these transportation area 
committees also in the south part of the province. But we are 
looking at the North also, how to work together with the 
communities in kind of a large-area planning, maybe through 
New North, some of those areas in order to help with figuring 
out priorities that meet the needs of communities. 
 
But the second point that you mentioned I think is really good. 
We’ve done some work in the Garson Lake area where we have 
worked with Social Services, unemployed, some to try to get 
into training. I know there’s examples to more probably on the 
east side in the North right now where there’s some programs in 
which the contractors are working with people to give them 
heavy equipment training. I think we need to continue to work 
with the contractors — our own policy too — to be hiring and 
working with more Northerners in the northern part of the 
province. And so I believe a lot of your suggestions in working 



June 9, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1817 

with training in this area, we are working on, and we need to 
continue to work on, and certainly look to your advice on how 
successful we are and ideas to implement that. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I know there’ll 
be a lot of people very happy to hear some of the positive 
comments you have because there’s roads have been a problem 
for many years. La Loche has led the example of how they can 
take people that are primarily unemployed and train them on 
heavy equipment to rebuild roads. So there’s a lot of potential 
in that particular area. 
 
And the final few questions I have for you is in terms of the 
NRT (Northern Resource Trucking), northern trucking firm. 
How much did they contribute to the province for hauling some 
of their goods and services on the roads that we talk about this 
evening? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, could I have that question 
just repeated or clarified? I’m just not sure that we caught the 
question. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Yes, the question — I understand that NRT 
contributes so many dollars to the Department of Highways for 
travelling on these roads with extra loads, extra heavy loads; 
and I was just wondering what kind of dollars did they 
contribute to your department as a result of this agreement? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, we don’t have that 
information here, but we will get back to you with it, what they 
have contributed. We do have, through other partnership 
expenditures . . . that we are spending 2.6 million in the North. 
 
But on the NRT we do not have that right now. But we will get 
back to you. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you. And I guess the other point I 
wanted to make is that, in the event that some of the people that 
may have hit a pothole, or may have hit an unmarked problem 
area on the highway, what is the general procedure for them 
trying to claim some damages back from Highways or from 
SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) because there are 
many people out there that have ran into this problem? Many of 
them have swallowed the cost because they assume nothing 
could be done about it. But many times, these areas are 
unmarked. And it’s a road hazard, and they hit it, and they feel 
that they have no particular recourse to try and get some help 
getting their vehicle fixed. 
 
So could you explain the process as to where SGI’s 
responsible? Where Highways is responsible? And how people 
can begin to look at the option of trying to get some help for 
their damaged vehicles in the event that there’s an unmarked 
area of the highway that causes damage? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, first, if the damage is the 
result of it being not marked and they feel that it was 
Highway’s fault, then they would see the area manager and file 
a claim there, and that would be reviewed. If it was a condition 
of the road in what you felt that we were not liable, they would 
still go through the regular then SGI claim. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you. I guess the final point I want to 

make, Madam Minister, I want to thank you and your officials 
for sharing the information with us. And I never really did have 
the opportunity to congratulate you on your recent appointment. 
 
I certainly hope that you provide as much energy and support 
and focus on northern Saskatchewan as you have in other 
regions of the province. 
 
I think the points that the northern people want to make is that 
we’ve been very patient with the highway system. We have 
been very supportive over the past number of years. 
 
And a lot of truckers, a lot of taxi operators, and general public 
travel these roads. They’re extremely frustrated. They say to the 
government, at the very least, let’s have a plan. Let’s have a 
commitment you’re going to give us that, within five years, our 
highway system would have some opportunity to get some 
dollars injected into them to try and bring them up to at least a 
half-decent standard. 
 
And if you can work on a solution that we have — which 
includes a major road rebuild training program — which would 
take a number of people from these communities to rebuild the 
roads. That’s an option that we looked at and sincerely are very 
interested in having the government investigate. 
 
And secondly, look at some of the proper maintenance of some 
of these roads. Perhaps we need more direct consultation with 
the communities impacted to say how could we improve the 
maintenance of your road? For example, Turnor Lake, Dillon, 
Patuanak, Pinehouse, these communities. 
 
Because when you have a centrally located highways depot, 
these people spend an hour and a half travelling to these roads 
to do an hour and a half work and then they got to travel back 
an hour and a half and there you’ve already blown four and a 
half hours. So there’s a lot of lost time transporting vehicles and 
equipment back and forth, and that again is an injustice to the 
certain communities that have to be serviced. 
 
And, Madam Minister, these communities aren’t small. Turnor 
Lake, for example, has close to a thousand people. Dillon, you 
know, they’ve got a thousand people as well. These are people 
that we need to serve . . . Patuanak. And that’s the incredible 
challenge we have is we’re leaving thousands of people in 
northern Saskatchewan isolated because of poor road 
conditions. 
 
So at the very least, look at these options, give us your 
commitment, and always respect what the northern people have 
been stressing for many years, the fact that they do need some 
solid commitment when it comes to the highway program. 
 
And I sincerely look forward to the next year to see what 
happens. And again I wish you the best of luck in your new 
portfolio and advise you that we’ll certainly be keeping our 
eyes and ears open into the coming year to see what plans that 
you may have for the North. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I just want to 
make a comment that I appreciate a lot of the suggestions that 
you have said. We certainly have targeted a $35 million 
increase . . . $35 million being spent in the North. We do need 



1818 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 1998 

good planning. We want to work with the communities. Since 
being appointed as minister — I guess it’s a little bit less than a 
year — I have put on 66,000 kilometres on a vehicle and 
certainly are trying to travel the roads, plan to be in the North, 
plan to be across the South, so I do appreciate a lot of the 
comments that you’ve made today. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 
welcome to Madam Minister and her officials here this 
afternoon. 
 
I want to just get into a few more items that are more 
constituency specific before I go on to some other questioning. 
And one of them deals with agreements that Highways and 
Transportation would enter into with private individuals for the 
acquiring of aggregate related to construction of highways. And 
I’m looking at, I guess the correct title being “Agreement for 
the Removal of Material.” 
 
And the ones that I’m most curious about actually are specific 
to, I guess you might want to describe it as, the road to Avonlea 
or perhaps better describe the road almost to Avonlea — the 
Highway 334. Now I’ve had some individuals that have asked 
with respect to contracts, agreements that have been entered 
into if . . . well for one thing, prior to me asking these questions, 
would you just explain for my benefit and for the benefit of 
everybody here that — what procedure you go about acquiring 
aggregate let’s say from private individuals? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, first, any time that we’re 
building a road, in which we need to do a haul on aggregate, we 
look at where we do already have sources. But if it’s too far 
away and it looks like the truck haul will be too expensive, we 
do investigate a local area to try and find aggregate. And so 
they do the investigation, field investigation, do sampling, look 
for the quality that they need. And then if they can find the kind 
of quality that is needed, they negotiate a sale. And we have 
somebody that would go out and negotiate a sale at fair market 
value. And that is usually how we would acquire aggregate 
close. 
 
Now if we’re talking on the road to Avonlea, that was one of 
the concerns . . . is to get aggregate that was close because a 
truck haul some distance could damage a lot of other roads too 
in that area. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. And Madam 
Minister, with respect again then to this specific project, how 
many outside suppliers or private land owners did you end up 
entering into agreements for aggregate with? What specific 
quantities were supplied by each of these? And what sort of 
values, dollar values, were paid to these individuals? Are the 
payments already out in their entirety, or are there still some 
payments left to be made to suppliers on some of these 
contracts specific to this Highway 334 project? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, I think because of the 
specifics that you’re asking for on this that we will get back to 
you with a written answer on it. And it is property acquisition is 
what happens with this, but we would have to get back to you 
on the details that you’re asking for. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair, and, Madam 

Minister. So we have your specific undertaking here this 
afternoon that you will be providing us with the details that 
have been requested. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, provided that it’s not 
protected under freedom of information, we certainly will be 
able to provide that information then to you. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chair, then I’d have to ask 
how many contractees would be involved here. Would you at 
least be able to provide us with that here this afternoon because 
some have been in communication with myself and they have 
asked if I could obtain some information on their behalf? 
 
My understanding in speaking with some of them is they have 
some concerns that perhaps the amount of aggregate that they 
understood was to be contracted for hasn’t ended up being 
required by the department. And they’re wanting to know if 
there’s going to be further required from the department or not, 
this sort of thing. So if I could get some idea of how many 
contractees are involved. 
 
And I certainly, probably could get their undertaking to get the 
informations from your department on their behalf. I’m sure 
they wouldn’t have any problem with that and thus remove the 
necessity of talking about freedom of information. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, I just ask you, give us the 
specifics and we will try to get the answers. I don’t think we’ve 
got the information here to be able to answer that in details, but 
we certainly will try to provide the information to you in a 
written form. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair, and, Madam 
Minister. Another more constituency-specific concerns that I 
have centres around Highway 363. And I know there was a 
small project — I guess that’s the best way to describe it — in 
terms of some resurfacing done on 363 just west of Moose Jaw. 
 
There were a number of concerns expressed that, almost 
immediately after this particular stretch of road was resurfaced, 
it was starting to come unglued, I guess would be one way of 
describing it. 
 
Could you perhaps this afternoon describe for us what went 
wrong on this project? Because it would seem that something 
did go dreadfully wrong in that an improper surface application 
must have been used that it would already have been literally 
coming apart. 
 
And if I could just have your comments on this this afternoon, 
because not only has that small stretch of 363 that has been 
repaired, if you’ll call it that, not only that part has been of 
concern, but certainly the entire Highway 363 is one that really 
begs some attention. It’s a highway which is of tremendous 
concern to those who have to use it. 
 
I know I hear members opposite from time to time try and argue 
that well, there’s just not that much traffic on that road. Well 
the fact remains though, the traffic that is on that road at times 
could be carrying some people in rather precarious 
circumstances in the event of some serious injury along that 
stretch of road or in adjacent farms; ambulances up and down 



June 9, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1819 

that highway. We have school buses trying to travel over that 
highway on a regular basis as well, and there’s safety concerns 
surrounding those as well. 
 
So if I could . . . I’ll take my place here briefly and let you 
perhaps respond to some of these concerns. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, on 363, on the piece that you 
were talking about that had been repaired, if it had come apart 
right away, I mean the contractor that did it we wouldn’t have 
accepted it, and he would have to go back and do the work on 
it. Now we’re not absolutely certain exactly on the timing of the 
piece that you’re talking about. 
 
There are sometimes pieces that are done on these surfaces of 
Highway 2, say, in the fall of the year. They still will have some 
difficulty in the spring with freezing and thawing, and then 
usually if the repair is added one more time to that, they do 
improve. But if it was just immediately after — and I mean 
there is some difficulty with that surface — the contractor 
would still have to go back and work on that piece. 
 
Just in generally, on highways, as you say, on some of the 
thinner-surfaced highways like a 363, of course those are still 
important networks for our communities, and we certainly do 
try to keep them in the best condition possible. It’s important 
for both the economic and the safety of our communities. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. If I might just 
for a moment bounce back to Highway 334, the road almost to 
Avonlea. And I know I attended a public meeting that the 
Highways department had sponsored in Avonlea — it’s some 
months ago now — concerning highways in and out of Avonlea 
and what to do with the balance of the work that sorely needs to 
be done. I know you were at the meeting asking community 
leaders, residents — local residents and area residents — to 
help provide some solutions along with yourselves as to what to 
do with the balance of these roads. 
 
Of course, the highway leading out of Avonlea west, and 339 
being the condition that that it’s in as well, it’s — and one of 
course that leads to what is a national historic site now in the 
Claybank brick plant and the tourism that is associated with that 
or hopefully that will continue to be — provided that people 
don’t give it a bad review after trying to get there and find out 
that it’s too difficult to traverse the highways and go back and 
tell friends and families, well, look, it was a great place to go 
visit, but it was difficult trying to get there. 
 
If you might just update us here this afternoon as far as what 
your intentions might be in terms of improving the balance of 
the roads in the area and just what specifically do you have in 
mind in terms of what you require from the local governments 
in this issue because I had a sneaking suspicion at that meeting 
that you were skirting an issue of whether some local funding 
initiatives might be provided towards trying to improve some of 
those roads, and a bit of an offloading of some responsibilities 
on the part of yourself and the department and this government. 
It certainly sounded dangerously close to that, and I’d like an 
update whether that’s what it in fact is. 
 
I know . . . well this weekend in fact there’s a benefit auction 
being conducted in Moose Jaw, and some of the proceeds are 

going towards raising some funds for furthering the 
development of the Claybank Brick Plant as a historical site and 
tourism spot. 
 
And dollars being precious with respect to those sorts of 
projects, we don’t want to see any area dollars going to have to 
serve the purpose of getting these people to the site. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, I’m pleased to be able to 
address this question because this area too used to be in my old 
constituency. So I know these roads really well and have 
travelled on them a lot. 
 
So, okay, on the section that is under the CAIP funding, there is 
$4 million being spent there, as you say, on the road almost to 
Avonlea. On the rest of the road into Avonlea, we’re actually 
going to do an amount of work this year on 3 kilometres in 
which there had been some damage because of the aggregate 
haul, the gravel haul there. And we feel responsible for that. 
 
We’ve met with the communities there, and we’ve certainly 
assured Avonlea, and to the Claybank Brick factory, an 
important historic site, that there will be strong maintenance 
and work on that road to keep it in very good shape, all the way 
to Claybank. We’re talking a little bit on a five-year plan. So 
that will be a priority area. 
 
I know all the way from Avonlea to Kayville, getting down to 
Bengough, which does get into my constituency, I actually met 
some people the other day, and they said that’s probably the 
best shape they’ve seen that road in, in a long time, and that 
they’re very pleased for the kind of work that we’ve been doing 
on those roads. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Well, thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. And, 
Madam Minister, I just don’t have in front of me right this 
minute the benefit/cost analysis that was prepared last year that 
you provided to the member from Wood River earlier. But I 
don’t believe that the projects that you’re talking about, the 
initiatives that you’re speaking of here were very highly ranked 
previously. 
 
Am I to understand then that they’ve moved significantly up the 
list? Are we talking about a reshuffling of rankings? Or is it 
strictly just a matter of re-costing the projects on that list? I 
guess we get into these greater questions now, whether specific 
to the benefit/cost analysis. Just why is . . . what is the delay? 
What are all the reasons for the delays? Why don’t we have an 
updated list in front of us right now? Is there some re-shuffling 
going on? Or is it strictly just a dollars and cents issue and 
trying to arrive at current dollar costs? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, as you the know the major 
project there, the $4 million project, is under CAIP funding 
which we’ve established. Certainly we’ve taken some 
responsibility to do some work on a piece there that we said, 
because of the gravel haul, was severely damaged. 
 
The type of work that we’re talking about for the rest of that 
system is not a major upgrade. When you look at that BCA 
(benefit/cost analysis) project ranking, that’s for an upgrade of a 



1820 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 1998 

road to a different structure. But we’re talking still that 
intensive preservation, or some time it’s reconstructing a road 
that’s there. But it’s going to be at that type of level. It’s not 
going to be upgraded to a new level of road. But what it will be 
is that there will be dollars put in to do a good access type of 
road. It might be rebuilt in some places, but it won’t be 
upgraded to a different level. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — So thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. So, Madam 
Minister, I take it from your response that the type of work 
that’s going to be done on this particular stretch of road is better 
than what would be achieved if it was bumped up the list. So 
correct me if I’m wrong, but what you’re talking about here in 
terms of what you intend to achieve on this stretch of road — 
stronger maintenance, some rebuilding where required — will 
in effect upgrade this road to essentially what would be a higher 
standard any way. And one that’s more safe and more 
conducive to tourist traffic to the national historic site. 
 
(1730) 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, for example on that three 
kilometres I’ve talked about, that will be strengthening, so it is 
almost a type of an upgrade on it. The rest of the kilometres into 
Avonlea over time will all be upgraded to the same standard 
that’s being done to Highway No. 6. From Avonlea to 
Claybank, there is going to be intensive work done there, and it 
will be monitored into the future to look at the traffic volumes 
and so on. But that traffic there probably won’t have the kind of 
heavy haul that some of the other roads, so we’ll be working in 
the area to make sure that we have a very good, strong road 
system. Certainly the tourism thing is a very important piece in 
that area. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chair, and Madam 
Minister, again we get back to this discussion about traffic and 
types of traffic, and I know there’s been some discussions that 
have taken place in the past concerning . . . in terms of 
prioritizing these sorts of projects and what sort of highways 
should get attention and shouldn’t. And you apply what I guess 
you would call or your department would refer to as an 
acceptable level of risk, I guess, as it would relate to highway 
safety. 
 
And Highway 339, I would maintain, is an important route, 
perhaps maybe . . . and I might give you . . . perhaps not quite 
as much heavy traffic as the stretch heading east of Avonlea. 
But nonetheless it’s the route for ambulances when they come 
out of Moose Jaw to pick people up in Avonlea and area to take 
them into the Plains hospital here in Regina, the major trauma 
centre. So certainly it’s one that is of concern from a safety 
point of view. 
 
And I just want to know, in terms of your department, in terms 
of yourself, just how high on the list is people’s safety on these 
highways? The acceptable level of risk that you might refer to 
in terms of departmental policy, just exactly what does that 
mean? Do you accept that there’s a certain number of highway 
mortalities, or would you consider or should consider . . . but 
maybe I better put it to you, would you consider that one is too 
many? It’s an issue that we have to deal with everyday, and I’m 
sure that your members, as well, have concerns expressed to 
them about highway safety. So if I could just have your 

response to this. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, of course highway safety is a 
top priority. I mean it’s like you say one mortality is too many. 
When we look at accidents, we always want to analyse if there 
was road conditions or if there was structure of the road or any 
piece there that was involved in it. 
 
Generally, like I have said many times before, we want to put 
our dollars, use them in the best way possible to keep our road 
system as safe as possible for both economic and social reasons 
for our communities right across Saskatchewan. And certainly 
roads play an important part of that. 
 
The second factor in that is to make sure that the drivers that are 
on these roads are being trained and are as safe as possible. And 
so that’s why there’s a very important initiative, the drinking 
driving initiative, other things about probationary licensing — 
all of those pieces are trying to attack so that we can have a road 
system, transportation system that is safe in this province. 
 
The other piece to that too is to make sure that the vehicles 
operating on those roads are safe and that’s why we’ve got to 
work with the trucking industry. We have to work with all of 
these in partnership to make sure that our roads are as safe as 
they possibly can be, whether it’s on a farm access road, 
whether it’s a gravel road, a secondary highway, a provincial 
highway, a national highway. All of those things have to be 
addressed and they are of utmost important to us. 
 
And we are working in transportation area committees with 
communities. We are working with the local governments. And 
again we would like to pull in the federal government to be a 
partner in a transportation strategy, because I think it’s 
absolutely important to have a safe transportation system and a 
system that meets the needs for economic development in our 
province and also the social needs of our communities. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Deputy Chair, and Madam Minister, you 
mentioned the area of transportation planning committees and it 
concerns me, given that these committees are essentially formed 
by very well-meaning local individuals. I think they have the 
best interests of their regions at heart certainly and are trying to 
work towards what’s best for their regions. 
 
But I have a constant concern in hearing the sorts of discussions 
that take place between themselves and yourselves as 
department or your greater government, that really what you’re 
manipulating them — and you might take issue with that word 
— what you’re manipulating them towards is arriving at what 
you want the conclusions to become. 
 
And I have a very real fear that there’ll be options presented to 
a lot of these people in their regions that, well look, you’ve got 
these many kilometres of highways and you’ve got these many 
types of highways and that consists of highway no. 
such-and-such and so on. And it becomes a choice that you 
present to them not of how to go about maintaining, upgrading 
all of the system, but one of a choice of, well, you only get to 
keep this one or that one or only a certain number of them. 
 
So now you as a committee have to arrive at which ones are 
going to essentially be more or less abandoned or if you choose 



June 9, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1821 

the Tory option, turn them back to gravel. 
 
So I’d like to have your comment on that because I see some 
abuse of a committee structure that’s there and manned by some 
individuals that are rather well intentioned. In fact very well 
intentioned, they have the best interests of their communities 
and their regions at heart, and I don’t like to see them being 
manipulated to achieve some end that they will regret at 
sometime in the future. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, in response to this it doesn’t 
surprise me that you might think this is some type of 
manipulation. I take exception to that. This is a provincial 
government that is working with communities because of the 
tremendous challenge that has been placed forward to us mainly 
because of a federal government that doesn’t understand the 
kind of cooperative decision making and cooperative 
responsibility across this country. 
 
So when we’ve been working out there, and what I’ve seen with 
these transportation area committees, and I have seen and have 
no evidence that they have felt that there is any manipulation in 
this. What we’re trying to do, is kind of like . . . I look at it as 
the Saskatchewan way to solve a tremendous challenge that’s 
there. 
 
And part of that challenge is looking at what’s happening to our 
branch line system which is not been determined by this 
provincial government or those local municipalities where 
we’re seeing an abandonment there. They’re looking at what are 
the possibilities of us working together to look at possibilities of 
short-lines. How do we see some of the changes and where we 
do have to priorize for our area? 
 
And they know that there is limited dollars, and they know that 
things are changing in their communities. And what we’re 
doing is trying to be there to help them and to help us in our 
decision making so that we are building a system that will meet 
the needs of today and into the future of this province. 
 
And what I don’t see again, sitting there and helping us out, is 
the federal level of government, which is putting this huge 
challenge upon us in this province. We’ve seen a loss of a Crow 
benefit that’s had a huge dollar impact. We’ve seen the changes 
in the branch lines happening here. 
 
And so we need to work with communities to face these 
challenges, and we are there to work with them as partners and 
for them to give us their advice so that we make good decisions 
for the future of a system that will meet the needs of today into 
the future. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Deputy Chair, and Madam Minister. I 
guess if I could be more specific with respect to these processes 
then. Do I have your commitment and the commitment of your 
government here this afternoon then that it will not be 
acceptable to end up downgrading highways within these 
regions that are already requiring maintenance just as they are 
ranked currently? There will be no downgrading as a result of 
the interactions that you’re describing that are not manipulative 
of nature . . . you’re suggesting. 
 
I take the contrary view there because I’ve had some private 

discussions with people who have been involved. They have 
these concerns; they’ll continue to express them, I’m sure; I’ll 
continue to relate them to you. 
 
We can continue to blame whoever we want here — blame 
federal government, whatever we want. But what I want to 
avoid in this issue is that at some point in time we stand here 
and you try and blame some local regional transportation 
council for some decision that you made them arrive at. So I 
want your undertaking here this afternoon that we’re not going 
to see the highway system downgraded as a result of this 
initiative. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, in response to that, we 
certainly will be working with the area committees and making 
joint decisions. And no, what we’re doing with our system is 
building a system that will work to meet the needs now and into 
the future. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Madam 
Minister, with respect to your department’s policies, procedures 
in place to dispose of Highway department assets, supplies, and 
so on, could you describe for us how you go about doing that. 
Who is involved in . . . Perhaps you have a list of people who 
are authorized to sign off on supplies or assets of your 
department, let’s say to whatever agency you may use to 
dispose of them — if you could outline that procedure for us 
here this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, it would be senior officials 
within my department that would sign off. They would then go 
through SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation) through sales and salvage. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. And, Madam 
Minister, could you perhaps provide us with a list of those 
officials that are currently authorized to do that? Do you divide 
up the duties? Are certain officials responsible for the disposal 
of certain types of assets within the department? Could you 
describe it a little bit further for us here with respect to that? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Yes, it’s more than like one official; and 
you’re right, it gets divided up. So we can get back to you with 
more specifics in a written form. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. But, Madam 
Minister, at least for our benefit here this afternoon, could you 
at least categorize the assets for disposal. Perhaps you don’t 
have available to you here right now the list of individuals 
authorized to dispose of assets of the department, but how 
would you break it down? Are there one or two or three 
categories of supplies or assets of the department? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, the two main groups would 
be . . . one would be fleet services and the other would be 
probably the office and technical, you know, type of equipment. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Well, thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Madam 
Minister, I’ve had it described to me —and maybe you could 
tell me where things like fleet services and so on would fit in 
here — but I’ve had it broken down as departmental 
non-revolving fund items, Highways and Transportation 
revolving fund, Highways and Transportation revolving fund 



1822 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 1998 

but just sundry items only. 
 
Now this, I assume, is perhaps how you’ve broken it down for 
SPMC before when . . . I know they’ve been caught in the past 
in terms of the Provincial Auditor and the fact that a lot of 
departments . . . I’m not pointing the finger at yours here but 
there have been a lot of departments that have perhaps disposed 
of certain supplies from their department and not really . . . and 
they haven’t done it without proper authorization. I’m not 
suggesting that was your department here, but this is how it was 
broken down before. Is that how it currently would be broken 
down, the three categories I’ve just described? 
 
(1745) 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, the fleet services, what you 
described is the revolving fund and that would be the part that 
would be dealt with under the fleet services. That’s where it 
would go through is the revolving fund. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Madam 
Minister, pieces of heavy equipment, heavy highway 
equipment, does that fall under that same category then for 
disposal? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chairman, the big equipment would 
go through the revolving fund; that’s where it would be. The 
sundry items that you mentioned before would be the smaller, 
more technical, those types of items. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Madam 
Minister, the Minister responsible for SPMC last year had 
described in terms of what they had disposed of for the 
Department of Highways . . . and I guess this would have been 
for the ’96-97 fiscal year. But he described it as . . . oh, here, 
and you can check verbatim for this. But last year they had 
handled one of the largest sales ever for the Department of 
Highways. And at the time he attached a figure of something 
like $11.9 million towards the proceeds of disposal. 
 
Would you be able to outline for us this afternoon just how 
much Highways equipment you intend to dispose of during this 
fiscal year? How much for the ’97-98 fiscal year which I’m 
missing within here? Because I know so often we’ve heard, 
well perhaps from your predecessors or perhaps from yourself, 
that a lot of our problems or some of our problems that we can 
attribute to Highways relates to the massive sell-off of 
Highways equipment under the Tory administration. 
 
Now I might maintain — and others — that perhaps all that was 
done here is it was just handled a little bit more slyly by the 
New Democratic administration in that perhaps it was handled 
in a series of smaller sales, but to accomplish the same end, 
versus the way the Tories had handled it before. Because I 
heard a lot of comments from people who have a problem with 
having to operate equipment that they feel might be past its 
prime, so to speak, when there is other pieces of equipment that 
might have been disposed of for that same use that were in 
much better condition. Perhaps for the sake of . . . the decision 
was made — maybe it was more saleable, a newer piece of 
equipment versus an older one. 
 
But in the end, what did we end up arriving at for a disposal 

price? Did we get essentially what was the full value for that 
piece of equipment? Did we get 10 cents on the dollar? What 
was described by the SPMC minister as one of the largest sales 
ever handled for the Department of Highways, did that $11.9 
million that he described to us — what did that represent? Did it 
represent a good value for the equipment, or was it something 
that might be considered a lot less than desirable. Because we 
also heard stories about where contractors, who may have 
picked up some equipment from some of these sales, ended up 
turning them around rather quickly, and for a tidy profit too. 
 
So I just certainly welcome the minister’s comments with 
respect to the procedures involved and the results of sales in the 
recent past, and certainly what your intentions are for the 
current fiscal year. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, on the year that you said you 
don’t have the dollars there, ’97-98, it looks in the area of about 
$1.7 million is what had been up for sale that goes back to the 
revolving fund. It was a replacement of equipment that’s wore 
out; that’s what is involved there; ’98-99, I don’t have the 
numbers, but we don’t . . . Again it will be just for replacement 
of equipment. 
 
And we’ve been trying to upgrade equipment. Somewhere in 
the area of 3 to $4 million has been spent in the last two years 
— Or is that each year? . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, 
each year 3 to $4 million is being spent to upgrade our 
equipment. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Deputy Chair, Madam Minister, would 
you be able to send to us a summary then of assets, equipment 
that have been disposed of, ’96-97 and ’97-98, specific to the 
piece of equipment disposal price. Would that be possible to 
obtain that? 
 
Also would you confirm or was it correct — I’m assuming it 
was correct — that the minister had advised me that there was 
something in the order of $11.9 million worth of assets disposed 
of on behalf of the Department of Highways for the ’96, I’m 
assuming it’s for the ’96-97 year. 
 
He specifically said last year they had handled the disposal of 
that much equipment for your department. Would you be able 
to verify that and in turn, as I say, send over a summary of what 
in fact was disposed of? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, I’d want to just confirm that 
the ’96-97 wasn’t anywhere near the 11.9 million that you’re 
saying. We don’t have the exact number here. We think it was 
substantially less. And so we will give you those numbers. We 
will even give you the number for ’96-97 and ’97-98. 
 
I again confirm that ’82 was by the far the largest sale of any 
equipment that was ever done in the Department of Highways 
and Transportation. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Madam 
Minister, changing or shifting gears here, if we would. With 
respect to, and I know the member from Wood River had 
alluded to, and I guess in the greater sense of government — in 
the amount of money spent on advertising and communications 
globally with respect to government — I think your department 



June 9, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1823 

expends a rather healthy sum of money in that regard. 
 
Would you be able to provide us with the sort of figure that 
your department might be intending to expend in terms of . . . 
specifically for advertising and communications? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, on the advertising piece here, 
I’ll send over part of what the budget has here as an agency 
report on advertising and communications. I don’t have a total 
on it, but what I do want to say is that I think it’s been very 
important. 
 
One of the big pieces was the highway hot line that we set up 
with a toll-free number right across the province now. And that 
was advertised and was certainly an important initiative that we 
heard lots of good reports, especially in rural Saskatchewan. 
Because when we talk about some of the issues that you’ve 
been saying about safety, I think this is one of the pieces that 
tell road conditions, what’s happening with ferry crossings, now 
with construction happening in the province. And people can 
phone that toll line, and it is free access for right across the 
province . . . certainly heard it from ambulances and health 
districts, school buses that they really appreciate that piece. 
 
And certainly some of the other programs in which we’ve been 
doing some major advertising is some in the construction zones, 
but also on some of the safety things with the trucking industry 
within the province. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Well thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Madam 
Minister, now the member from Wood River had spoke earlier 
and suggested some, I think some rather valuable things for you 
to consider. And some of them surrounded the fact that you 
could stand to do a little bit more advertising of the fact that 
people should be submitting some claims in terms of damages 
done to their vehicles. 
 
And it seems . . . you know when I look here too under your 
department’s attempts to gather public opinion, I notice there 
was something done here in March of ’98 — I guess the agency 
of record, Quest Communications. It’s billed as a customer 
satisfaction poll, cost of 6,300-and-some-odd dollars. Do you 
have a copy of the results available for us? Could you send that 
across to us this afternoon? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, I think what you’re referring 
to again is on the polling. That is public information. We don’t 
have that information here. We certainly can give you a copy of 
that or you can get it . . . 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Madam 
Minister, I guess to make the point, it seems like your 
department is long on telling people how good things are and 
you’re rather short on trying to gather their input on how things 
are. 
 
So if you’re really wanting to be earnest in gathering some 
public input, you might utilize a certain amount of those 
advertising dollars to advertise the fact that the Liberal 
opposition in the province has their 1 888 621 Bump number 
activated. And the fact is that people could be letting us know 
of their concerns province-wide with respect to highways. And 
we certainly in turn would be letting you and your department 

and your government know about all of these problems. 
 
Just in winding up here, I noticed that there was a certain 
amount of money expended in terms of computer software. And 
it states the purpose as being a sign inventory software upgrade. 
And I’m just curious whether that upgrade included perhaps 
upgrading the program — that it would perhaps be able to better 
assist you in deciding how to properly sign a lot of these 
hazardous stretches of the highway. Because I think the 
member from Wood River had suggested, and rightly so, that 
there’s a lot of inconsistency in terms of your application of this 
signage on our highway system. 
 
You’ll travel the roads in some of the senior cabinet ministers’ 
constituencies and there might be a minor ripple in the highway 
and they’ll have a bump sign or a warning sign there. You’ll 
travel some of the highways in some of the rest of our ridings, 
and my gosh, you get conditioned pretty quickly to some rather 
severe bumps, and they’re not even marked. It has to be craters, 
it has to be what — well what the musician that I referred to 
earlier referred to — what we call here in Saskatchewan as 
potholes are actually thought of by people outside of the 
province as canyons. So certainly there’s a lot of 
inconsistencies in how these signs are applied. 
 
I certainly hope that the upgrade to your software might be 
working towards trying to achieve some more equitable 
application of these signs, because they certainly are not as 
effective at warning people or pre-warning people of some 
rather hazardous conditions on the roads. 
 
And just in closing, too, it’s rather unfair — and following up 
on some of the questioning of the member from Wood River 
from earlier — rather unfair that you as a government would 
further victimize victims of your highway conditions when you 
would even consider not allowing claims to proceed when 
granted. A stretch of highway might be signed and telling 
people to take caution and slow down, but the victim may be 
travelling at a snail’s pace. But it is the person going by that 
smashes out their windshield, who obviously disregarded the 
signs, why should suddenly the victim end up having to prove 
something that occurred on that stretch of highway when that 
car or truck has gone by at a 120 kilometres an hour, when they 
should have been slowed down to an appropriate speed. 
 
(1800) 
 
There’s a lot of inconsistencies in your policies. There’s a lot of 
inconsistencies in terms of how you priorize projects in this 
province. I don’t think you apply enough . . . you don’t give 
enough weight to highway safety, to people’s lives. And I think 
there’s a lot more attention that needs to be paid by yourself and 
your department during this fiscal year to some of these issues 
that we’ve outlined here this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, I just want to say that again, 
safety is a top priority in any of the work that we do. And we 
looked over at the sheet that I gave you on communication 
strategy, on all of those pieces there in communications . . . is 
all to do with safety: with the orange zone, winter safety, 
wildlife, the highway hot line. So certainly it is a top priority to 
us. 
 



1824 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 1998 

Certainly in the claims — and I’ve gone over that today — we 
are determining a process in which we’re trying it in a pilot to 
have a neutral referee to determine if we are fair in these claims. 
And so I believe we are addressing the issues. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. Madam 
Minister, I want to say that the member from Kindersley, the 
member from Wood River, and the members from Thunder 
Creek, the three MLAs that surround the Cypress Hills 
constituency, have done a very admirable job of asking a lot of 
questions. And of course those questions are important to me 
because they have included many of the highways that run into 
my constituency and through it. So there is very little to be 
gained by re-treading all of the old grounds. 
 
So I fully intend to take the answer that you’ve given to those 
members and distributing them to the people that are interested 
in the south-west in what your answers were with regards to 
their highways. 
 
There’s only a couple of areas that I noted that they hadn’t 
specifically covered that I think it would be important for me to 
ask of you — your answers and your opinion with regards to 
direct questions I received from constituents. Those areas will 
of course be the No. 13 Highway to begin with, south of 
Consul, which leads to the United States border. And of course 
that becomes No. 21 Highway at Consul and runs south. 
 
They tell me that this road has been fixed and that it has again 
deteriorated and that it is in very poor shape. Now because it is 
a link with another country, I would think that it should get 
some priority from that point of view. 
 
But on a local issue of course it is a school bus route, and it is 
the only highway, the only good road that an awful lot of folks 
have got down in that corner with which they can access the 
hospital at Eastend, or of course if they choose to go straight 
north up to Maple Creek, 60-, 70-mile trips either way. 
Nevertheless a very important road to them. 
 
What plans do you have to improve that road considering that 
the plans that you already have indicated don’t seem to be 
sufficient? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, first I just want to thank the 
member for taking the answers that have already been given in 
your area to other members, so I appreciate that. 
 
On the piece that you were talking about on Highway 13, on 
Highway 13 itself there is some work designated there for some 
intensive preservation. On the piece that becomes I think 
Highway 21 that goes south, again it will be routine 
maintenance. Certainly we want to keep that a safe route. It 
isn’t a piece that has high traffic volumes but we still have to 
make sure, as you say, that it’s in safe condition for school 
buses and for other vehicles that travel that road. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Minister. I appreciate that you’re 
going to give that road some attention. Because even though it’s 
not a high traffic road, as I mentioned, it is the only one for a lot 
of people. They don’t have another alternative. Most of those 
folks don’t have airplanes or helicopters of course, and so the 
road is extremely critical to that area of the province which 

covers so many miles and only that access to get anywhere. 
 
I think you should note just in passing, that an awful lot of the 
traffic out of that area does go south because obviously Havre, 
Montana is a lot closer as a trading centre for those people. And 
even though you may not see them all coming north or to the 
east, that road is used an awful lot by the farming community 
and the oil industry to go south. 
 
And of course one of the problems we’ve run into there is that 
the oil industry has started to develop that area, as I’ve talked to 
you about before. And what has happened, of course, is that that 
road was built for lighter traffic and it simply can’t take the 
pressure as you know. But I want to point that out so that you 
will put that into your mind and into your bank of information. 
The reason that it breaks up is that it just simply was never built 
for the kind of traffic that’s on it today. And I think we’ll have 
to build for that kind of traffic because it looks like it’s going to 
stay that way. 
 
I wanted to mention to you, Doug Archer, the mayor of Regina, 
whom I had the good fortune to talk to just a little while ago 
here in the legislature, and he indicated to me that his efforts are 
ongoing with regards to trying to get the No. 1 Highway 
twinned. We in the south-west want to publicly express our 
thanks to the mayor because his efforts, of course, are very 
much appreciated and they have not gone unnoticed by the 
people in our area. When the mayor of Regina is worried about 
our road out in south-west Saskatchewan, it makes us very 
happy to know that he’s willing to go to the extra effort . . . and 
all of the meetings that he’s conducted and called, and all of the 
things that he’s done to contribute. 
 
I think one of the things that I want to mention to you that he 
said today that’s of great importance, is that his approach to this 
is that we have to get the federal government onside with an 
infrastructure program. And I fully agree with him. 
 
He also makes another very important point that I think we need 
to take into consideration, Madam Minister, and that being that 
we need to approach this in Ottawa on a non-partisan basis. 
Because if we offend the federal government politically by 
pointing fingers at them or being partisan, then they’re 
obviously going to get angry, dig in their heels, and they won’t 
do anything. 
 
So he has said that he has gone to Ottawa and lobbied with all 
of the political parties and has tried to do it on a non-partisan 
basis saying that highways are necessary for people, that 
politics should stay out of it. Let’s get on with the job and all 
work together, and all take the credit together. I thought that 
was a very important message that I pass on to you. And I 
would ask you if you would share that approach with the mayor 
and if you will support him in his ongoing efforts? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, I want to acknowledge, as 
you’ve said, the importance of that national infrastructure 
system, and we certainly . . . It’s been interesting that all 
provinces, the Territories, all different politics there see that as 
important and that we should be . . . and we certainly do want to 
work with municipalities right across this country to look at the 
importance of a national system. And as you say, it’s important 
for people, and I agree with you. 



June 9, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1825 

Mr. Goohsen: — We thank you for that commitment, Madam 
Minister. A few weeks back you will recall that a school group 
from Prelate, the St. Angela’s Academy, were in the Assembly 
as visitors. On that date they asked me if I would help them to 
get a petition going which would beg in the prayer for relief that 
you and your government would pay more attention to our 
secondary highways. They expressed concern that, with the 
changes in the regulations for the trucking industry, that this 
might pose greater hazards. And I fully agree with them that if 
you’re going to have maybe even bigger transport trucks on the 
roads, then of course holes and bumps and sways make it more 
dangerous for those longer rigs to be controlled absolutely. 
 
Now the drivers in this province are excellent drivers, and they 
do a pretty good job. But realistically, if you’re on a bad road 
and the thing gets out of control, somebody could die over it. 
So, Madam Minister, they expressed that concern that we 
concentrate on our secondary highways. So on their behalf, I 
ask you the question: do you have plans to put more intensive 
work into our secondary highway system? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, I can appreciate the question. 
I think one of the things that we did target in our budget . . . and 
you know the balancing of . . . when you say the importance of 
the twinning projects and we certainly are doing some twinning. 
But we also have to identify that there’s an important 
infrastructure system on secondary highways that serve our 
community. And we added . . . Really the increase this year in 
our budget of $20 million. If we look at the dollars spent in the 
system for rural infrastructure for those secondary systems . . . 
is $23 million. So it’s certainly one of the priorities that we 
have set. 
 
The second piece I think is also extremely important that 
you’ve identified is making sure that if you’re having increased 
trucking, that we have safe trucking. We look at still using . . . 
The trucks cannot operate on our secondary system with 
primary weights. If we do any type of trucking partnership 
agreement, that those all have to be taken . . . The one factor 
that’s the most important is the safety factor, and so we have to 
totally look at that. 
 
Yes, it was a $23 million increase — I want to make sure that 
that’s clear — on our secondary system that we identified for 
the budget this year for those kinds of highways that you’ve 
identified . . . are also a priority for us. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Yet another set 
of concerns comes from a group of people at Eastend who 
approached me, they said you had attended the meeting in their 
community. And they had gotten a strong feeling that you had 
made certain commitments to them, and they’re worried that 
you’re not keeping your commitments that you’ve made to 
them. 
 
What commitments did you make and how are you seeing to it 
that those commitments are met? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, yes I was in Eastend to meet 
with the community group down there, and different people that 
were at that meeting. And I certainly enjoyed the meeting. 
 
The commitment that I made is that we would work with them. 

And we’ve had meetings still down in that area to look at the 
priorities that they identify, to look at the fiscal resources that 
we have, and try to kind of work out a longer term plan for the 
area. And I believe that we are living up to that commitment. 
Those meetings have taken place and it’s getting to be a real 
understanding of the amount of dollars, how we can spend them 
the best to meet the needs of those communities. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I’ll let those 
folks know what your answer was. 
 
In the area of transportation of course, which is also under your 
jurisdiction, we of course have talked in length about the 
problems of rail-line abandonment. And you have of course 
made some commitments, and the Minister of Agriculture has 
made some commitments, to work hard in those areas. 
 
I guess my question has to be, will you join with the Minister of 
Agriculture in attempting to resolve the abandonment 
problems? We particularly have the Notukeu Line from of 
course Shaunavon into our constituency, which goes down to 
Consul and loops back down around to Frontier. And so that’s a 
very important line. 
 
If we lose that we’ve got our whole area of south-west 
Saskatchewan with no transportation with rail. We are looking 
for and we have people brainstorming to try to come up with 
ideas of how we could more effectively use the railroad. We’ve 
even talked about moving crude oil by tanker cars in order to 
find ways that we could make that line more profitable so that it 
could stay in existence, whether it be as a short-line railroad or 
by CP (Canadian Pacific). 
 
(1815) 
 
Now I want you to answer your commitment to working with 
the Minister of Agriculture, along with your commitment to the 
farm community, remembering also that the line from Hazlet to 
the North is also in jeopardy. And that leaves the Hazlet, Verlo 
community without any rail service if that one’s gone. And of 
course over at Fox Valley we have another one in the 
south-west. It never rains but it pours. But the tail-end of that 
line of course is in jeopardy as well, which loops through Fox 
Valley and goes down to the salt mine. And so of course we 
have those three concerns in the area of transportation. 
 
Before I allow you to answer the question, I also want to offer 
to you the package of material that I offered to the Minister of 
Agriculture earlier today. It has been tabled so all you have to 
do is ask for copies. I won’t bother sending it over again. And 
it’s nothing original or new that I’ve created at all. I simply 
went to the library and asked them to put together a package of 
information that would give us the tools and the ammunition to 
be able to work with when we are going to Ottawa or to 
wherever we have to go to discuss these things. And I want you 
to have that available to yourself, without having to go to the 
library and do it over again. You might as well take that 
package because they did an excellent job on preparing it. 
 
It has a lot of ammunition about the history of the CPR 
(Canadian Pacific Railway) and how Saskatchewan farmers and 
the rest of the farmers of this country have bought and paid for 
the CPR probably about three times already, and it shouldn’t 



1826 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 1998 

have to be bought again. It might be good ammunition for these 
short-line railroads when you’re discussing what they should be 
worth, because in fact what they should be doing is giving them 
to the farmers because they’ve already paid for them. I’ll let you 
respond, Madam Minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, I could respond in a long way 
but I’ll try to be really precise here and concise. First of all, yes, 
I really appreciate . . . we’ll get a copy of the package that you 
have put together. And certainly the Minister of Agriculture and 
myself as the Minister of Highways and Transportation, we’ve 
worked on . . . I mean we think the short-line issue, the rail-line 
issue, we are . . . I mean we work on this together. 
 
We both agreed. I mean our government has and our Premier 
has said, first of all there should be a halt to abandonment 
during this major review. We’ve also got the short-line advisory 
unit within our department that is certainly out in your area and 
out in various areas working through transportation area 
committees; working with producers to look at the challenges 
that they’re facing as their branch lines are abandoned, trying to 
check to see what kind of choices that they do have. Helping 
them with — is there viability to it, helping them with studying 
the line, and helping them put proposals together so they can 
deal with CP and CN (Canadian National). 
 
Certainly we think there needs to be changes in the Canadian 
transportation Act that would be more short-line friendly. We 
believe joint running rights is a part of that, and that you’ve 
heard a lot of our comments before. But I certainly agree this is 
a top priority for me as the Minister of Highways and 
Transportation. Also I mean a top priority for our government, 
because nothing is more important than the grain transportation 
to our agriculture community right throughout this province. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Madam Minister. It never hurts to 
repeat good things, and it never hurts to repeat over and over a 
position that is necessary, because sometimes by repeating 
ourselves is the only way we ever get anything done that’s 
positive. 
 
One other area that I want to discuss with you, and I know I’m a 
couple of minutes over the time that I had allotted to myself to 
ask questions. But I think it’s important that you know that the 
people in the south-west, while they’re happy that you’re 
working on Highway No. 1, very happy, they’re hopeful that 
you can expand that program. That if there are any excess 
dollars available at the end of the season, if there happens to be 
a little surplus in the budget from anywhere, what they want 
you to remember — is where does the money in Saskatchewan 
come from that the provincial government spends? 
 
And what they want you to remember is that the leases, the 
royalties, the fuel taxes, and all of those things that the 
government puts in to the general fund, an awful lot of them 
come out of the south-west. And in fact some people have done 
some research, and the amount of money that comes out of the 
south-west from all of those areas of taxation, from all of those 
areas of revenues is far, far greater than what goes back into the 
south-west. And the people there feel that they have first claim 
to any share of a surplus. 
 
They’re not saying you should discontinue the health program 

or the education program. But I want you to know that in 
south-west Saskatchewan health care may be number one, and 
probably it should be, but highways and transportation are the 
number two issue of south-west Saskatchewan. 
 
I’ve heard other members get up and make their statements that 
health care and education, and down the road they go. Well, 
believe me, it’s roads and it’s transportation in the south-west, 
come in very closely to health care as the number one issue that 
people are worried about and concerned about, because that’s 
what affects their lives the most at this point in time. 
 
We don’t want to downplay the importance of all of those other 
areas. But I would ask you to make a commitment to looking 
into where the money comes from before you spend any 
surpluses as the end of the year. And make some commitment 
that it should go back to those parts of the province where the 
money comes from. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, I think we’ve made a 
substantial commitment in where we see that highways and 
transportation, as you said, is a top priority for us. And that’s 
why we’ve made a long-term commitment of 2.5 billion over 10 
years. It’s also why we put a strategy together. So if we have 
more dollars, that we are spending those dollars in the very best 
way possible. 
 
I’ve certainly had the chance to meet with the area that you 
represent in that south-west area. And they’ve brought those 
concerns to our attention. And we certainly will be putting the 
dollars as we see . . . As a government we want to be able to put 
more dollars into highways and transportation. Of course, 
we’ve got to balance all of the other priorities. And I certainly 
recognize I guess the concerns and the issues that you’ve raised 
here today. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Madam Minister. We appreciate 
your candour and your honesty. We are happy with the work 
that you’ve done in general for the first year. Now you have to, 
of course, accept the fact that you’re a veteran, and next year we 
do expect even more. 
 
I want to thank your officials. Certainly the people in the 
Department of Highways have worked hard with communities; 
we recognize that. We’re not always happy with the answer that 
we get to our questions, but we certainly do appreciate the 
effort and we do understand that effort is being made. 
 
Front-line workers of course are the people with the picks and 
the shovels. We don’t want to forget them. We think they do a 
reasonably good job in most areas of the province, and with the 
time and the effort and the equipment that they’ve got available, 
I think they do a pretty good job as well. So thank you, Madam 
Minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, I just again want to thank you 
for the questions and the questions from the opposition. I do 
want to thank my department officials that have come here 
today, and the rest of the department staff that work right across 
this province to provide the very best in transportation and try 
to provide the very safest of transportation systems to meet the 
needs of the community of Saskatchewan. 
 



June 9, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1827 

Subvote (HI01) agreed to. 
 
Subvote (HI02), (HI04), (HI03), (HI06) inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 16 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1998-99 
General Revenue Fund 

Budgetary Expense 
Highways and Transportation 

Vote 16 
 
Subvotes (HI04), (HI03), (HI06) inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 16 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Health 
Vote 32 

 
The Deputy Chair: — I would ask the minister, before we 
start, to introduce his officials please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. This evening I have 
with me a team of staff from the Department of Health. On my 
right is the deputy minister, Con Hnatiuk. To my immediate left 
is the executive director of finance and management services, 
Mr. Rod Wiley. Behind him is the project director of acute and 
emergency services branch, Lauren Donnelly. Directly behind 
me is Mr. Neil Yeates, who is the associate deputy minister. 
And behind the deputy minister is the assistant to the deputy 
minister, Mr. Dale Bloom. 
 
Seated in the back row, or the back chairs, Mr. Chair, is George 
Peters, executive director of capital and operating policy 
branch; Jim Simmons, executive director of community care 
branch; Barb Shea, executive director of the drug plan and 
extended benefits; Bob Firnesz, the associate executive director 
of medical services and health registration; and Rus Duncombe, 
who is the district director of the district support branch. That’s 
my team of staff, Mr. Chair. 
 
Subvote (HE01) 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I 
welcome you here tonight, and your officials. I guess we’ll start 
off rather easy with you; you’ve had a lengthy day or a lengthy 
session. 
 
But I would like to find out from you, Mr. Minister . . . it was, I 
can’t remember how many days ago, ten days, two weeks ago, 
you mentioned that it would be within a few days you would 
start to announce capital projects throughout the province. And 
I was wondering if you’d be able to table that list for us here 
tonight. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you, Mr. Member, for the 
comment. We’ve started to announce the capital projects. We 
began, I believe, just a few days ago. On April 20 actually, I 
think, was when we announced our first one, but more 
expediently from June 2, and we’ll continue to do that until 
June 26. 
 

Mr. McPherson: — Could you table the list of what you have 
to date, what you have announced, and what upcoming projects 
you’re going to announce in the next days? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — In the format that we have here, I’m not 
looking at the exact copy of all the capital projects that we have, 
Mr. Chair, but what we’re doing with this of course is 
announcing them in due course, and we’ll continue to do that, 
as I said, until June 26. We can provide for you the 
constituencies, I think, of which the capital projects will be 
announced in if that would satisfy your wish. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Do you have it there broken down by 
constituency? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — What we can do is provide those for you 
that we’ve already announced, and we’ll provide for you the 
following dates in which we’re going to be making 
announcements in and in which ridings. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Could you send it over? Could you send 
it over now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, I don’t have that with me 
tonight, but I can provide it for the member. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you very much Mr. Chairman, Mr. 
Minister, your staff. I guess, Mr. Minister, it seems like we’ve 
been across like this for some months now. And I guess we 
have. So really I think question period turns into an extension of 
estimates. 
 
Mr. Minister, recently I attended a district board meeting in 
Nipawin where the residents of Carrot River and area provided 
a brief to the district health board with concern over the lack of 
services or the cuts to services that they’re about to see in 
Carrot River, in particular in the Carrot River Hospital. 
 
That day when the district board introduced the board and some 
of their staff, there was members from your department at the 
meeting and the person there was introduced as a consultant. I 
wonder, Mr. Minister, if you could tell me what the role of that 
consultant is that attended that meeting and where I might find 
her salary, what line in the budget? 
 
(1830) 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, the name of the staff is . . . 
Vivian Krakowski was the individual that was there, and her 
salary would be in the Public Accounts. And the role of the 
district support staff of course are to assist districts in their 
planning process, in the development of their plans, and also in 
the administration or assisting them in how they administer the 
district health plans through the course of a given year 
providing advice, direction, support. 
 
Mr. McLane: — You say her salary is shown in the Public 
Accounts. I’m wondering can you show me what line on the 
budget item in the Health budget where that appears. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, it would be under subvote (03) 
under district support staff. 
 



1828 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 1998 

Mr. McLane: — Mr. Minister, does every district have a 
consultant? How do you decide whether a district has one, 
attends every board meeting . . . different districts, different 
staff? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — All the districts do have consultants. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Do they all have one . . . yes, do they all have 
one? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Some are shared, Mr. Chair, and some 
districts are covered off by one, but the majority of them are 
shared. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Some of the larger districts for example, 
maybe the Regina Health District, how many consultants would 
sit around a district board table on an average? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, one staff for Regina, and 
Saskatoon is one as well. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Are there any districts have more than one? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — No. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Can you tell me what the average salary 
might be? Let’s use the lady that attends the Nipawin meeting 
for example on that district board. What would her salary range 
be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — The staff salary, Mr. Chair, would be 
approximately 50,000. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Mr. Minister, can you tell me what role that 
consultant would play in attending each and every district 
health board meeting? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — There are several roles that they would 
play, Mr. Member, through the Chair. They would be involved 
in sort of the policy interpretation direction, would also be 
involved in the communication link between the department 
and the district health board, and would be involved in the 
planning process, both pre and post in the administration of the 
district health plan. 
 
Mr. McLane: — What sort of reporting mechanism would 
there be for these consultants back to you, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — They would report to the director, and then 
they would report to the assistant deputy minister. 
 
Mr. McLane: — And of course the assistant deputy minister 
would report to the deputy, and the deputy then to you? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — That’s correct. They would report to the 
ADM (assistant deputy minister), and the ADM would report to 
the deputy, and then the deputy would report to me. That’s 
correct. 
 
Mr. McLane: — What kind of reporting mechanism, Mr. 
Chair, Mr. Minister, is there back then from you to the district 
board through this consultant? 
 

Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, there are a number of processes 
here. I attend, of course, the annual SAHO convention. I also 
have attended the majority of the boards across the province. 
I’ve met with all of the boards, by and large all the boards, 
across the province. We have a health advisory committee of 
which I attend on a regular basis. We have a CEO (chief 
executive officer) form. And then of course we have the . . . I 
have the responsibility of approving all of the district health 
plans when they’re submitted to me. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Specifically, Minister, the question was, is 
your . . . the mechanism that goes from you through your 
deputy down through the assistant deputy through the manager 
to this consultant, this consulting person who attends these 
district meetings, is that the same kind of a . . . would that be an 
accurate assessment of how your message goes back to the 
district board? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I think that would be an accurate 
description of the process of how the information gets related 
up and down the system. I think that’s accurate. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you. I think, Mr. Minister, since last 
year about this time and your predecessor who is now the 
Minister of Finance in this discussion, I actually think we’ve 
made some progress. I can recall back to those days questioning 
him in this forum. I suggested at that time to that minister that 
the government was indeed in charge of the health system in the 
province and certainly sent each and every district their 
marching orders and how they were to operate. 
 
I think since then we’ve made some progress. Of course the 
minister of the day didn’t agree with that. However a number of 
things have happened since that time that give every indication 
and have proved I think beyond a shadow of a doubt who’s in 
charge. And the answer to that, Mr. Minister, is you and your 
government. 
 
One of the most recent events that has taken place that has 
confirmed this — not only in my eyes, but in many people’s 
eyes across the province — is the announcement that you made 
a couple weeks ago. I think it was a political by-election 
announcement of 600 nurses to the system. And I think what 
that has done is tell everybody in the province that you are 
indeed in charge because you made that decision without the 
district boards having any knowledge of that announcement. 
And many district boards have said that, hey, we had no idea 
what they were doing, that they were going to make the 
announcement. I think you’ll agree that it was a political 
announcement. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I think you’ve confirmed that in everyone’s 
eyes that the government is in charge. And having said that, I 
guess I have a number of questions that I want to ask you as the 
minister in charge and the minister in charge of the health 
districts, is that will you be intervening then in Carrot River 
with that district board and saying no, we’re not going to allow 
. . . keeping a commitment that your predecessor made and that 
you have made and that the Premier made in 1995 in a 
provincial election, that there’ll be no more closures, that 
there’ll be no more bed closures. There’ll be no more staff cuts. 
 
Are you going to intervene in this one, Mr. Minister, and tell the 



June 9, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1829 

people in the north-east that, no, Carrot River will not lose its 
hospital services and that they will be maintaining the level of 
services that needs to meet the needs of that district in that 
community. Are you about to do that, Mr. Minister, or have you 
maybe already done that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Chair, I want to say to the 
member opposite that he and I both disagree, I would say, 
philosophically disagree on the process of how the district 
boards manage their affairs and what the responsibility of 
district boards are. And we’ve had this discussion, as you’ve 
said, in the long fashion over the last several months. 
 
I want to say to you though that, first of all, I’m sure you didn’t 
mean that we’re hiring 600 nurses. I think you meant probably 
200 nurses, unless you’re announcing an additional 400 nurses 
for the province. It would be kind of nice to do that, but it’s 
really only 200 nurses. 
 
And I say to you that the specific question you ask about Carrot 
River, I have met with the board and with the community, met 
with the town and the RM and some of the community folks, 
and we talked at length about what they believe will be in fact 
the final outcome in their community. And I have here a letter 
that was signed by the town of Carrot River, the RM of Moose 
Range No. 486, and the North-East Health District. And I think 
what’s important for me to share with you just very quickly is 
that . . . and I’ll read the bottom line of this because I think 
that’s what’s most important: 
 

We want to be very clear that we are not promoting the 
status quo. It is about making the best plans possible for 
the community of Carrot River. We take our partnership 
very seriously, and we believe that we can solve problems 
and work productively together. 

 
So I say to the member opposite that this is the letter that I’ve 
got from the district, the folks that I’ve described. Our Health 
department through officials that I mentioned earlier will be 
working closely with them. And I await their district health plan 
so that in fact at the end of the day, they’ll have the best 
services in their area. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Well, Mr. Minister, I’ve gone through this 
procedure for years with different communities, and it’s always 
been the same thing. A community says okay, the axe is on us. 
Your department has said we’re going . . . and you as minister 
have said we’re going to cut services here. It’s all about money. 
We don’t have the money, so we’re going to cut these services. 
So the community comes forward and says, well, okay, we’re 
willing to give a little. We’re willing to take a little because if 
we don’t, we’re going to lose everything. 
 
I suggest to you that you’ve got the same scenario here again. 
I’ve seen it happen a hundred times in my career within the 
health system as a volunteer. And I see it happening again. I’m 
hoping that the community of Carrot River and the surrounding 
area, which is quite a large area as you may well know, will do 
and talk about what is best for their community and for the 
people that live in their community. I have confidence in that. 
 
Where I don’t have confidence is in your government — that 
you will listen to what these people have to say. We’ve see it 

hundreds of times across this province, that people say these are 
the needs of our citizens, of our community. And in your 
wisdom, your government has come and said, no, no, those 
aren’t your needs. These are your needs over here; this is what 
we think you need. You need the wellness model; we can do 
away with bricks and mortar. We don’t have to treat people in 
bricks and mortar. 
 
And we see that hasn’t worked. People are sick and tired of the 
wellness model in this province, and they don’t want to 
continue with that. 
 
Mr. Minister, Mr. Chairman, I have a number of petitions here 
that have been signed by the good folks in the Carrot River 
community and the area, and they’re from Zenon Park to Carrot 
River to Nipawin. And, Mr. Chairman, I’d like to table those 
this evening and the minister can take a look at them. 
 
And so these people are a little more than relaxed in thinking 
that they’re going to have the services in their communities that 
they need. They put their signature to these things not because 
they have nothing else to do but because they have some major 
concerns. So I don’t for a minute believe that the people are 
saying that, hey we’re happy with what you’re suggesting; 
we’re happy with something less than what the people need. 
 
You know, Mr. Minister, I don’t know how long you’ve been 
involved in health care — and maybe it’s immaterial — but it 
used to be that in a community the people would sit down, and 
they’d talk with their local boards, and they’d assess what the 
need was in the community. And then they’d say, okay, this is 
what the needs of the people are that we have to meet, and then 
they’d go about trying to fund this thing. And they would do it. 
We did it over and over and over again, whether it goes back to 
the little hospitals that were built back in the ’50s or the ’60s, or 
integrated facilities that were built in the late ’80s and ’90s. 
They were there to meet a need. They weren’t built in majority 
for some political whim. 
 
In most cases, boards, volunteer boards like mine . . . and I see 
you squinting, Mr. Minister. You can probably pick two or 
three cases where our predecessors that put us in the terrible 
debt we’re in today went and did some things politically. But in 
most cases any boards that I worked with there was a need. And 
we went about doing it, and we fought hard whether it was with 
your administration, the NDP, or whether it was with the 
Conservatives. We fought hard to get what we wanted, and we 
did it. 
 
Unfortunately, now a district board sits down at the table and 
the first thing is, okay we’ve got this handful of money; what 
can we do with it? It has nothing to do about what the needs of 
the community are. It’s all about this wad of money that you’ve 
given them, and that’s what they have to work with. The needs 
are over here. Well so what? These are the needs. We can meet 
50 per cent of the needs or 60 or 70, but we’re going to balance 
the books — the almighty dollar. 
 
(1845) 
 
And that’s what the people in Carrot River are up against. They 
know what their needs are, and they’re going to tell you. The 
question will be, Mr. Minister, are you going to listen to them 



1830 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 1998 

and ensure that their needs are met? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Chair, I want to say to the 
member opposite something that I said when I first started to 
speak, and that is that he and I philosophically disagree with the 
direction in which the health care system in this province — 
and for that matter in this country — is moving and what in fact 
he believes. 
 
I think it would behove me not to say that clearly in this 
province today, and in Canada, if you look at the picture, what 
you see is you see a significant shift from institution to 
community-based services. It doesn’t matter where you go. And 
I mean it’s something that the federal government is advocating 
as well. So when you take a look at what’s happening across 
Canada today, it doesn’t mesh with what you’re saying. 
 
I mean if you’re suggesting for a minute that we should be 
building more hospitals in this province when in fact we already 
are saying . . . and all of the research around the country says 
that you have too many hospitals and for that many, too many 
hospital beds. It flies in the face of what’s happening across the 
country. And I think on balance, if you were to look at that, you 
would have to agree. 
 
And I say to the member opposite that when you look at 
decisions that were made throughout the political lives of many 
parties — not just ours but yours and certainly the rampant 
spending of the previous administration of the Tories — we 
built facilities all over this province, and to suggest that we 
didn’t build them for political reasons I mean would be the 
understatement of the year because you can just pick 
communities across the province today where politicians built 
hospitals — for that matter schools or recreational complexes 
— that today don’t have any occupancy in them. 
 
And I say to you that this isn’t the direction that we’re moving 
in, and this isn’t the direction that anyone is moving in across 
the country. Irrespective of what the administration is — 
whether it’s a Liberal government or a Conservative 
government or an NDP government — they’re moving towards 
community-based services. And you need to get on board on 
that direction because that’s where it is. 
 
And I say to the member that when you suggest for a minute 
about the expenditures, $1.72 billion is what we’re spending in 
this province today. Now you might say it’s not enough, but it’s 
40 cents nearly of every dollar that we spend today that we have 
charge of in this province. And that’s a fairly large contribution 
I would say to you. 
 
So I think part of what I would like to hear from you from time 
to time is that in fact the direction in which health care is 
moving . . . and don’t just pick our province; look across the 
country, and you’ll see that that’s where everybody’s moving. 
And I think it would be most helpful if you were to recognize 
that. And it would help us and the people of Saskatchewan, I 
think, in putting some comfort into the delivery of health care 
services today across the province because by and large we’re 
well served as Canadians. And certainly in this province — it’s 
my opinion, which you won’t agree — we’re very well served 
in Saskatchewan. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, you can look all 
across Canada and government after government . . . and you 
start with our neighbours to the west. They’re saying, whoops, 
we made a mistake. We made a mistake, Mr. Minister. They’re 
all saying it. They’re saying it in Ontario. They’re saying it 
everywhere. The only . . . One of the few places they aren’t 
saying it is here and in British Columbia where your B.C. 
(British Columbia) cousins are running into the same problems 
that you are. 
 
Now you brag about $1.7 million, the highest expenditure ever 
in a Health budget. Yes, you’re right, it is. But I wouldn’t be 
proud of it because what have you got? What have you done? 
You’ve got 6,600 people on a waiting-list. You’ve got closures, 
you’ve got bed closures, we’ve got nurse lay-offs, you’ve got 
everything. You’ve got people suffering and dying out there 
and you’re saying hey, we’re spending 1.7 million so it must be 
working. Well it isn’t working. 
 
And right across Canada people are saying, whoa, hold the 
phone here. It’s great to say treat everybody in their home. 
That’s wonderful, that would be just great. But man oh man, 
you’ve seen the problems created. You can send home care out 
into a home but you can’t do a hip replacement in my home. 
 
Is that what you’re advocating? That we’re going to come to a 
point where we’re going to have all the hospitals close, and 
we’re going to do surgery, we’re going to, you know, move a 
tent around, and we’re going to do all these things. That’s what 
I hear you’re saying. That’s ludicrous, Mr. Minister, absolutely 
ridiculous. 
 
And I would challenge you to come out to Craik, 
Saskatchewan, and tell the people there that their integrated 
facility was built for political reasons when the thing is sitting 
there overflowing. 
 
I challenge you to come to Imperial and say, in my community, 
that this facility was built for political reasons when we can’t 
keep all our people in the community. 
 
I’ll challenge you to go to Nokomis and I’ll challenge you to go 
to Watrous and tell those people that you built a hospital in 
Watrous and you don’t need it. Yes, the district, the Living Sky 
District is cutting beds, not only there but in Lanigan. I’ve got 
letters here piled up 16 deep telling us it’s wrong when you’re 
saying they’re all politically built. 
 
Why don’t you come out? Why don’t you have the courage to 
come out in these places and tell that to the local people — that, 
hey, this was a politically built thing and we’re going to close it 
instead of hiding behind your district health boards? 
 
And that’s what you’re doing, Mr. Minister. You travelled 
across the southern part of the province and got an earful this 
past spring and early summer. Does that mean anything to you? 
Are those people saying the Estevan hospital was built for 
political reasons, we don’t need it? Simply just because you’ve 
cut beds and services, and you’re forcing people out of the 
community to go elsewhere or do without or go out of the 
province or go south of the border, that they were built for 



June 9, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1831 

political reasons. 
 
Mr. Minister, I think you better rethink that position and start 
listening to what the people are trying to tell you. 
 
Now in Living Sky, we talked about Living Sky and the cuts 
that you’ve made. I attended those meetings in Watrous and 
Lanigan and Wynyard about cutting back, Mr. Minister. People 
were saying, hey, we have the need. The nurses and the 
physicians and the local people proved to you that there was a 
need and yet you allowed the Living Sky board to make some 
massive cuts in all those agencies. 
 
Since you’ve taken control of the system, Mr. Minister — and 
everybody believes that you’re the driving force behind it and 
that you control the district boards — are you going to go to 
Living Sky District and say, no, you’ve made a mistake here, 
fix it, these people need these services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Chair, to the member, I think 
when you make the comment that there aren’t a growing 
number of services in the province today, you need to look at 
what’s happened in this province in the last seven years. I know 
that you look at it from different coloured glasses than I do and 
it’s unfortunate that sometimes when you look through yours 
that you don’t see exactly what’s happening across the 
province. 
 
But I say to you when you look at what’s happened in home 
care alone in this province . . . And in your earlier comment you 
said to me that we need to continue to concentrate in ensuring 
that we build strong community services, and you asked me 
what I was involved in throughout my lifetime in health. 
 
Well in 1980 I managed a private social service agency in this 
province and we had a home care program that was fledgling; 
never had a nursing service. I think we had one individual staff 
that was involved in going out and providing some intravenous 
therapy — one person. Today we have probably one of the 
leading home care programs in the country — 25 years later — 
that are doing a majority of home-based services today that we 
would have never imagined we would ever do 25 years ago. 
And I say that to you sincerely because I was there when we 
started some of that stuff. 
 
And today when you look at the kinds of outreach services that 
are being provided — seven years ago in this province we 
didn’t even have a MRI (magnetic resonance imaging). Today 
we have one MRI in this province, looking at a second one for a 
population of a million people. 
 
We have a CT (computerized axial tomography) scanner in 
Prince Albert today where you would have never found a 
regional CT scanner anywhere in the province. We’re doing 
chemotherapy today in small communities like Melfort. We 
have 13 or 15 pilot projects today where people can stay in their 
own communities and get some of that therapy without having 
to go to the bigger centres of Regina and Saskatoon. 
 
We have a vast array of drug therapy that we’re doing today. 
Out-patient surgeries today have grown by over 10,000 over 
what we did 10 years ago. And today in this province we still 
have more beds per capita than anywhere else in the country, 

and you continue to make the case that we have too few beds in 
this province. 
 
I say to you, Mr. Member, that you just need to examine the 
kinds of things that have happened in this province not only in 
the last four years but over the last 10 years in this province of 
which we’ve been moving in a major way but under reform in a 
very methodical way to ensure that Saskatchewan people get 
services closer to home. And there are few examples that you 
can find outside of Saskatchewan where that’s the case. 
 
Now I have travelled all of the province and I have been to the 
majority of the health districts as — I think probably four or 
five that I have yet to meet with — where I tour their facilities 
and I say to you that in many of those converted facilities, 
which you say were closed, but they were converted. Some of 
them are found in your riding and what you’ll find when you 
talk to those people is that they have more expanded services 
today than they had when they had the conventional hospital. It 
was under utilized significantly. 
 
And you just need to talk to these people. You just need to talk 
to them, and they’ll tell you that they have things today that 
they’ve never imagined they’d have in their community which 
are coming from regional centres, which are coming from base 
centres. And people are pleased to have those services. 
 
Now for sure, in the bigger centres, you are going to continue to 
have to provide the tertiary services like Saskatoon and Regina 
and some of the regional centres in the province. We’ll try to 
enhance those. 
 
But I have to say to you that you’re not on the mark. You’ve 
missed the mark when you’re talking about the development 
and enrichment of health care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Mr. Minister, you say we have lots of beds. 
Then how do you account for 6,600 people on the waiting-list? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well I want to say, Mr. Chair, that the 
6,600 number does not come from the Department of Health. It 
doesn’t come from any kind of an examination that’s occurred 
between district health boards and the Department of Health. 
And the number that you’re using I believe is from the Fraser 
Institute that did their research in this province. And that’s what 
you’re using. 
 
And I say to you that there is no scientific research that has 
been done in this province to establish what the current 
waiting-lists are. But that process we’re working on today in 
conjunction with the four . . . or the three prairie provinces and 
British Columbia to get a method and a process of how we’re 
going to measure waiting-lists across western Canada because 
there isn’t a scientific one today. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Well that’s interesting, Minister that today is 
the first time I’ve ever heard you dispute the 6,600 beds. So in a 
lot of people’s minds, the waiting-lists are probably a lot longer 
than that, or otherwise you’d be screaming and kicking a long 
time about those numbers. So I ask you then if the 6,600 isn’t 
accurate, what’s your number? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well that’s exactly the dilemma that I say 



1832 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 1998 

to you that we’re in . . . is that we don’t have a scientific 
process today that has done an examination fully of what the 
waiting-lists are across the province. And we’re not alone in 
this situation. When you look at what’s happening in other 
provinces which are our neighbours, they don’t have a process 
either, and that’s why today the three prairie provinces and 
British Columbia are involved in a process where they’re going 
to do a full examination of what system they’ll set up to do a 
better evaluation assessment of waiting-lists. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Mr. Minister, we were just talking about the 
Living Sky District, and the cuts that you made within that 
district to Watrous, Lanigan, and the concerns that the people in 
particular those two communities have, as well as Wynyard. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’d like to ask you to comment on . . . I have a 
letter here that was sent to the Premier, and as well one sent to 
you. And it’s from some people that actually live in the Living 
Sky District — they live at Lanigan. And they’re talking about 
the concerns that they have to the Premier, and they’re talking 
about the concerns they have to you, about what was going to 
happen to the Lanigan hospital. This letter was dated back on 
April 15. 
 
And I won’t use the names, Mr. Speaker. I think that’s unfair, 
even though the people from that community said go ahead and 
use them. In those people’s minds the problem with the cuts 
were all the district’s fault. And one of the reasons that they 
give that some credo, some credibility, is the fact that they say 
that both Mr. Serby and our daughter have assured us that this is 
the problem of our district board. 
 
Now their daughter happens to work for one of your cabinet 
members. And of course we know the role that you play, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
So I guess my question is to you, since you’ve laid the blame at 
the district’s feet here, you’ve stated it in this letter, which 
could be a public document, maybe you could tell us then, if 
you think it’s all the district’s problem, what should the district 
have done? What should the Living Sky District have done to 
rectify its funding problem short of closing beds, as they did? 
 
You’re saying it was their fault, and they shouldn’t have done 
that. So what should they have done? 
 
(1900) 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Chair, to the member. As I’ve 
already said, you and I have a philosophical difference in terms 
of how health services are provided in the province. 
 
We think that we have a partnership with district health boards. 
District health boards are involved in providing the needs 
assessment for districts. And we fund based on the needs, based 
funding formula for all districts across the province. And we 
take that $1.72 billion, and we divide it up into the districts 
across the province. And accordingly they’re funded on that 
basis. 
 
We believe the district health boards are in fact the people who 
should be determining what the health needs are for districts. 
We take their recommendations and their decision making very 

seriously, and in fact respect it — unlike what you do, unlike 
what you do — and will continue to do that as the process 
moves into the future. 
 
We’ll be ensuring that Saskatchewan people continue to get an 
increased level of funding, which has been the case for a 
number of years now. We’ll continue to provide those kinds of 
dollars for district health boards to make decisions which are 
really community based. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Well, Mr. Minister, this particular incident 
has nothing to do with your philosophy or the difference 
between yours and mine. My philosophy is very simple. I want 
the people in this province to get the medical needs and health 
care needs that they deserve and require and not to have to sit 
back and suffer because of the ineptitude of your government to 
provide the services to it. 
 
This particular instance here, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chairman, Mr. 
Minister, is all about you. You’re the one that has stated to 
these folks that it’s the district board’s problem, it’s their fault. 
That the community should go after them and say no; if you 
don’t want the Lanigan Hospital closed, don’t do it; and if you 
don’t want them to cut beds, they shouldn’t have done it. 
You’re saying it’s their fault. 
 
So I’m asking you as the Minister of Health, what would you 
have done if you were in the district board’s dilemma? What in 
the world would you have done? What are you suggesting to 
them that they should have done other than close beds, which 
they did? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well I want to say to the member opposite 
that I would have done exactly what the district health boards 
have done, same thing that you and I have done when we served 
on hospital boards. And I know you have and I have, 
historically, and we’ve made decisions over the last 20 years 
that aren’t any different than this one. 
 
And if you’ve been prudent in your responsibility as an 
individual who served on hospital boards in this province, as I 
have, you and I both know that we’ve reduced the number of 
beds in this province significantly in our capacities. And I 
shared with you on a previous occasion that in my community, 
when I served on the regional hospital board, we had 225 beds 
in our city. Today we have 107 beds in our city over a period of 
25 years. 
 
And so when you make the comment about what it is that you 
and I would do, we would act responsibly as members of 
communities that have been elected or appointed to serve to 
ensure that the best health services in the area are delivered. 
And we would protect them. 
 
And that’s exactly what district health boards are doing across 
the province today. And that’s the same capacity in which I 
operate today is to ensure that Saskatchewan people get the best 
services they can. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Minister, I think you’re shirking your duty. 
Let me go back and read a little more from this letter then. This 
family goes on to say: 
 



June 9, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1833 

I am sure if you were to look into this situation you would 
find that our board has not been managing our health 
dollars wisely. I for one thing think it is the fault of the 
board rather than you, the government. 
 

And I do hope this is the case. And I go on to quote again: 
 

Both Mr. Serby and our daughter have assured us that this 
is the problem of our board. 
 

How do you justify that statement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well I think, Mr. Member, and Mr. Chair, 
to the member, that you and I both heard — particularly in the 
last several weeks where you and I have been on the road and 
have been talking to a number of Saskatchewan people — that 
there is concern about the way in which district health boards 
are managing their affairs. 
 
And from what you’re reading today, here is an individual in 
Saskatchewan from the Living Sky District who’s concerned 
about the level of service and the management of the district 
health board. And there may be issues that from time to time we 
need to examine. 
 
And you asked me earlier, what’s the role of our consultants? 
Our consultants are involved at that district board level, they 
would be listening to what district boards are saying, they 
would have a pulse of what’s happening in those communities, 
and some of that would be shared with us. 
 
And so I’m not in the position today to suggest for a minute that 
we have a district health board, or agree with the individual 
there, that’s dysfunctional. But I say to you from time to time 
district health boards are having to make decisions that are 
difficult, and they might not be perceived in the same light as 
others who view them from a distance. 
 
Mr. McLane: — But, Mr. Minister, you have you have said to 
these people that the problem is of the board. You’ve said it — 
that the problem is of the board. They’re saying that the board is 
a problem and you are agreeing that they’re closing beds. At 
this time they’re worried about closing the whole hospital, but 
they were closing beds. And you agreed with them that it’s a 
problem with the board. 
 
So I’m asking you as the Minister of Health, what would you, 
what advice would you have given to the Living Sky District to 
say that, okay, we won’t close beds. If I were you I’d do this or 
something else. Evidently you must have had some thoughts on 
this or you wouldn’t have said this to these folks. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well I don’t have the copy of the letter 
that you’re reading from. And I’m finding it a bit difficult to 
follow your line of questioning in the areas that you’re 
following, because you’ve now moved from supporting the 
district health board to saying that I was supporting the district 
health board and now I’m not supporting the district health 
board, and maybe you’re not supporting the district health 
board either. 
 
I’m not sure. But it would be useful for me if you were to 
provide that letter for me that I might follow it. 

But I say to the member opposite: when you ask me the 
question about what I would do, it would be exactly the same 
responsibility that I would take in my chair today, as you would 
take. You would examine what the needs of the community 
would be, and you would then provide for the community based 
on your ability to provide those services to a district — the 
resources and the manpower that would in fact meet the needs 
of those individuals who live in that area. That’s what I would 
do as a responsible citizen of that community if I lived there, 
and I’m sure you’d do exactly the same thing. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Well, Mr. Minister, I can tell you, you can go 
back and look at your letter. It was addressed to you and a copy 
to the Premier, and the Premier’s letter was copied to you — so 
you have it. 
 
And we’ll move on. So I can tell you very simply what you 
were doing here was you were sloughing off the responsibility. 
You were saying, no, no, don’t blame the government, blame 
the district board. That’s exactly what you did here. 
 
And all of my question was very simple, very simple, is if 
you’re blaming a district board that says no, I wouldn’t be 
closing beds or I wouldn’t be closing this hospital, I wanted to 
know what your alternative was. But I don’t think you had one 
and I don’t think you thought that far ahead. It was simply to 
get these people off your back and say, no, it’s the district 
board’s fault and make them suffer the consequences. 
 
So we’ve seen . . . you know we’ve talked about the Carrot 
River people and what’s going to happen there. They’re 
undoubtedly going to lose some services unless you do 
something to stop it. You weren’t prepared to step in the Living 
Sky. You simply went about blaming the board. 
 
Let’s move to the Midwest Health District, Mr. Chairman, 
which is partly in my constituency and move into Davidson. 
Most recently, there’s kind of a bit of a war going on out there 
with some of our residents of Davidson. And I know some time 
ago, you announced a new facility for the town of Davidson, 
community of Davidson. Of course, one of your members from 
Regina delighted himself in standing up and making an 
announcement that day trying to embarrass me to some extent 
that you’re building this new hospital and health centre in 
Davidson. 
 
However to this date, there’s been nothing finalized and you’re 
still talking. And I know exactly what’s happening there. It’s a 
way of how you’re going to cut acute care beds out of the old 
Davidson hospital and convince the people that you’re going to 
give them a new facility, an integrated facility, I hope — it’s 
one of the things that we need in rural Saskatchewan. But 
you’re going to cut some beds. 
 
And one of the problems with that is, Mr. Speaker, that right 
now we’ve got all sorts of people that are being told that they’re 
going to have to move their loved ones out of the community of 
Davidson where they were born and raised. Old people, seniors, 
the people that built our province and our communities are now 
being told sorry; there’s no room for you here. You can go a 
hundred miles away where you have no family or friends, 
where your elderly wife or husband can’t drive to see you. And 
if you want to come and stay, we’ll throw a cot in the room with 



1834 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 1998 

you and you can spend a night or two with your spouse to live 
out his last years. How do you answer those problems Mr. 
Minister? 
 
I’ve been talking to the district board and they’re saying, hey, 
our hands are tied, the government’s got our hands tied. We 
don’t have the money. We can’t do this. We can’t move 
services. 
 
How do you address people like Mrs. Schneider whose husband 
is in the Davidson hospital right now, who incidentally has lost 
both his legs and is old and wants to live in the community 
where all his family is? 
 
What do you say to people like Mrs. McLaren who they want to 
move out of the community? Mr. Weighill? You know some of 
these people are sick and dying. Some of them have only weeks 
or months to live maybe and they’re being told they’re going to 
have to move 50, 60, or 100 miles out of the community, away 
from their family and friends to die. What do you say to those 
people, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, first of all, I want to say to you that 
it is not a common practice for district health boards to make 
the kinds of decisions that you’re talking about. It’s not the 
practice that I’ve certainly witnessed as I’ve been around the 
province. 
 
It is true that from time to time district health boards would 
make accommodations for people to live and to complete their, 
sort of, final years of life in a different community from where 
. . . in which they possibly lived a lifetime. Not unusual. This 
has happened prior to reform, as you well know. 
 
But I say to the member opposite that in many situations today 
with the expansion of home care services, which I know that 
you don’t have a full appreciation of and don’t support. And I 
say to the member opposite that today we’re finding that more 
and more people are finishing their final years within their own 
homes — not only within their own communities, but within 
their own homes. 
 
If you take a look at the number of respite hours that are 
provided today through home care, they’ve increased 
substantially. If you were to look at the number of palliative 
care hours that are provided today to individuals by district 
health boards so they might be able to die in dignity in their 
own home, those numbers are far higher than they’ve ever been 
in this province. 
 
And I would say to the member opposite that prior to making 
the comments and the statements that services are not being 
fully provided to a lot of our seniors — and we recognize the 
hard work that they’ve done — you need to have a fuller 
appreciation of the continuum of services, the compendium of 
services that they have available to them. And in many, many 
communities today they’re using them. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Mr. Minister, I’m sure that Mrs. McLaren 
will be happy to hear that she has access to psychiatric services 
when she has a brain tumour and maybe has a month to live or 
six months to live. It means that . . . Those are empty promises, 
empty words to these people. This woman has lived there, to 

quote her daughter: 
 

She has a brain tumour and her days are limited. 
Administrator says she has to be moved to Dinsmore for 
heaven sakes. She could die tomorrow. She could die next 
week. She could die next month. 
 

All these people that I’ve talked about in Davidson have met 
with a coordinator within the Midwest Health District. Now one 
of the things that came back to me was that they actually — and 
I was happy to hear that — it laid out some alternatives for 
some of these people, not for them all. Some of them have said 
you’re gone; we’re moving you out of here, and that’s it. 
 
So there is appeal process and . . . Maybe I’ll stop there, and I’ll 
ask you what that appeal process is for people that don’t like 
what the district board has said to them. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, the quality care coordinators 
are the people who really do the examinations and evaluations 
and the assessments of what the needs of an individual might 
be. And if you have a case that you’re working on today in 
which you want us to look closer at, we’d be very happy to 
receive that and work closely with the district and our 
consultant to see how we might be able to accommodate 
someone. 
 
Mr. McLane: — I appreciate that offer and likely will take you 
up on that, Mr. Minister, but my question still is, can you 
explain the appeal process for me? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, the appeal process is really 
where the quality of care coordinator, in concert with the 
assessment that’s being done in the district, would examine 
what the needs of that particular individual would be and then 
would suggest where they might in fact receive their services. 
 
If an individual wasn’t happy, of course they would make their 
appeal back then to the quality care coordinator, who would 
then re-evaluate or reassess the work that they’ve done to try to 
determine where it is that the person should be. That would be 
the process as I know it. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Simple question: then what? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, I need to know what it is that 
they’re appealing. I don’t understand the direction that you’re 
asking, questioning. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Well as I mentioned these people have gone 
through this coordinator, and they’ve laid out some options for 
them. One option might be to take the person home. Another 
will be to send them off a hundred miles from their home. 
These people are saying that’s nonsense and they’ve been told 
there’s an appeal process. 
 
So what do they do? They go back to the same coordinator and 
appeal it, and then what happens? If the coordinator says that’s 
the end of it, is that the end of the appeal process, or does it go 
up the ladder, and does it eventually come to you? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I think if, Mr. Chair, if somebody wasn’t 
happy on a decision that was made by the assessment team and 



June 9, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1835 

the quality care coordinator in terms of where they would go, 
they could then — if we use the word appeal — they could 
appeal their position to the CEO of the district or the senior 
management staff of the district, or they could go to the board 
and suggest that they’d like a hearing or an audience with the 
board. 
 
So they would have those two mechanisms for sure within the 
district health board to look at what the individual needs might 
be. If they were dissatisfied with that process, they could refer it 
onto the department and our district staff would look at it in our 
department, and it may make its way to me in the process, 
which happens from time to time. 
 
(1915) 
 
Mr. McLane: — But, Mr. Minister, surely this appeal process 
that I’m referring to isn’t something that’s unique to the 
Midwest Health District. It must be something that’s been 
instituted through the health districts, through your department. 
And there must be some firm process in place as to where it 
ends. It has to end somewhere. Will it end up in the Supreme 
Court, is that where it’s going to end, or does the buck stop with 
you, or what is the process? Surely your department must be 
aware of this process. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Chair, to the member, I just 
want to say to you that this would be the process. I’ve 
mentioned to you that it would go to the district quality care 
coordinator. Okay, that’s the first level it would go to. Then it 
would go to the board for resolve. If it wasn’t resolved there 
you could put together . . . and you’re right, this is inclusive for 
all the health districts. Then if it can’t be resolved there at the 
district level, a multidisciplinary professional review team may 
be appointed by Saskatchewan Health, if in fact it doesn’t get 
resolved at our level here or through the ministry. 
 
So that’s the process that we would have in place today, that all 
district boards would be using as policy direction. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you. This particular coordinator — my 
understanding from the people that have been involved in this 
process — was quite surprised that these people would want to 
appeal this process, and said that they have never had an appeal 
before. And that may well be the case. 
 
However I do recall a couple of years ago that there was . . . and 
I think it made the front lines, the front page of the 
Star-Phoenix and maybe the Leader-Post and maybe some 
media where there was people being sent away from their home 
communities 70, 80 miles away. And of course at that time, my 
recollection, the district backed down and amazingly found a 
bed. So okay, so we have the appeal process and really the buck 
will stop with you then. 
 
I guess one of the suggestions that was made — and you keep 
talking about community-based services — one of the 
suggestions was made for one of these folks was that well, okay 
they could either have a respite sort of thing where they’re 
home in the daytime and back into a bed at night. 
 
The second option was — which is one that is totally 
unacceptable to myself and others and everyone else — is that 

they be sent away to some distant place to spend the rest of their 
life. 
 
Or the third option was that they could take them home and 
would have 24-hour . . . 24-hour home care. Mr. Minister, can 
you tell me: can this province afford to have one-on-one, 
24-hour home care? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well I think on an individual basis you’re 
right, that there are a variety of different options that are 
available for families and individuals. And the ones that you’ve 
highlighted are the process that in fact works in many, many 
instances. 
 
Your question about whether or not we in this province can 
afford 24-hour home care today, or district boards can, I would 
say to you that to provide 24-hour home care services across the 
piece is something that we would need some additional support 
with. 
 
And so in our discussions with the federal government today, 
we’re talking about the importance of home care, home-based 
services. And there’s a great deal of interest in that by the way 
on the part of the federal government and all other provinces. 
And so we’ll continue to promote that, look at how we might be 
able to achieve that. 
 
But certainly that is one of the areas, as you highlight, that we 
want to spend more time in trying to achieve — not only for 
Saskatchewan, but I think across the country — because that’s 
where we’re going. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Now, Minister, you won’t answer the 
question, so I’ll answer it for you. You know full well, not in 
Saskatchewan or anywhere else in Canada, we cannot afford 
24-hour home care one-on-one for the type of people that we’re 
talking about. You know full well we can’t afford that. 
 
We can afford to have home care to keep people in their homes, 
and it certainly works in urban settings. But when you get into 
the rural settings where people are travelling 30, 40 miles to 
look after people the . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Whitmore: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, to introduce a guest. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Whitmore: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Sitting in 
the Speaker’s gallery tonight is a friend from Saskatoon, Ken 
Roach. And sitting beside someone that I think is known as the 
Minister of Finance. So I’d like you to welcome the two beside 
him is another old friend, Marv Schultz, who now resides in 
Regina. And they’re sitting beside people tonight . . . to the 
Chamber. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 



1836 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 1998 

General Revenue Fund 
Health 
Vote 32 

 
Subvote (HE01) 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, as I 
said, you know full well that we can’t afford one on one home 
care. And I’ll tell you another thing, Mr. Minister. Many of our 
seniors, if they’re living by themselves, that’s not what they 
want either. They like the security and comfort of being in a 
setting where there’s others like them and for security reasons 
want to be there. So don’t give us that. 
 
And I’m happy to hear that you are talking with the federal 
government. That would be an improvement, instead of day in 
and day out you standing in this House criticizing the federal 
government for not doing anything with you. Maybe that’s part 
of the problem; you haven’t been talking with them. And this 
certainly will be something to look at. 
 
However, Mr. Minister, the problem that we have with these 
people is that they want to stay in their own community, they 
want to be by loved ones. And that’s what they should have, 
would you not agree? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — The majority of people who are living in 
their communities today want to be in their homes. And it isn’t 
right for you to suggest for a minute that the institutional 
mentality still persists across the country, because that isn’t 
where people want to be. And you can talk to seniors anywhere 
across the land today, and they’ll tell you if they have the option 
of being in an institution or being at home, they’ll want to be at 
home, without a doubt. 
 
And so I say to you a couple of things. One is that on a 
long-term basis we aren’t today being able to provide 24-hour 
home care. But we are talking to the federal government and we 
have been talking to the federal government for some time, 
because the federal government recognizes that in 
Saskatchewan they have an opportunity to partner up with us to 
provide a national program on home care. 
 
And our emphasis will be the same as theirs, that we want to 
continue to move out of the institutional direction that we’ve 
been in for many, many years in health care, that we want to 
enrich community-based services. Home care is going to be a 
leader not only in this province, but also across Canada. And we 
will be able to do more for the future if we have some 
additional federal support on this, as you well know. 
 
And that’s what I’ve been saying all along, is that we need to 
have a greater injection by the federal government in 
community-based services. There appears to be some 
commitment in that today, of which we’re providing some 
leadership in on this side of the House. And that will continue 
to be our emphasis, it will continue to be our thrust so that we 
can build the strong home-care program not only in 
Saskatchewan, but provide a model for other parts of the 
country. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Well, Mr. Minister, I think again once again 
that, you know, in professing your wellness model which it 

seems your government is committed to sticking to even though 
we’ve got 6,600 people out there suffering and dying. And your 
government won’t admit that you made a mistake in the 
direction that you took in trying to move into an area that’s 
been unproven. There’s all sorts of studies that have been done 
and have been hid under a large book or a desk some place 
because they don’t bear out what you’re trying to preach to the 
people of the province. 
 
Many people as I’ve said, relied on home care for many years to 
keep them in their home — people that were healthy; need a 
little bit of support. We’re getting to the point now where we’ve 
got people that are being discharged from hospital with open 
wounds and all that kind of gory stuff that we hear. We’ve got 
horror stories from all too many letters and documentation, Mr. 
Minister, on that kind of stuff. 
 
And you don’t have the courage and won’t say to your cabinet 
partners that, hey we better take a look at this thing and start 
fixing it before it’s really out of hand. And I think it’s time that 
you made that commitment to the people of Saskatchewan and 
start doing that, Mr. Minister. 
 
A question I would ask you, what would you like me to tell the 
Schneider family or the Weighill’s or the McLaren’s in 
Davidson that they should do? Should they continue the fight? 
Should they continue to fight the district board and say we want 
to stay in our own community; we have a right to? Are you 
going to support them on that? And can I give them that 
message? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, I think if you’re asking me to follow 
up on the case, then you should provide that information to me 
and we will, through the department, make a follow-up on that. 
 
And I don’t know what you’ve done, Mr. Member, but if you’re 
asking my direction on what you should do, I say to you that 
what you should do is you should sit down with the district 
health coordinator, the quality care coordinator in that area. You 
should make yourself available to the assessment team that’s 
provided the assessment on this particular individual and have 
them tell you first hand in terms of what they’re determining. 
And then you’ll have the better appreciation of what it is that 
the district is prepared to provide and whether other options are 
available for them. 
 
I would suggest that you might do that to start with. If you’re 
unhappy with that process, you should provide those cases to 
us, through the district coordinator . . . or through the consultant 
or provide them to me directly and we’ll take a look at them. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Well, Mr. Minister, I do have that dialogue 
with the district board; that’s not a problem there. And I do 
know what services they’re provided to provide but they don’t 
meet the needs. Here’s four examples that I’ve given you 
tonight where they’re not being met. 
 
My question is very simple. I don’t think you need any more 
information than what I’ve provided with you tonight, that these 
people are sick, need to stay in their own community, want to 
stay in their own community, must stay in their own 
community. The one old gentleman makes a comment that if I 
move out of here, I’d just as soon be dead. Now you want that 



June 9, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1837 

type of thing on your shoulders? 
 
So to me it’s very clear. Either you support these people staying 
in their community, or you don’t. Which one is it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, I say to the member opposite, if 
you’re unhappy with the process of the district health board, 
you have an option of providing that information or those cases 
to me. Or you should be encouraging the family members who 
you say are dissatisfied to providing that information to me or 
to the department, and we’ll follow up on it to see what sort of 
the bottleneck is or what the issue is in helping them deal with it 
on an individual basis or on a district basis. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Well I have talked to these people, Mr. 
Minister, and I have worked with them, and I am working with 
them. And I have suggested that they do what they have done is 
try and talk to the district. 
 
The district is saying their hands are tied. They can’t do 
anything, that talk to the government. That’s what we keep 
hearing. Go to your MLA. It’s the government’s problem. I 
know you don’t agree with that because you told these people in 
Lanigan that it’s the district’s fault. It’s their problem. It’s their 
problem that they’re closing beds. You know that’s nonsense. 
You know that your government’s in control, that you run the 
districts. And so that’s nonsense, Mr. Minister. 
 
So it’s very clear that these people have no other course but to 
appeal. For Heaven’s sake, can you imagine these old people 
having to go now and hire lawyers . . . what they’re doing to ask 
a lawyer what their rights are to keep their loved ones in their 
own community. For Heaven’s sake, surely that you would 
have to agree that that’s unacceptable, that you don’t want to go 
there. I mean, some of your other cabinet ministers don’t share 
that philosophy. 
 
The Minister of Agriculture said, hey, take us to court, when he 
stole $188 million of GRIP. He didn’t have a problem with that. 
Take us to court. It’s very simple. 
 
But I don’t think you believe in that, and I sure as heck don’t 
believe in that. But this problem should be able to be solved in 
the local community, and all I’m asking for is your support to 
do it. And I think you want to do that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member, I’ve already 
indicated to the member that what he should do is he should 
provide for me the list of the individuals who in fact he’s 
working with where he thinks he hasn’t been able to advance 
his notion of providing or having them receive the same kinds 
of services that they want in their community. Provide me with 
that information; I’d be happy to look at it, and we’ll follow up, 
based on the information that you provide me. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Well, Mr. Minister, I guess we can belabour 
this for quite a while. And I’ll certainly see that you have these 
names. I’m surprised that you may not already have them on 
your desk. 
 
I talked earlier about your predecessor, the Minister of Finance, 
who was just up in the gallery visiting with some friends. And 
last year when we talked about this, we talked about the doctors 

in this province and he gave . . . it’s a public commitment as to 
some of the things that I suggested that would maybe solve 
some of the problems with the doctors in particular rural areas. 
 
And I haven’t seen anything happen with that, Mr. Minister, 
and so I’ll just explain to you what I’m talking about. One of 
the positive things — if there was — that I thought I saw in 
districtification was the fact that a district could have a doctor 
pool. And having said that, what a doctor pool would do would 
be to ensure that when a doctor needed time off — holidays, 
weekends, whatever it was, educational time — that there 
would be a pool of doctors that a district could resource from to 
fill that need, so we didn’t have to have all the problems that 
we’ve seen right across Saskatchewan with doctors wanting to 
go on strike and communities being without service and all 
those types of things. 
 
Now your predecessor made a commitment on that, Mr. 
Minister. I’m wondering if you share that commitment to that 
idea, and if you do, what have you done to further that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well I wasn’t knowledgeable that this was 
really your idea, but if this is your idea and the idea of the 
Minister of Finance and the previous Health minister, it was one 
heck of a good idea because, I mean, what we’ve done in the 
last year is we’ve implemented a number of programs which are 
there to assist rural doctors to practise in rural Saskatchewan in 
particular and have signed an agreement with the physicians in 
this province which enhances that. 
 
And certainly the weekend on-call relief program which you 
talked about is one that we implemented last year and the 
emergency room coverage program that we have. We’ve 
implemented of course the other ongoing longer objectives 
where we’re providing today a grant to physicians to start up in 
rural practices. 
 
We’re encouraging . . . last year of course, 26 additional 
physicians came to rural Saskatchewan to practise. So there are 
three or four very visible programs that are in place today that 
are to ensure and enhance the enrichment of physicians 
particularly to rural Saskatchewan. And I appreciate your 
support on this idea and on this concept. 
 
(1930) 
 
Mr. McLane: — Well you strayed a little bit from what I was 
talking about, and that’s the doctor pool. You didn’t hit on that, 
and I’ll ask you the question again. What about it? Do you 
support that concept? Some of the programs that you’ve talked 
about is not that. That’s something totally different, and it’s 
unfortunate your official passed you the wrong document. 
 
It’s simply where a district or even the province would have a 
pool of doctors that districts can draw from when there’s a 
shortage. 
 
A perfect example of that is in my own community last fall 
where we lost our doctor, and there was no doctors. The district 
health board says, hey, we don’t have any. Your department 
says, hey, we don’t have any. And so as usual, our community 
had to fight and search to find a doctor. Luckily we found one. 
Luckily we found one. Other communities haven’t been so 



1838 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 1998 

lucky. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, we’re talking about the doctor pool, and let’s 
use the Regina Health District as an example. If they had a pool 
of doctors, that would never happen. When Imperial needed 
relief or whoever else within the district needed a relief doctor, 
they could draw from that pool of doctors, and we wouldn’t 
have this problem every time. And every time that this comes 
up, it’s a crisis for you guys, and you bring in some stop-gap 
measures to try and satisfy it. Most often it’s with money. 
Here’s more money, and we’ll pay you overtime and all that 
type of stuff. 
 
We’re talking about actual relief by other doctors. And I’d like 
to know, are you going to support that or are you working 
toward it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Chair, to the member, he’s 
correct. We have a number of associations that we . . . or a 
number of programs that have been established in partnership 
with the Saskatchewan Medical Association. And we have a 
locum pool which SMA (Saskatchewan Medical 
Association)oversees. We have a locum roster which in fact is 
available then to help recruit, and a provincial recruitment 
program which is being used today to try and fill some of those 
areas that you talk about where rural practices might need 
enrichment or in larger communities like Regina where you 
might have the need for a specialist or a physician with a 
particular kind of expertise. 
 
And beyond that, I talked about a whole host of other programs 
that we’ve initiated over the last year which I’ll just go over 
very quickly for you, like the emergency coverage program, 
like the weekend on-call relief program, the rural practices 
establishment grant that I said a few minutes ago, the 
undergraduate medical student bursary, the physician 
recruitment coordinator which is a year old now, the rural 
practices enhancement training which allows for physicians to 
come and practice in rural Saskatchewan. I’ve mentioned the 
locum services program, the alternate pay in primary health 
services, northern medical services, support services. 
 
There are a whole host of programs that we’ve initiated with 
SMA to help advance some of the notions that you support and 
we do on this side of the House. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Maybe I’ll just explain the doctor pool a little 
further, Mr. Minister. For example, if the Regina Health District 
can say at any time we need — we’ll pick a number — 20 
general practitioners to serve the Regina Health District 
including outposts such as Imperial where we have a resident 
doctor . . . So we have 20 doctors. So you need relief time. So 
let’s say what the Regina Health District would need would be 
25 doctors on staff so that at any given time there’s probably 
going to be five on relief or holiday or educational purposes or 
for whatever reason. 
 
So you got a pool of doctors so that Imperial’s never without a 
doctor. The clinic in east Regina is never without their doctor 
. . . blah-blah-blah-blah— all those types. And it’ll work for any 
district. You can either do it district by district. Some districts 
are too small to have that, so you need the larger ones to 
provide the pool. 

That’s what I’m talking about, Mr. Minister. Are you going to 
give the same commitment as your predecessor, the Minister of 
Finance, did that he supported that and would work toward it? 
And if you do, what are doing to move to that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Chair, this is some of the work 
that we’re doing today currently with the Saskatchewan 
Medical Association to try to accumulate a pool of physicians 
in the way in which you speak. It’s part of the discussions that 
have been ongoing now for better than a year when they were 
talked about here in the House with the previous Minister of 
Health and the Finance Minister today. 
 
Included in that process, of course, as I’ve outlined for you, the 
locum services program that we have in place. You’re speaking 
about something broader than that where you could get 
physicians across the province to give of their expertise to a 
pool so that they would be available to cover off across the 
province. And that discussion we're currently having with 
physicians in Saskatchewan. 
 
And some of it you’re starting to see occur on its own where 
physicians are moving from larger centres and doing some rural 
practice today. We’re going to encourage to do that. But the 
actual physical pool of physicians today, not accomplished that 
yet. That continues to be our objective. 
 
Mr. McLane: — So I take that as a yes that you support that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Chair, I don’t know why we 
wouldn’t. In this province, you want to get physicians that 
would help each other, that could function in various different 
locations across the province. It clearly is our objective and has 
been in the initiation of the wellness model. 
 
Mr. McLane: — One of the problems with most of your 
programs for doctors is that it talks about a doctor practice of 
two or more doctors. That does nothing for communities such 
as ours or many others in this province where we have a single 
doctor. 
 
It’s been the intention of your government, your department, 
since the wellness model, to try and concentrate doctors in the 
larger centres. And us outlying areas, us smaller towns, well we 
will send you down a doctor one or two days a week or 
whatever we can. Really what that would accomplish would be 
more rationing, I think, which has also been a role of your 
government. So the problem that you have is when you 
introduce these programs is . . . it’s for a practice with two or 
more doctors. It does nothing for our doctor who says, okay I’m 
a single doctor. I want to come to Imperial, but I can’t access 
those funds. 
 
Why do you specify it has to be a two- or more-doctor practice 
in order to access these types of programs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well we’ve tried, Mr. Chair, to address 
that from both perspectives where in fact we might be able to 
enhance the practice in rural Saskatchewan because there are 
issues today where physicians are practising in small 
communities, and they’re leaving for a variety of different 
reasons and wanting to be in larger pools. Practising in a group 
practice might be the better language. 



June 9, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1839 

And we’ve provided some initiatives at both end of that, at both 
ends, to see if we can get physicians to come and practise in 
solo practices in Saskatchewan because we recognize the 
importance of that and have initiated some programs to do that. 
 
On the other hand, we’ve also provided some opportunities for 
physicians to practise what we might call group practices and 
provided some incentives for them to do that. So our opinion is 
that we’re trying to cover that off on both sides. And so some of 
the funding that we’ve put into the base budget this year, or 
over the last two years, reflects that. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Well, Minister, I could parade you in . . . if I 
could find them all the doctors that we’ve had in the community 
of Imperial in the last 15 years. And there isn’t one of them that 
would say they didn’t want to work there, including the one 
that’s there now, that doesn’t like the single practice. His only 
issue is, is that when he wants a weekend off, there’s no one to 
replace him. So we have to make agreements, and we do. In the 
community of Imperial, we’ve made agreements out of the 
Regina Health District and into other health districts to have 
relief for him. It would be so simple if the Regina Health 
District or your government had that pool of doctors and said 
okay, Dr. X in Imperial, you want next weekend off; we’re 
going to have a doctor out there to cover for you. 
 
So you know you’re saying . . . you’re trying to paint all these 
doctors and single practices as saying they don’t like the 
isolation. They don’t want to be by themselves and all that kind 
of . . . That’s not the issue at all. Most of these doctors like it in 
small town rural Saskatchewan, even in a single practice. All 
they ask for is relief. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Chair, all you need to do is have 
discussion with your leader, who’s a doctor. He knows what’s 
been done, and obviously he hasn’t had this discussion with 
you. 
 
But what’s happened in Saskatchewan in the last year, and this 
last announcement, has been that we’ve got both of the 
programs that you’re talking about in place today. The 
weekend-on-call is in place today so that in fact physicians can 
get that kind of respite that their asking for. And in the 
negotiation of this contract, we’ve provided it because the SMA 
said that this was an important piece to the signing of the 
agreement. So we have it in place today. And we have the 
weekend relief or on-call relief. And all that they need to do is 
they need to make the application through your community, if 
it’s Imperial, to the SMA, and this process kicks in, and the 
supports will be there to provide those kinds of reliefs that 
you’re talking about. They’re there. 
 
Mr. McLane: — I don’t think it’s quite that simple, Mr. 
Minister. I’ve been in this business too long, and I’ve seen it. 
They make the application. Where’s a doctor going to come 
from? Tell me where this doctor’s going to magically appear 
from every second or third weekend when this guy needs time 
off? It’s not going to happen. And you know it isn’t going to 
happen until we get that pool of doctors. We’re short of doctors 
now, so until we get that pool in place it’s not going to happen. 
And I ask you to work toward that and try and accomplish that. 
 
Mr. Minister, I wanted to ask you if you could explain to me . . . 

and I’d like to as well, assuming that you have guidelines for 
the terminologies that you use for surgeries, you talk about 
elective. You talk about urgent. You talk about other terms that 
you need. Can you explain some of those for me, and do you 
have those documented, so you could send me over a copy of 
them that will explain those types of terms? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, I don’t have those with me 
right now. But what we’ll do is we’ll make sure that we provide 
them for you in terms of what the guidelines that are being used 
in terms of the classification of those three areas that you and I 
have both been using. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Just a few 
questions for the minister. Again welcome to yourself and your 
officials. 
 
Obviously health care is of great concern to northern 
Saskatchewan and in particular Athabasca. And just a few 
questions we have in reference to an update on the formation of 
the district health boards, where these people are from, the 
number of staff they have in place, and some of your proposed 
planning or the stages of planning. 
 
Obviously, Mr. Minister, we have people that may be watching 
this program back in northern Saskatchewan. And I guess this 
would be an opportune time to express to them some of the 
stages of the development of the board, your staff, and some of 
the services that are being considered. Would you be able to 
give us that information please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well first of all, to the member, I want to 
say that — and Mr. Chair — that we are going to be working 
very closely and have been working very closely with the 
district health boards in the North. And of course part of what 
the district health boards in the North are going to do is look at 
the kinds of accomplishments that have happened in the South 
so that you can develop a broad range of services and a battery 
of services that you’ve asked about from time to time during 
question period, that we want to enhance in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So in the southern part of the province today we have about 
1,500 first responders to start with, that have been trained and 
are now living in rural communities and soon will be in the 
northern part of Saskatchewan which the district health boards 
will be putting in place. They’ll be providing training programs 
for these individuals to ensure that you have first response 
services as close to the communities in which people live as you 
can. And I expect that in northern Saskatchewan there will be a 
large number of those folks that will take advantage of those 
opportunities. 
 
We know that we need to enhance and work at enriching the 
emergency services both in air and in some areas of the 
province, in northern Saskatchewan, road ambulance. And I 
know that the district health boards are going to be making a 
concerted effort to develop that. 
 
We know that in the northern part of Saskatchewan there hasn’t 
been a strong emphasis on home care. And the district health 
boards — I know through some of their visionary planning — 
are developing a strategy of how they’re going to provide home 



1840 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 1998 

care services in those communities. 
 
So there’ll be new training programs. There will be staff that 
will be now employed across the North who will be providing 
home care services similar to what we have in the South today, 
and growth, I would suggest to you, in terms of job 
opportunities for people on front lines who are doing home care 
services. We’re going to see of course enrichment in some of 
your institutional services because you don’t have many nursing 
home services in the northern part of the province. There’s 
going to be a need to provide some additional resources for that 
through district health boards. Some of that planning will come 
forward. 
 
As you know, we’re developing and soon, hopefully, we’ll see a 
new facility in Athabasca, a new health care facility in 
Athabasca. So there’s a whole range, broad range of services 
that your district health board is working at developing and 
putting into place that will reflect many of the services that 
today southern Saskatchewan people have but northern folks 
yet don’t have. 
 
I don’t have for you the list of the board members with me but 
we’ll make sure that we provide that for you. The Keewatin 
Yathe District Board is 12 members and the chair of course as 
you know is Max Morin. The board representatives include two 
representatives from Meadow Lake Tribal Council named 
through the memorandum of understanding between the 
Meadow Lake Tribal Council of Saskatchewan. And then the 
chair of the Mamawetan/Munito Uskiy, which is a district 
health board with 12 members; the chair there is Louise Wiens. 
 
And we’ll provide for you more detail or more information as it 
relates to the board members, because you asked that question. 
We’ll make that available to you; I don’t have it with me 
tonight. 
 
(1945) 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And I realize that 
there is a $10 million facility being planned for Stony Rapids, 
the transfer of course being from the Uranium City Hospital 
that is there now and all the services and the staff and so on and 
so forth. 
 
As the new facility in Stony Rapids is being built and certainly 
being commissioned, there’s been a lot of questions as to what’s 
going to happen to the community of Uranium City and 
Camsell Portage. 
 
And certainly, Mr. Minister, we won’t argue and neither will I, 
on terms of the logical choice of location of the facility in the 
far North. Stony Rapids is certainly close to Black Lake, which 
is one of the largest communities in the far North. It’s relatively 
close to Fond-du-Lac as well. And they’ve also got an airport 
being done up. 
 
And as I mentioned before, Mr. Minister, the communities of 
the Athabasca Basin, both the mayors of Uranium City and 
certainly the chiefs of Fond-du-Lac and Black Lake and Stony 
Rapids, there’s a lot of cooperation there and a lot of 
coordination of that whole region that says, yes — that’s the 
most logical place for this facility to go, therefore we’re 

supporting it, and so on and so forth. 
 
So I guess my argument being is that we don’t want to leave 
certain communities away from the, you know, from the whole 
mix of accessibility to emergency health care services and 
general preventative health care efforts. And that’s why it 
brings me into the question I’m going to ask here in terms of 
Camsell Portage and Uranium City. They obviously have some 
challenge ahead of them then, Mr. Minister, and I wrote you a 
letter about these concerns a number of months ago. 
 
Could you update us tonight as to what the Uranium City 
facility may look like two years from now? Or what type of 
services they may have immediately for the 200 people that are 
left in Uranium City and certainly the adjoining community of 
Camsell Portage. And when I say adjoining I don’t mean a 
bedroom community much like you have Saskatoon and 
Martensville. By adjoining I mean they may be as many as 20 
to 25 air miles from each other. 
 
So I think if a young person is quite sick or there’s been an 
accident in Camsell Portage, that there be a system in place for 
these people from the far North to access emergency health care 
and certainly preventative health care services. Again, could 
you give us an update as to what you foresee happening in the 
Athabasca Basin? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well thank you, Mr. Chair, to the member. 
First of all I want to thank you for your comments in 
relationship to the support that you’re providing, and that’s 
extremely valuable as we develop many of those services for 
northern people today. And I want to thank you for that support. 
 
In respect to Uranium City, some of the services that will be 
there will be these — services in Uranium City will not change 
significantly from what is utilized at present — physician 
services, lab, X-ray, observation, holding beds will still be 
available there. There’ll still continue to be acute care services 
to be provided through primary care health centres, which will 
then be physicians’ referrals as they are today. 
 
And the design of the new facility at Stony Lake is nearing 
completion as you well know. And the Athabasca authority of 
course will be overseeing that. Now the members of the 
authority — I think the other piece that’s important here that 
you asked about, Hatchet Lake and Wollaston, has chosen to 
maintain its historic relationship with La Ronge for hospital and 
physician services and is within the boundaries of . . . it’s now I 
said Mamawetan/Munito Uskiy but that’s been changed now to 
the Mamawetan Churchill district. 
 
The members of the authorities of course will include — and I 
think this is important in the planning process which you talked 
about — will include people from Camsell Portage, 
Fond-du-Lac, and Uranium City, Stony Rapids and Black Lake 
to ensure that when you put those services in place that in fact 
they’ll reflect the needs of all of those communities that are 
there. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Certainly that’ll be 
of interest to the people of the whole Athabasca Basin. And I 
certainly want to commend the leadership that the Athabasca 
Basin communities has afforded this whole process of 



June 9, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1841 

rationalizing health care and certainly try and coordinate our 
health care dollar to ensure maximum service and of course 
affordability, accessibility, and the whole bit. 
 
So I think they should be commended and be understood that 
there has to be some cooperation and they certainly come 
through with their portion of that cooperative spirit. 
 
The other issue, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, is the La Loche 
situation. St. Martin’s, as you’re probably aware, has been a 
black eye for health care in this province for many, many years. 
Dilapidated trailers simply do not a hospital make. 
 
So I guess my argument to you, and has been for the past three 
years, is we’ve been harping and banging on this drum, and I 
certainly must admit that there has been some progress being 
made by the announcement. And if I can recall the hon. member 
from . . . the former minister of Health indicating a price tag of 
$10 million for the replacement of St. Martin’s Hospital. 
 
La Loche serves a great amount of communities, and those 
communities include Descharme Lake, they include Turnor 
Lake. They also include Black Point and Poplar Point. They 
also include the Clearwater River Dene Nation, which is the 
Indian reserve right next door to it. So the population base that 
they’re serving could be anywhere from 6 to 7,000 people, and 
certainly they’re looking forward to some kind of response and 
I think they’re encouraged, Mr. Minister, at this point in time. 
 
But there’s still a question mark as to what amount of 
commitment are we looking at in terms of the final price tag 
and when is the actual construction going to start. Because, Mr. 
Minister, as we’ve talked about this whole issue in the 
Assembly time and time again, there is no other health care 
system that I’m aware of that has dilapidated trailers lumped 
together for the past 17 years that is considered a hospital. 
 
So I guess in reference to St Martin’s Hospital, the people of La 
Loche deserve equal treatment, they certainly deserve fair 
treatment, and they certainly deserve to go to a facility that is of 
equal status to the other facilities in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as I mentioned before, there’s a great number of families 
out there that are waiting. They have older people in their 
families that need care. They have young children. They have 
their own health to worry about. And unfortunately the only 
problem they’ve had, Mr. Minister, is they’ve been very patient. 
 
So could you give us an update as to what your intentions are in 
reference to the St. Martin’s Hospital and the La Loche 
situation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Chair, to the member, just to 
indicate that he’s correct in saying that there has been a great 
deal of discussion over the last couple of years about the 
importance of the health care facility in La Loche, St. Martin’s. 
I want to say to the member that it’s been brought to my 
attention as well as you have corresponded with me. The 
member for Cumberland has also raised this issue with me on a 
number of occasions. 
 
And I want to say to you that we’re continuing to complete our 
planning process. Within a very short while, there’ll be a letter 

going to Mr. Morin who’s the chair of the district health board 
there, and I’ll be sure that I copy you in that correspondence 
which I think broadly identifies what our commitment is to the 
community of La Loche and the St. Martin’s Hospital. 
 
We share the same views as you do, and our correspondence 
will be going out within short order. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Again the other 
factor we’re looking at — again bouncing around the map a bit 
here — is in terms of the Stony Rapids situation. As you’re 
probably aware, that’s where the new facility is going to be. 
And I think the Black Lake Development Corporation is also 
entertaining the possibility of amalgamating housing plans to 
coordinate your staffing housing needs. 
 
And one of the things that’s of some concern out there is Stony 
Rapids is going to be building a water treatment plant to serve 
the hospital, the health care centre there? Yet the residents of 
Stony Rapids will not have the means to access the water and 
sewer system that will be built there. So it is a health care 
matter, Mr. Minister, that we have in this day and age a 
community without properly treated water and properly 
disposed sewer. All that adds to the health care costs. It all adds 
to the challenge of living in northern Saskatchewan, as does 
some of the crowded housing conditions. 
 
So I guess my point to you is, do you feel that water and sewer 
services to Stony Rapids is a health concern? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member, I know that 
there has been a great deal of work that has gone into the 
decision around the development of the new facility at Black 
Lake, and I’ve been apprised by my staff that this project is 
moving ahead with the kind of pace that we intended it to be. 
 
The point that you make about the incorporated housing needs 
and the water treatment and the need for ensuring that we have 
good housing opportunities, I’ve actually had a discussion with 
the district health board members regarding — or two of the 
members from the board — relating to this project. And we’re 
working very closely with them on both of those issues. 
 
As you know, the facility will be on reserve. And so when 
we’re talking about roads and infrastructure, water treatment 
plants, the discussion becomes a bit more technical because it 
requires then the participation and involvement of other levels 
of government besides the province and the band itself. 
 
So we’re continuing that dialogue today, keeping in mind that 
although the health facility is our primary objective, that we 
understand and appreciate the importance of ensuring that you 
have good housing needs, because you need people who are 
going to work there and live in those communities. And it’s 
been suggested that we need to ensure that that’s in place for 
them or to assist them in making sure that both the water 
treatment process and the housing is available for them. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And certainly 
whenever my office is able to offer some assistance in some 
limited capacity, I might add, we’ll certainly try and do our very 
best to impress upon the federal government, and certainly the 
leaders of the Athabasca Basin, that yes, cost sharing the $9.5 



1842 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 1998 

million facility 50/50 with the federal government is something 
that we certainly support. And we’d like to see some kind of 
effort to expand on the housing issue, the road issue, and 
certainly the water and sewer issue with the corresponding, 
adjoining community. 
 
And I did have a conversation with the current mayor of Stony 
Rapids. And I indicated that now is a very essential time in 
which he begins to work hand in hand with the province to try 
and coordinate these two projects together. Because if you do 
coordinate the projects together you’re obviously going to get 
the best bang for your buck. 
 
So I would suggest that the mayor of Stony Rapids will 
probably be in close contact — if he has not been already — 
with your office to say, look, listen, how could we coordinate 
both objectives, maximize the dollar, and accomplish both of 
these objectives on behalf of the Stony Rapids people and 
certainly the Athabasca Basin? 
 
The other two comments I have, questions I have, Mr. Minister, 
before I take my place, is I really do want to recognize some of 
the efforts of the Ile-a-la-Crosse community. From sitting back 
in the mayor’s chair and certainly viewing it from a young man 
growing up in the community, I’ve seen a lot of contribution the 
community has made as well. 
 
And they have constructed something like seven doctor’s 
residences at an enormous cost. They’ve also constructed a 
tenplex professional staff residence which does cost close to, I 
believe, 7 or $800,000 including interest over a period of years. 
 
So quite frankly, you can look at the small community of 
Ile-a-la-Crosse in terms of their contribution to health care — 
well in excess of $2 million over the last seven or eight years. 
So I want to make sure we put a plug in for that community to 
make people out there understand what they have been doing to 
support health care and certainly doing their part in demanding 
that they have fair and equal treatment when it comes to health 
care. 
 
I guess my question to you is when communities undertake that 
type of commitment to you, what does that mean to the 
provincial government and to yourself as Minister of Health? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well I think I really appreciate the 
comments that you make, Mr. Chair, Mr. Member, because this 
is exactly the kind of cooperation and partnership that we talk 
about across the province. 
 
I really want to endorse the words that you’ve given and that is 
that any time that you can create the type of an infrastructure 
that you have in Ile-a-la-Crosse — which does a number of 
things, it ensures that the people who are coming to work in 
your community are adequately provided in terms of services. It 
also enhances your opportunities to recruit additional staff, 
professional people, to come and work in your community. 
 
So I know that much of this work started when you sat in the 
chair of the mayor in your community. And so I want to 
recognize that much of that work that was done during that 
period of time, and to congratulate the community of 
Ile-a-la-Crosse in being able to put together the kinds of 

community plan which we talk about very often when we talk 
about the importance of enriching community-based services. 
And this is an example in the northern part of Saskatchewan 
where you achieve some of that and we endorse it and will 
continue to support that. 
 
(2000) 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you. And I guess the overwhelming 
example that we have of the far North, the Athabasca Basin 
communities, I understand that there’s got to be some huge 
levels of cooperation amongst all the communities along the 
west side, which includes of course Buffalo Narrows and 
Patuanak and Beauval, Dillon and Canoe Lake, because there’s 
going to be the question of how could we optimize our 
opportunity to have as many health care facilities in our region 
as possible to serve our people since we’re so isolated from the 
rest of the province. 
 
And certainly every community wants a facility, as you’re 
probably aware, Mr. Minister. And the key thing that I want to 
stress to the people out there that may be listening is that 
cooperation amongst all the communities is so essential and so 
key that Buffalo Narrows and Beauval and Ile-a-la-Crosse and 
Patuanak have to work together very closely. 
 
I understand, as you probably are aware, Mr. Minister, that 
there’s going to be a lot of, I guess, mixing of different views 
and different parties. You have the first nations community also 
involved. 
 
I understand that Meadow Lake is looking at a new facility. I 
understand that, you know, there’s some communities like 
Pinehouse that may be amalgamated with the Lac La Ronge 
health district. 
 
There’s all these different scenarios and different players that’s 
going to take an incredible amount of cooperation amongst 
these communities to try and put together an attractive package, 
health package I might add, for the whole region to survive and 
to ensure that they have proper health care facilities for their 
people. And having the age of our population being fairly 
young, you can see that there’s going to be an incredible need 
for preventative as well as immediate medical care for our 
citizens. 
 
The other issue I want to talk about, Mr. Minister, because of 
the housing shortage, some of the problems or some of the 
challenges in health care include high rates of TB 
(tuberculosis). We’ve spoken about this before. And TB of 
course as you are aware, Mr. Minister, could easily spread 
amongst a family, especially if they live in crowded conditions. 
La Loche is one community that always pops into my mind 
because it’s got something like 150 on the waiting-list. 
Ile-a-la-Crosse is certainly getting a handle on their housing 
needs. They’ve got a bit of a ways to go yet. Buffalo as well. 
Beauval is also way behind. So housing in general also adds to 
the health of the Athabasca people. 
 
And the reason why we stand up each day, Mr. Minister, and 
talk about these health challenges is because for years, when 
you forget and neglect a certain region of the province and then 
all of a sudden you get an MLA that wants to speak about the 



June 9, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1843 

challenges, many people perceive that request for a whole pile 
of things to happen as being greedy. The fact of the matter is 
we’re not being greedy, Mr. Minister. We’re simply asking for 
our fair share of what has been happening in the rest of the 
province for the past 20 years, and we’re trying to bring 
northern Saskatchewan up in terms of some of the infrastructure 
we need, and we’re trying to be treated as equal. 
 
So we hope we don’t taint your attitude to the North as us 
wanting everything overnight. We simply want to be treated 
equally. We wish to be on par with the province in terms of 
some of our health needs, some of our infrastructure needs, 
some of the economic needs, and so on and so forth. So this is 
the reason why it’s very important we get that attitude in check, 
and very important that we develop a healthy attitude in terms 
of some of the requests we have. 
 
So if I can get your response to the TB question and the housing 
needs, I’ll then have one more point to make, and then I will 
close. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member, I recognize his 
comment as it relates to the increased level of tuberculosis in 
the North, and he’s accurate in making in that comment. I know 
that through the Saskatchewan tuberculosis control program 
which we now have in place and in a joint partnership with 
Health Canada and the district health board now, they’re 
looking at increased ways in which we might be able to reduce 
or prevent the level of tuberculosis that is increasing in the 
northern part of the province. 
 
Clearly you’ve identified some very significant health 
determinants. And when you talk about Ile-a-la-Crosse and the 
need for enriched housing and the need for purification of your 
water, good sewer and water systems in the northern part of the 
province, those are the kinds of issues that both the district 
health board, mayors in the communities in the North are 
needing to provide some leadership in. 
 
Those discussions are going on today both with the federal 
government, the community leaders, and, as I’ve said to you, 
the Saskatchewan tuberculosis control program which we 
believe are the issues that will further advance the assurance of 
getting a better control on the increase of tuberculosis in the 
North and also provide some additional health care needs to 
ensure that we don’t see that, us moving in that direction. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And my final point 
this evening is that while we understand that . . . and I urge all 
the communities out there, the leaders that are out there to make 
sure we coordinate our aspiration as a region, especially when it 
comes to health care. And I think the challenge we have is to try 
to identify the whole master plan, I guess so to speak, to try and 
have these communities in this specific area become centres of 
excellence in certain regions. 
 
Perhaps Buffalo Narrows could become the centre of excellence 
in economic development and government services. Perhaps 
Beauval could become the centre of excellence in education. 
There’s so many different opportunities that could happen out 
there if we were to coordinate all our efforts, as a region, to 
make sure the government knows that the communities are 
cooperating with the people in these various communities. And 

that is exactly the way to go in terms of trying to maximize 
benefits for your certain region. 
 
So I would encourage all the Athabasca constituents out there 
that are working with their leaders, with their chiefs, with their 
mayors to really look beyond the small confines of our 
communities and to look at the regional aspect to try and see if 
there’s such an opportunity to look at the regional approach to 
developing centres of excellence. 
 
And the other factor I wanted to point out, Mr. Minister, is that 
as you are aware, health is a wide variety of . . . it covers a wide 
variety of matters. Everything from water and sewer systems, to 
housing, to mental health, and those are areas that we’re all 
looking at. And as you are aware, mental health is one area that 
needs a lot more funding. 
 
But I wanted to point out as a disclaimer, Mr. Minister, is we 
certainly hope that in recognizing these northern problems 
which you have done so this evening, is that we don’t use the 
health boards to pass cuts on to northern Saskatchewan which 
would eliminate all the positive things that we have spoken 
about this evening. 
 
Like I said, we have a whole pile of catching up to do in 
northern Saskatchewan, and we mustn’t apologize. And I 
certainly won’t apologize, as the member from Cumberland 
does every now and then, for what the North gets. We’re here to 
fight for what the North needs and will continue pushing home 
that message. So hopefully two or three years from now I won’t 
look back at Hansard and say, well I warned the Minister of 
Health not to use the northern health boards as a scapegoat for 
planned cuts to northern health services. 
 
So in closing I wouldn’t mind hearing your comment on this. 
And again, I want to thank you and your officials for taking 
time this evening to hear some of my concerns. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’m happy that the 
opposition is . . . or the government is very happy to see that 
I’ve got up to ask a few questions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — I’ve been sitting and listening very intently, 
hoping that I would be able to come up with some questions 
that would allow the minister to scrum with all his officials in 
order to come up with the answer. 
 
But what I’d like to do first of all is ask some questions on 
some unfinished business, questions that I asked about a year 
ago during estimates when I asked the minister when he was 
going to prescribe NGOs (non-governmental organizations) 
providing addiction services as affiliates. Is this in the wind? Is 
that taking place? 
 
I asked this question a year ago. I was told that the government 
would be consulting with the health districts. To date I hear 
from some of our NGOs that nothing has happened. They have 
not had a definitive reply, and I’m wondering how long they’ll 
have to wait. 
 
They are performing a service to their communities. They’ve 



1844 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 1998 

been asking. They’ve been very patient. And, Mr. Minister, I 
guess my first question . . . hard-hitting as it might seem. I need 
to have an answer because I know that the people that contact 
me to ask this question will be paying very close attention. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member. First of all, 
district health boards, as was the case prior to district health 
boards . . . is that NGOs or CBOs (community-based 
organization) as they are known today, in fact have contracts to 
provide a vast array of services of which we see today, 
providing some mental health services, drug addiction services 
in some cases. And some areas are providing home care, and 
some parts of the province they are providing other . . . well 
they are providing facilities for physicians to house their 
practices in. 
 
There’s a whole host of responsibilities that NGOs take on in 
the province, and then in some cases . . . in most . . . in all of 
these cases, they’re by contractual agreement with the district 
health board. We value them in the way in which you speak 
because clearly district health boards and previously 
governments couldn’t provide those services on their own. And 
NGOs and CBOs, as we know them today, continue to provide 
a very valuable service across the province in many, many 
ways. 
 
Mr. Osika: — So what you’re saying, that there is a 
consultation process in place, or they have been already 
prescribed as affiliates? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Deputy Chair, to the member, they’re 
not affiliates, and they never have been affiliates, and there’s no 
intent or interest, I don’t think, for neither CBOs or NGOs to 
want to be affiliates and/or district health boards to have them 
in that capacity. 
 
The contract agencies that provide a vast array of services to 
districts . . . in this case we’re talking about health services; as I 
say, it could provide mental health services, drug addiction 
services, and the list goes on. In some areas, they provide some 
home care services. They might contract for somebody to 
provide physiotherapy. There’s a whole array of services that 
are provided by the NGO, CBO community, but they’re not 
affiliates. They’re contract agencies, as they have been in the 
past, and continue to be that way. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To the minister, in order 
for them now to obtain any financial assistance for all the work 
that they do with addiction treatment and counselling services, 
how are they to go about obtaining the very valuable financial 
resources that they need to continue to operate and to help the 
people in the communities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Deputy Chair, to the member, what 
they do is they negotiate a contract to the district health board in 
terms of what the value of that service they believe should be, 
and they contract that and they negotiate that agreement with 
the district health board. In the past, they would negotiate that 
with the Department of Health, and the Department of Health 
would then determine at what level they would fund them based 
on a delivery plan, and we would provide them with the money. 
 
Since the establishment of the district health boards, those 

community agencies now go to the district health board and 
negotiate that agreement on an individual basis with them. And 
we provide the funding in all of those cases, I expect, to the 
district health boards who then pass it on to those third parties. 
 
Mr. Osika: — I believe that that is one reason that the issue is 
raised once again, is that because when they do go to the district 
health boards they say, look, we’re so financially strapped; we 
can’t cut anywhere else. Our resources have been diminished, 
and we’re not able to share any of our hard-found resources for 
your types of services. And they are struggling like all the 
district health boards are struggling for finances. 
 
And so when you say it’s easy and as your colleagues are 
saying, hey it’s easy, just get a contract, well it isn’t that easy 
when you go to the people you’re doing a service for and they 
don’t have the money, and you can’t just say well, to heck with 
the people that require the service. They are very caring people. 
So they go ahead, and they do it. But they do need some 
financial assistance. And if it isn’t forthcoming . . . that’s one of 
the breakdowns. That’s one of the problems with district health 
boards and the lack of adequate funding to provide care for all 
those people that are in fact in need. 
 
And I’m going to pursue that a little later. But I’d like to really 
nail this down, Mr. Minister, about these NGOs who are 
providing this kind of service and yet not having access to 
finances from the district health boards to help the people in 
need in those small communities. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Deputy Chair, to the member. First 
and foremost, I want to say to you that there hasn’t been a 
reduction of funding to district health boards across the 
province. And so for you to make the statement is inaccurate 
because district health boards have continued to receive growth 
across the province in each and every year over at least the last 
four years. So you shouldn’t be saying that there has been 
reductions in health care funding to district health boards 
because that’s not accurate. 
 
And I want to say to the member opposite that when you talk 
about CBOs . . . and we can provide this list for you because I 
think it’s important for you to have it as you speak about it. 
When you look at the increases to CBOs across the province, 
community-based organizations, you’ll see when we pass the 
information to you, that in each of these programs across the 
province that provide a vast range of services, you’ll see 
increases in their annual allocations as well which has come 
from the district health boards and which we funded from the 
department to those boards. 
 
(2015) 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thanks, Mr. Chairman. Thanks, Mr. Minister. If 
I said that there has been a reduction in financing to the district 
health boards, that was not what I meant to say. There is an 
inadequate amount of funding to the district health boards in 
order to provide the services to the people that they serve. That 
was the point I was making. 
 
Before I ask any further questions, my friend and colleague 
from Athabasca wants to clarify something. He was awaiting a 
response from you to his last dissertation. And if I may, Mr. 



June 9, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1845 

Deputy Chair, I’d like to allow him to pursue that with the 
minister now. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I guess the question, 
Mr. Minister, just in case you thought for a moment that I didn’t 
need a response, the question I asked you is that two years from 
now, if I were to research Hansard and I would ask you is there 
any way, shape, or form, are you planning on using the district 
health boards that you have now established in northern 
Saskatchewan to blame for some of the cuts that you have 
planned or otherwise will be planning, in terms of the health 
care services for northern Saskatchewan. 
 
And I would like your response, a very simple response of no; 
we will not be using them as scapegoats . . . at the same amount 
of care if not better care and better budget dollars will be 
allocated to these northern districts and certainly not be used to 
hide any cuts from the people. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Deputy Chair, to the member, I didn’t 
comment because for a moment I thought you were a member 
of our party and were on this side of the House because you 
made such a wonderful dissertation about the level of health 
care services. You talked so eloquently about the model of 
health care in northern Saskatchewan that I thought for sure that 
you were advocating a great deal of the wellness program that’s 
already been established in the southern part of the province. 
And I just adopted that as being the way in which you’d like to 
see it occur in the North, and that is the case. 
 
And the examples that you used tonight -- in terms of the 
communities that have come together to develop the district 
health plan to initiate the kinds of strategies that need to occur 
into the future so that you have good comprehensive health care 
programs in the North -- are exactly what we’ve been doing in 
the southern part of the province. And I want to commend you 
and those people who are providing leadership across the 
northern part of the province, and we’ll continue to work 
together in ensuring that that happens. 
 
I want to say to you that it has never been the position or the 
opinion of this government or the ministry of those who have 
served in it or the communities where district health boards 
have served . . . And I’ve heard this again at the SAHO 
convention not more than four months ago where they don’t 
view themselves as being sort of the front-runners of the 
government in terms of making the hard decisions. They view 
themselves as being partners of this government. This is what 
the district health boards . . . and this is how they view 
themselves. 
 
We’ve never used them, and I say to you sincerely, district 
health boards are men and women like you and I. And you 
know who they are in the northern part of the province in your 
community today. And these people in fact are going to be 
providing, as you know, in developing the best plans for 
northern Saskatchewan that northern Saskatchewan has to offer 
because they’re like you and I. And we know that into the 
future, when we reflect back on to the next couple of years, 
you’ll see a whole host, a battery of services that have come 
together because of the kinds of partnership and cooperation 
that you talked about in your comments. 
 

Mr. Belanger: — So the simple answer is no; you will not be. 
And I’d like to hear you say it -- no they will not be used to 
hide cuts. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well boards have never been used for that 
purpose, and that won’t be their role in the northern part of the 
province either. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Committee members, before I recognize 
the hon. member for Melville, I would request respectfully 
leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Trew: — I thank all members for that. Seated in the 
Speaker’s gallery are two good friends of mine, George 
Hainsworth — give us a wave, George — and Fred Kress up at 
the back. I ask all hon. members to join me in welcoming these 
two very good friends of mine. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Health 
Vote 32 

 
Subvote (HE01) 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Minister, 
over the last days that we’ve sat here in the legislature, and 
we’ve talked about health care, and we’ve brought up issues 
from all over the province that point towards a deteriorating 
system. It concerns me. 
 
You talk about more money being spent, and that’s great. But 
the problems are not subsiding, and that’s troublesome to me. 
Each time I hear that things are getting better . . . And I have 
constituents that call, and we hear about the issues that we 
brought to the legislature from people who are actually victims 
of waiting lists, bed shortages. We’ve talked about folks riding 
around in ambulances for hours because of lack of beds in the 
system. I guess that’s really troublesome for me. 
 
As a matter of fact I don’t know whether the member from 
Estevan and I . . . and perhaps others that are getting up to my 
age range have the same fear I have . . . because the people that 
contact me that need to wait lengthy waits for surgery are told 
that it’s too bad. We’d get you in sooner, but we just don’t have 
the beds. We don’t have the wherewithal. We don’t have the 
means, and we’ll have to prescribe you with medication. The 
doctors out there are doing the best they can. 
 
We’ve had the example that I brought to your attention with the 
situation from Yorkton. That was something reported by a 
doctor that actually happened, Mr. Minister. You can’t deny 
that. And I hope -- and I would like your sincere commitment 
here tonight -- that this doctor will no way, shape or form be 
taken to any kind of task for having spoken out and saying what 
he did about, I did everything I could. The condition of this 



1846 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 1998 

patient was such that he required immediate treatment. And yet 
it was not available. That’s the scary part. 
 
And I’d like to think that, yes, we are . . . Perhaps the whole 
country is moving in the direction that we need to move. 
However not unlike projects that need to be well thought out, 
was there perhaps a haste in all of this? And haste makes waste. 
And perhaps everything happened too quickly: the whole 
shutting down of all the facilities and the closure of hospital 
beds and the reduction of services, the process by going to 
district health boards and wellness models and wellness 
programs and home care. 
 
Perhaps that is a way of the future with all our technology. 
However it was perhaps done too rapidly, too quickly. And now 
there are a lot of people caught in the middle that are 
experiencing the brunt of these massive cuts and this rapid 
movement towards something that may perhaps be within 
reach. 
 
But folks are sort of caught in the middle of all this now. When 
I read things like “Health cuts hurting staff,” that’s pretty 
frightening. When you hear it from the district health board, 
when you hear it from the front-line workers and the doctors 
and the nurses. I guess that’s what boggles my mind is nobody 
else seems to care. I don’t know. Don’t the people in the district 
health boards hear that? Do not the people in your department 
hear that, Mr. Minister? Are we the only ones that are reading 
this? Is the public seeing this, experiencing this, and reading 
this but not the people that are under your umbrella? I don’t 
understand this. 
 
It’s hard, the head of obstetrics and gynecology for the Regina 
district continued, you can sustain extraordinary work for a 
short term but there’s no indication this is ever going to end. 
Nurses, doctors, X-ray technicians, nursing assistants — they’re 
all feeling the brunt of the cuts, and health care workers are 
burning out with no end in sight to the long hours and bed 
shortages. 
 
I realize and appreciate that once government makes a 
commitment to a project, they would find it devastating 
personally — perhaps for the sake of arrogance — to at some 
point realize that, you know something, perhaps we did make a 
mistake. Perhaps we have gone too far too fast and we need to 
slow down. Perhaps we need to take a look at this project again 
and back up a bit. Maybe we should sustain, retain some of 
these precious health care facilities that we have without 
destroying them, without tearing them down and rebuilding 
them. Let’s just maintain that for a little while further until we 
get caught up to these lengthy waiting-lists, to these burnt out 
front-line health care workers. 
 
Mr. Minister, it’s not only . . . And I’m talking about the whole 
health care system throughout the province, because whatever 
shortages exist here in the cities, not only in this city but in 
Saskatoon, impacts and affects the precious hospital beds and 
the care facilities in our rural communities. 
 
And some of the rural communities with some of the decent 
health care facilities that they do have and are able to sustain, 
are concerned, are fearing that they will lose those facilities 
because people . . . there’s an exodus of folks that are unable to 

access the specialized type of treatments that they need . . . 
specialized care. 
 
So where do they go? They go to the cities. So guess what those 
health districts are told. Well there’s more people going out of 
here. You know you’re not using the facilities to the extent that 
you should be. But how can you use it if you don’t have the 
proper kind of services there. 
 
“Shortage of doctors growing.” And these are all recent and 
they continue. This is not something that just started, just 
happened; this has been going on for the last three, four years. It 
seems to be accelerating; it’s not decreasing; that’s the 
troublesome thing. If it was something that started six months 
ago and people could see some improvement, some light at the 
end of the tunnel, 6,600 waiting list or 6,000 — whatever. It’s 
far too great. If they could see it three months ago, four months 
ago when it was brought to people’s attention that they cared 
and something was done about it and then you, Mr. Minister, 
could get up and say: I’m pleased to announce in this House 
that our waiting list for care facilities, for operations, for 
surgeries, in our hospitals is down to 2,200. That would be 
fantastic, but nobody sees any relief. It continues. 
 
A recent study by the Association of Canadian Medical 
Colleges published in the Canadian Medical Association 
Journal tabulated the total number of 1989 graduates from each 
medical school across Canada in 1966 — out of 1,722 students 
that were tracked to see in which province they ended up 
practicing, British Columbia and Ontario were the only 
provinces that gained in numbers of those students. Nearly 200 
others flocked to jobs in United States. 
 
We talked about that earlier in the House during different 
debates, the number of doctors from this province that exit it, 
that could hardly wait to get out of here when they saw all these 
rapid transitions taking place to our wellness models and our 
health care models. Alberta and Quebec had moderate losses of 
students and most of Atlantic Canada had losses between 20 
and 50 per cent. Saskatchewan clearly had the greatest problems 
retaining its medical students that year. Of 62 medical grads at 
the University of Saskatchewan in 1980, only 17 were still 
practicing in the province seven years later. Still the net loss of 
physicians to Saskatchewan was a staggering 60 per cent. Why 
is that? 
 
We have to start looking at answers to questions like that. And I 
know you’re going to tell me that yes, there have been some 
negotiations with doctors, some incentives, some bursaries, but 
is that working? Is money the only thing? Is that what we’re 
talking about? Is the bottom line here dollars and cents instead 
of caring about people and people’s needs? The two can 
perhaps be tied in, because it seems that it’s dollars and cents 
that we’re concerned about rather than adequate, proper health 
care. 
 
If it was not the almighty dollar that we were worried about, 
Mr. Minister, then, then perhaps you might reconsider. You 
might reconsider this mentally — a health care facility that’s 
served the people of this province well, continues to serve it 
well and may be pulled back on the continuing expansion of the 
Regina General Hospital — a 100-year-old building that you’re 
spending millions of dollars on. And we still don’t see the end 



June 9, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1847 

of that. There’ll be more money needed to be spent so people 
can have access to it by way of parking facilities. The member 
from Rosetown-Biggar wouldn’t even go down there at night, 
Mr. Minister, after dark. I know that and he’s a tough guy. 
 
(2030) 
 
But I guess the point I’m trying to make is can there not be any, 
any sort of compromise if you wish to at least say well perhaps 
maybe instead of spending that additional 20 or $30 million 
over and above, over and above the overruns, the cost overruns, 
let’s back off for a year. Let’s put some of that money aside. 
Let’s put it back into the Plains Health Centre. Let’s put it back 
in there. Let’s try it out for another 6 months, or 10 months or 
12 months. And perhaps by that time, Mr. Minister . . . I used to 
be involved in a process that required a presentation of new 
programs and changes to a variety of people in the province. 
And you know the greatest thing that is frightening to people is 
the rapid change that takes place. If they’re eased into it, if 
they’re eased into it, then they can accept it, it can be better 
explained. 
 
Right now people can’t understand, can’t understand all the 
great things you’re saying about — and the government is 
saying — about the best health care in Canada. They don’t 
understand that when they’re faced with not being able to get in 
to see a specialist; having to go to the Mayo Clinic in order to 
get an MRI; having to go to British Columbia to get surgery; 
having to go to Alberta to get eye surgery, otherwise wait three 
months, four months, six months. People don’t understand that. 
 
And I don’t know if there’s any hope, any hope, that you sir, as 
the Minister of Health, could talk to your cabinet and talk to the 
Premier — who’s heart seems to have turned to total stone 
when it comes to the problems that people are facing in health 
care — and suggest that maybe, just maybe we should wait 
another six months before doing anything to the Plains. 
 
I know, I didn’t mean to get . . . ramble on quite that long 
because I do want to hear some of your responses. And I know 
you’re going to say we’ve still got the greatest health care 
anywhere in Canada. But I’d like you to, but I’d like . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — You have convinced yourself, you’ve convinced 
your colleagues, but you have not convinced the people that are 
caught up in this disastrous health care system — in this new 
wellness model, in this new home care program. Those people 
don’t understand that. You try and convince them of that. 
 
The people that were at those town hall meetings that you and I 
attended, those are the people that you have to convince, and 
they’re not convinced. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I want to say to the 
member opposite that in Saskatchewan and in Canada today 
there has been a tremendous movement in the reform of health 
care. And you only need to look around all over North America, 
and particularly in Canada, and you can see the change. And the 
only people that are stuck and can’t see what’s happening 
across the country are you people over there, are you people 
over there. 

And I say to the member opposite, how is it, how is it that all of 
Canada, how is it that all of Canada can be wrong and you’re 
right? It just doesn’t make any sense, in my opinion. 
 
And I say to the member opposite, when you say to me, Mr. 
Deputy Chair, that this was done in haste, it is six years, seven 
years now that reform has been on its way — it’s been moving 
along in this province. And I say to you and I said a couple of 
moments ago to the member opposite, when you said that we 
have not enough beds in this province, I’ve been saying to you 
in your town hall meetings and to the people of Saskatchewan 
that it’s my view that we have enough hospital beds in this 
province. 
 
And I say to you . . . And recently in a report that’s just come 
out, as you know, Mr. Member, we’ve cut and reduced and seen 
fewer reductions in beds in this province than anywhere else in 
Canada. Everybody else is taking acute care beds out of their 
system at a higher percentage than we are, and you stand up in 
the House and say you shouldn’t be taking any beds out again. 
And I say to you it’s happening across the country. 
 
All that we’ve done in Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Chair, is that 
we’ve ensured that we do that in a fashion that doesn’t disrupt 
the health care system and protects the communities to ensure 
that they’ve got good acute care services. That’s what we do. 
 
And I say to the member opposite, today in Saskatchewan we 
have services that we’ve never had before — never had before. 
We have enhanced home care; we have first responders in the 
tune of 1,500 today that we didn’t have in the province before. 
We have enriched ambulatory services and emergency services 
across the province, all over the place. 
 
And I say to the member opposite, a while ago I said to you that 
we have in Saskatchewan now a MRI. Seven years ago in this 
province we never had one. Soon we are going to have two 
MRIs in this province, which was all part of health care reform. 
 
We didn’t have CT scanners in some of the communities 
outside of Regina and Saskatoon. Today we have more of those 
in this province. 
 
And we’re doing chemotherapy in small communities so 
patients don’t have to leave their homes and they can have it 
done in their own community. We talked about expanding our 
renal dialysis program. 
 
There are a whole host of programs today that we’re developing 
across the province to enrich and enhance the opportunities for 
people to get health care services closer to home, in their own 
communities. 
 
And the only people that don’t see that in this province are, by 
and large, you people. You don’t have it yet, and you can’t see 
it anywhere. And so I say to the member opposite, into the 
future our initiative will be to continue to grow that. 
 
And I just want to make a couple of comments in closing to the 
member opposite. You say that all over the place people are 
opposed to reform. And I say to you I have a copy of a health 
inside, an “Inside Health” here that comes from a Kyle resident. 
And this is their brochure that they put out on a regular basis. 



1848 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 1998 

And this is a nurse who’s speaking here, and this is what she 
says — Ms. Lowe is her name — and this is what Ms. Lowe 
recalls as a registered nurse. Lowe herself says that she fought 
the changes tooth and nail, but has since changed her mind. 
“People in Kyle and area are better off today. We’re offering a 
lot more services and helping more people in our community 
than we ever did,” is what Ms. Lowe says. 
 
And I say to the member opposite, there are many stories like 
that. We have a physician here that was from Moose Jaw, and 
it’s a long, long dissertation of what he says. And I’ll only say 
to you, in an interview that he did just recently from when he 
was in the United States, and he says, the doctor from Moose 
Jaw says, that he has returned — returned back to Moose Jaw 
after having been in the United states for a couple of years. 
Why? Why? Because . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . It isn’t Dr. 
Lewis Draper. I mean I think he writes for you; he doesn’t write 
for us. And I say to the member opposite, here is an individual, 
here is an individual like others who have gone to the U.S., 
returned to Saskatchewan, is practising medicine in the 
province. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Member, that you need to get on the 
program, because the program in Canada is that we’re going to 
have fewer hospital beds, more community-based services, 
more involvement by communities in making decisions, and 
you need to appreciate that and understand it and try to be a part 
of it. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I found the 
remarks by the Health minister most interesting when he’s 
telling others to get on the program. Well I’ll tell you there are 
thousands and tens of thousands of people in this province that 
are afraid to get on your program. And why? 
 
We take a look at the Leader-Post on April 4. I don’t remember 
what problem you were in that day, but obviously you had to 
figure out some way of getting out of a bed crisis. And you’re 
quoted in here in the paper as saying, and one way to deal — 
well that’s a quote so, “And one way Serby plans to deal with 
that is by discharging some people from hospital sooner.” 
 
Is that part of the program, Mr. Minister, by booting people out 
of the hospitals sooner, before they’re ready to go? And how 
many times have you run into a problem by doing just that. 
 
We raised the case not too many days ago about a lady who was 
booted out of the hospital too soon and had a stroke a few hours 
after she got home. Is that part of the program? Because if it is, 
the people of this province aren’t buying into your program . . . 
So perhaps you could tell us it’s axed the program. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I’ve said to the member 
on many occasions that the decision about who stays in 
hospitals, when they come, and when they leave the hospital 
facilities, those decisions are made by physicians; they’ve 
always been made by physicians; they’ll continue to be made 
by physicians. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — But, Mr. Minister, they’re only made by 
physicians when in fact they have to prioritize the sick that are 
coming into their facility. And if there are not enough beds and 
if there are not enough staff, then in fact it’s not their decision. 

It’s one that really was created by your government, was it not? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I’ve always said in this 
House and to the people of Saskatchewan, say to the member 
again, that when people arrive at medical care centres for 
treatment, the physicians will make those decisions. If in fact 
there’s a concern about the level of service that individuals 
have, the physician will ensure that the appropriate facilities 
will be . . . well the appropriate services are provided for them 
if it’s a serious medical treatment. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Minister, with that in mind, what 
you’re saying then, how do you explain the fellow, the doctor 
from Yorkton who you just recently I guess passed his name on 
to, what, college of physicians and surgeons to have the case 
reviewed? 
 
Now this doctor has stated that I think on more than one 
occasion he could not get a bed here in Regina, and the 
specialist that he was phoning could not free up a bed. And so 
how can you say it’s either of those doctors’ decision what 
happens to that patient. If there’s no beds, there’s no beds, and 
people are not living to see the end of that day. Now how do 
you dispute that? The letter was sent to you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chair, I’ve said to the 
member opposite and to the people of Saskatchewan that it was 
raised in this House by your party, by the member from 
Melville that somebody has lost his life. And the system 
apparently, as you put it, has failed them. And what I’ve done is 
acted on the responsibilities that I have as the Minister of 
Health. And you know what that position has been, and that 
process is currently under way. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — You see, Mr. Minister, we have went I 
don’t know how many days this session and how many times 
we’ve raised cases, people that couldn’t get beds, people that 
are on waiting-lists, and you’re still saying it’s up to the 
medical staff. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, you yourself, you know that’s not correct. 
The fact of the matter is our system — in the way that your 
government has designed it — does not meet the needs of 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I’ll give you a case right here. This is a lady from Shaunavon, 
Eileen Justason. On February 11, she had back surgery at the 
Plains; re-injured her back two weeks later. She went back to 
her doctor and the doctor booked her for a CAT (computerized 
axial tomography) scan and was told it would take about four to 
six weeks. After she went past that period of time, hadn’t heard 
anything, she was told it would be another further six months. 
So the doctor phoned Medicine Hat and she was able to get in 
for the CAT scan in less than one month. 
 
So how then can you say this is a decision of the doctors? 
Obviously there aren’t beds. The equipment that’s used to do 
the tests is not there. How do you explain it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, if the member would mind 
sending me that piece of information, we’ll pursue it and have a 
discussion with the individual and see what we might be able to 
do into the future to assist her with her future treatments, if 



June 9, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1849 

that’s what the member would like to do. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well, Mr. Minister, I appreciate that, but 
as you should have heard me tell you, this was taken care of in 
Medicine Hat because it couldn’t . . . it wasn’t taken care of 
here in Saskatchewan. But I appreciate the offer. 
 
And I’ll raise with you later the woman’s . . . I’ll give you her 
phone number and perhaps you could or one of your staff could 
explain to her what went wrong. 
 
Another case that I raised recently, Mr. Minister, and you in this 
House said that you would check into this, Mr. Donald Jones. 
Mr. Jones went through about a nine-hour ambulance ride from 
the time of his injury till the time that he was actually admitted 
into a hospital. Shipped all over south-west Saskatchewan. I 
think it was started in Coronach to, you know, on the way to 
Regina, and over to Weyburn, and back to Bengough, then to 
Assiniboia, on route to Regina once or twice I think, if I recall, 
in that process. 
 
And you made the statement that you would get back to us as to 
what went wrong. Have you discovered what went wrong? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Deputy Chair, what I’ve said to the 
member is this, is that we appreciate the information coming to 
us. We acknowledge that there was a mistake made in the 
process here. We have brought some information currently on 
what’s happening with this case. We’ve met with the family. 
We’re not completed our work yet, but as soon as we have 
completed that we’ll provide that information to Mr. Jones, and 
suggest to him that he might share the detail of that information 
with you. Only because of ensuring that we protect the 
confidentiality, we’ll need to respond directly to Mr. Jones and 
suggest to him that it was raised by you and he can then share 
that information with you. 
 
We hope to have that done in fairly short order. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Minister, not so long ago you had 
made some statements about making use of other health care 
facilities in the province. And I think the example . . . and I’m 
not sure who first raised it. But you know, specialists could go 
from Saskatoon out and use the operating theatres at Humboldt, 
make use of those facilities and operating theatres. 
 
Could you perhaps expand on that as far as your point of view 
as to how this creates any efficiencies in the system? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chair, I think what I’ve 
said and continue to stand by is that if there are opportunities 
for itinerant surgeons to travel outside of the larger tertiary 
centres -- Saskatoon and Regina -- make their way to larger 
community hospitals like a Humboldt or a Melfort or a Tisdale, 
of which in large proportion is happening today, or regional 
centres across the province, that will do two things. If they can 
provide those surgical services closer to home and keep people 
in their communities so that they don’t have to go to the larger 
tertiary centres, it relieves some of the pressures that they have 
there. 
 
So I’m supporting that kind of a concept and would like to see 
us enhance that in a broader fashion with greater regional 

participation. And that’s part of the strategy that we’ve been 
working on. I know that in the questions that I was asked by the 
Saskatchewan Party, they also raised the same issues with me 
and to a large degree support that process, which I expect you 
do too. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well, Mr. Minister, not to a large degree 
but entirely the Tory Party supported you on that point of view. 
But that does not mean at all that it’s accepted by the people of 
this province. 
 
The fact of the matter is . . . and we’ll use the Humboldt or the 
Yorktons as the example. You’ve got people going from -- say 
-- Humboldt to Saskatoon to those tertiary centres to have their 
health care needs met. And you’re saying it’s just as efficient to 
go the other way? What are these people passing on the 
highway? 
 
Where is the efficiency, Mr. Minister, in having . . . Think 
about it. Specialists in Saskatoon, when they’re booking their 
surgeries, how many are they booking? Four, five, six in a 
block so that they can actually perform a number of surgeries 
that day. So what’s going to happen if they’re going out to 
Humboldt? Do you think they’re still going to have four, five, 
six surgeries booked in a block? 
 
And what about the operating room technicians, the support 
staff? Can you assure us that that support staff is as well trained 
in Humboldt or any of those other communities for whatever 
kinds of operations that they’re going to be facing? And do they 
have, do they have the same equipment as those people in 
Saskatoon? 
 
(2045) 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chair, the comment that 
I make and continue to support is that if you can get itinerant 
surgeons to come from the tertiary centres to regionals and/or 
large community hospitals, keep people in their own 
communities, provide those services closer to home and so that 
they don’t to travel. And certainly you can’t be opposed to that 
where you would have people from local communities who 
would be served by itinerant surgeons who would come to their 
communities and provide those services all across 
Saskatchewan in the larger communities, in the regionals. I 
can’t believe you’d be opposed to that process. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Minister, what you’re saying then is 
it’s fine and it’s a good use of our specialist’s time when they’re 
in such short supply in this province to have them on the road 
for one or two hours in one direction. Do one operation, maybe 
two operations, and then one or two hours back. That would be 
efficient use of a specialist’s time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Deputy Chair, the surgeries are done 
over blocks of time, and so today if you took the time and went 
to communities like Melfort, you’d find two or three specialists 
that are practising in that community that come there and stay 
for a couple of days, do a block of surgery with a number of 
individuals who live there. Go to Tisdale; they do the same 
thing. 
 
We were there for the opening of the dialysis just a couple of 



1850 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 1998 

days ago. The ENT (ear, nose, and throat) guy is there. He stays 
overnight for a couple of days, does a block of surgery. People 
from Tisdale and the northern part of that communities don’t 
have to travel to Saskatoon. It’s a wonderful piece of service 
that’s being done today in a variety of locations across the 
province, and all I say is that we want to advance and enrich 
that practice. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — You see, Mr. Minister, you, and definitely 
the Premier of this province, in selling health care reform, made 
sure that everyone felt that in this province if they needed these 
surgeries they were going to have state-of-the-art everything. If 
they would just come into the Reginas and the Saskatoons, that 
things would be the best that they could be. 
 
And now you’re saying well no; our plan is somewhat changing 
now. In fact we don’t need to use these larger centres with the 
equipment that they have. So what are you going to do -- say -- 
if there’s a problem in a surgery where perhaps they need a 
CAT scan or an MRI, you know, and you’ve shipped not only 
the patient but the specialist out to a place like — you know, 
pick a community out there in rural Saskatchewan. You then 
ship the whole crew into Saskatoon to use the equipment and 
the professionals that run it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Deputy Chair, you and I both know 
that for highly-specialized surgeries today or diagnostic testing, 
they’ll continue to be done in the larger tertiary centres. 
Nobody’s advocating against that. In fact we promote that, and 
we’re going to continue to advance the best technical equipment 
in the larger tertiary centres into the future. 
 
But we want to see some other advances like you now have a 
CT in Prince Albert which has just opened this past winter. We 
now have renal dialysis sites across the province. Now we’re 
going to have . . . and we have the chemotherapy sites across 
the province, and we’re going to expand if we can as we work 
with the district health boards, SAHO, the Saskatchewan 
Medical Association, to promote the practice of physicians in 
rural Saskatchewan but where they might be able to do that in a 
safe and equitable fashion. 
 
Clearly you’re not going to be moving MRIs out all over rural 
Saskatchewan. You’re not going to be taking the highly 
diagnostic services all over Saskatchewan. You’re not going to 
have a cancer clinic in every location and every regional centre 
in the province. You’re going to have those in locations where 
the public will come to and are continuing to do that. And we’ll 
promote that. 
 
But from the other broader perspective, we’ll want to ensure 
that people have services closer to home, and we'll be 
promoting and encouraging the practice of some specialties and 
some services in areas of the province where they can meet the 
need of those individuals. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well, Mr. Minister, then what do you say 
to people like Hope Sawin, who I’ve raised her case here in the 
legislature, where she laid in a hospital in rural Saskatchewan 
out in the Wood River constituency. She’s from Coronach . . . 
laid for about six, seven days with a broken hip. You know, I 
think really Hope Sawin could have used the beds here in 
Regina, so she could have had her problems taken care of 

immediately. I mean, don’t talk about the rebuilding you’re 
going to start to do now in rural Saskatchewan after all the 
tearing down and people are laying out there for six, seven days 
with broken hips. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well I just want to say to the member that 
from time to time people wait for surgical procedures. From 
time to time they wait in Regina in observation rooms, and 
those decisions are made by physicians because there needs to 
be an opportunity to observe the level or the state of the 
individual before they perform a particular procedure. 
 
It’s not unusual for people to wait for some of that. And I would 
suggest to you that will continue to be the practice, irrespective 
of where they are in rural Saskatchewan or here in the tertiary 
centres. People will continue to wait for some of their 
procedures for a variety of different reasons. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Minister, do you have an update on 
the number of people on waiting-lists here in Saskatchewan. I 
know it was at one point some 6,600. Can you give us some 
indication what it’s at today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I answered that 
question earlier to one of your colleagues. We don’t have a 
scientific accounting of the number of people today who are 
waiting for surgeries or procedures across the province. 
 
And we make the commitment, as I have on several occasions, 
that we’re going to be doing a full and broad examination on 
that with our partners on the prairie provinces and British 
Columbia because they find themselves in the same situation as 
all of us do . . . is that we don’t have an appropriate, full 
accounting of what those waiting-lists are across the province or 
western Canada. And so that process we’re undertaking today 
and hope to achieve that over the next several months. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Minister, it sounds like the same thing 
happened, I guess, with the senior care, long-term care. But in 
fact you’ve made changes where people can’t get a sense of 
what the waiting lists are at today because you say you don’t 
have waiting lists. And yet we talk to people out there in the 
medical field that say, you bet there’s waiting lists; you’re just 
not sharing them. I’ll assume that’s happening again now. 
 
Could you give us, Mr. Minister, an update as to the dollar 
value and the amount — perhaps you have it broken down — 
which surgeries are performed out of province and where? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Deputy Chair, we can provide that 
information for the member. We have that, and we’ll send it to 
you. We don’t have that with us currently, but we’ll make sure 
that the member has that information. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. On the hospitals 
in the city, now there was, as I recall, your project ’98 cost 
estimate already had an overrun of some $25 million more than 
first projected. I believe it was started out at I think some 83 
million, and it’s now up to $108 million to renovate the 
hospitals. 
 
Can you tell us if that’s still on track? Now the previous Health 
minister -- I think it was 33 times in one scrum -- said it was on 



June 9, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1851 

time and on budget. Are you prepared to say that and mean it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Deputy Chair, you’ve heard me on a 
number of occasions at the rallies across the province where 
I’ve said to you that the $83 million that we’ve committed for 
the conversion of the two facilities — the General and the 
Pasqua — is exactly where we said it would be. We’ve made a 
commitment. 
 
I think now we’ve paid out about 78 million of that, of the 83 
that was committed to it. We’ve also included in the upgrade of 
the two facilities, in the Pasqua the $8.8 million for the 
enhancement of the Allan Blair cancer clinic. And I think 
there’s $2.2 million that we’ve committed to the site 
preparation for the MRI. 
 
And so to date I think that number runs to right around $94 
million of which a portion of that has already been paid out. 
And there will be continued work in progress as the district 
health board develops its overall plan and strategy. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Minister, it sounds like perhaps we’re 
already not on budget or on time because some of the estimates 
that you were just giving to me aren’t on this sheet that I have 
from the Regina Health District. You’re saying the $83 million 
is still on track. But the Regina Health District’s own document, 
which you’ve had for -- oh -- November 13, 1996 — is already 
$25 million out. And the things that you mentioned aren’t even 
on the list, so perhaps we’re more than 25 million out. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chair, I think that the 
. . . and I don’t have a copy of the information that the 
member’s reading from, but what I would say to the member is 
that there’s likely things included in the overall capital project 
that are work in progress, and additional project investments 
that they’re going to make in terms of enhancing their broad 
based needs for both their physical needs within the district and 
improving some fire and safety issues within the development 
of the project. 
 
So over a period of time that’s beyond the $83 million that we 
committed. There likely are additional investments. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — So obviously you’re not aware of where 
their spending is right now. You admit to that. But would you 
be 25 to $30 million out? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well I want to say to the member opposite, 
Mr. Deputy Chair, that if you want to talk about the project that 
you started out talking about, which is the investment in the 
consolidation of the two facilities, $83 million, and the addition 
of enhancements to the Pasqua for the Allan Blair centre and 
the MRI preparation, we say to you that our schedule is as we 
have told you on many occasions. 
 
As a district health board prepares its strategy and its planning 
for enhanced services for Regina, they’re providing those 
capital projects to us for the future. And we’re examining them 
and working closely with them. And over the next couple of 
years, we’ll be developing or assisting them in the developing 
of their plans to make those investments for what the overall 
health care needs of Regina and southern Saskatchewan will be. 
 

Mr. McPherson: — Well, Mr. Minister, you know you’re a 
year and a half out from this district budget document. And 
perhaps really that’s where some of your problem lies, is that 
you don’t have a good handle on what’s happening in Regina or 
perhaps Saskatoon. That’s why, when we raise day after day in 
this House health concerns of people that come to our caucus to 
ask that we raise them publicly so that they can be dealt with, I 
don’t doubt for a moment that you genuinely don’t understand 
how serious the situation is out there. Especially in one 
document, you’re out 30 million bucks. 
 
Maybe it’s time you got a handle on the Regina Health District. 
That’s your problem. You can take a look at that document and 
then later if you’d like to comment on your own board’s 
document. We can get into it again. 
 
Mr. Minister, now I know we’ve raised waiting summer 
slow-downs with the hospitals. And of course the response has 
always been one of, well it happens every, I guess, Christmas 
holiday, Easter, and summer. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, and I don’t want to belabour this because we 
have raised it so many times in the House. Do you think it’s fair 
when you have so many thousands on the waiting-list waiting 
for elective surgery . . . and I know, I know, Mr. Minister, that 
you have those numbers because we get them from the districts. 
I can tell you. In fact I have the document here, and you’ve seen 
these yourself: 370-day wait for elective surgery in Saskatoon. I 
know you have those numbers. 
 
(2100) 
 
But do you think this is fair to the people in this province that 
you would shut down -- what? — some 80 beds, 79 beds, 
during the summer months? And I know your answer, Mr. 
Minister, is one that, well, the medical staff want their holidays, 
and on and on. You’ve said that several times. 
 
But is it fair to the people, the 6,600 or the 7,000 on 
waiting-lists in this province, that you would have them wait 
that many months for their health care needs to be met? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chair, I’ve said to the 
member opposite or to the House or to the previous questioner 
about -- some other member -- about what we’re doing in the 
province today. We’re doing far more procedures. And if your 
concern is about surgical procedures in the province, we’re 
doing far more out-patient surgeries today than we have in the 
history of this province. 
 
We’re doing almost the same or slightly more surgeries 
in-patient today than we did in the past. We have the same 
number of docs by and large in the province today than we had 
prior to reform within a couple . . . within a handful of 
difference in that period of time. 
 
And I say to the member opposite that when you asked the 
question about why it is that we have slow-downs during 
periods of time during the year, Christmas, Easter, holidays, this 
is historical. As I’ve said many times over, not only relevant to 
Saskatchewan, but it’s relevant to all of Canada and North 
America. 
 



1852 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 1998 

What happens here is that the system slows down during those 
periods of time. And it’s done to provide, as we’re told and 
you’re told and the member previously who asked me this 
question are told, it’s to provide opportunities for people to take 
those vacation breaks: physicians, nursing staff. And in many 
cases it’s patients, where they make a decision that they don’t 
want to have their surgical procedures occur during the summer 
months. 
 
And so it’s a variety of reasons for why that happens, and it’s 
been consistent historically in this province, in this country. 
And I say to the member it will continue to be that into the 
future. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — All right, Mr. Minister. From the 
Saskatoon District Health Board we have some numbers here. 
You’re saying even the patients want the summer off, that 
they’re not so interested in getting their surgery. But if I take a 
look at some of these, I don’t know that these people would 
agree. 
 
For general surgery, elective, the average days to wait is 370. 
Well elective surgery, I guess if you want to make the statement 
on behalf of these people that they would just as soon wait, fine. 
What about the urgent, Mr. Minister? We have a 30-day wait 
for general surgery. For urgent surgery? In fact when I look at 
each and every one of the services provided in the hospitals, 
they’re all around the 30 to 34. Do you think those urgent cases 
are people that find it acceptable to take the summer off? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well some of the numbers that I’ve seen, 
Mr. Member, is that when you look at the elective surgeries . . . 
You used the waiting period, 365 days, and dependent on the 
specialists. So between specialists you see the variation that 
runs anywhere — and I think it might be in the document 
you’re looking at — that varies anywhere from 28 days to 365 
days. So there’s a large disparity here in terms of what the 
waiting times are, and it really depends on the specialist. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair, and good 
evening to the minister and his officials. 
 
I have a few questions here this evening concerning where your 
government may be at in terms of responding to the over 8,000 
communications that the Liberal opposition received 
concerning the closure of the Plains hospital. Those 
8,000-and-some-odd communications representing probably a 
conservative guess — I shouldn’t use that word; I’ve been 
caught using it before — but conservative guess of at least 
16,000, probably more likely 20,000 individuals, but certainly 
8,000 households that communicated with us on the very topic. 
 
I know at the Plains rally in front of the legislature on May 29, 
the minister and his officials were good enough to receive those 
on behalf of the Premier. It was unfortunate the Premier didn’t 
make himself available at the time to receive those directly. Do 
I have the assurances of the minister that those communications 
have been passed on to the Premier’s office because after all 
they were all individually and directly addressed to the Premier 
on the very topic of the Plains hospital closure? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Deputy Chair, if the question was, did 
I receive them, I was there when we took them in I believe. So 

if the question is, did I receive them, I was there when we 
carried them into the Assembly. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Deputy Chair, the question was: did the 
minister pass these communications on to the gentlemen sitting 
to his right? Did you pass them on to the Premier’s office, and 
can you just confirm that or not? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Deputy Chair, my understanding was 
that those petitions were for me; that’s in the spirit in which I 
received them, that they were directed to me, and so I received 
them and took them into the building with my staff and 
certainly have communicated with the Premier that in fact, we 
received the petitions. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I would have hoped that 
the minister and his staff might have given a little bit more 
consideration to the communications that he received. After all, 
I pointed out that some 1,500-odd letters had an attachment 
directly to the Premier from myself requesting individual 
responses on the issue, and, as well, there was a number of 
additional concerns that a lot of my constituents expressed. 
They wanted the Premier to respond individually to those. So I 
guess we’re to take it that they’re still sitting in your office as 
we speak. Could I have your commitment to transfer them over 
to the Premier’s office yet this evening? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chair, I’ll be sure that 
the communication that you share with me tonight is complete 
in its fullest. I don’t know what stage it’s at today. I don’t know 
what stage it’s at. It may already be at the Premier’s office. I 
can’t say that fully, but I’ll ensure that that process continues. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chair, we’ve went back 
and forth with the minister and the government on the issue of 
deficits in the health care districts and how to address the 
chronic underfunding that this government forces on health care 
in this province. And certainly I was interested in, well, the 
Minister of Finance in his responses when Finance estimates 
were up last night. Where it was a somewhat similar response to 
what he had given as the member from Wood River referred to 
earlier on the issue of being on time and on budget with respect 
to the Plains or the amalgamation of hospitals in Regina. We 
heard a lot similar rhetoric where the finances of the province 
were on target, you know the budget’s balanced, and all of this. 
 
Now we saw just in this past fiscal year where the government 
did take the opportunity to spend a lot of additional monies 
under special warrant where required. I know the Tories took 
exception to the additional spending attributed or provided to 
health care. There is some — I believe, and correct me if I’m 
wrong — is there an additional 30-million-some-odd dollars 
under special warrant last year? It didn’t, it didn’t, as we 
pointed out at the time, it didn’t go far enough in terms of trying 
to even erase the deficits that had been rung up in terms of the 
health districts at that point in time. But certainly, we didn’t 
take any fault with the government about the additional 
spending in health care. 
 
What do you intend to do, given that the Finance minister is 
saying everything is all coming up roses. We’re on target? Are 
you prepared to go the extra distance and relate to the rest of 
your cabinet colleagues that if need be there should be some 



June 9, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1853 

additional money spent in health care to help meet these . . . 
what we’ve already pointed out are some mounting deficits 
again within the health districts? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I think what I want to say to the member 
opposite, that we know that we’ve made a huge investment this 
year in health in this province, as the member knows. And 
we’ve said on many occasions, and I’ve said on many 
occasions, that as the district health boards continue to prepare 
their strategies, as they continue to prepare their plans and 
redesign delivery of a system across the province, we’ll be there 
to assist them in that process in whichever way that we can. 
And from time to time we provided transitional funding to 
districts to help them through those periods of time, and we 
continue to make that commitment. 
 
But I want to say to the member opposite that there will be 
change in the health care system all the time — it’s not stagnant 
— and you’ll see different scenarios occurring in various 
different districts across the province, where you’re going to see 
some growth in some areas, you’re going to see some 
reductions. And that will change from one year to the next and 
that will be reflected in the district health plans. And the 
funding will also reflect exactly the same kind of . . . it will 
reflect the same kind of a change. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Deputy Chair, during this session the 
Liberal opposition introduced a Bill, The Tommy Douglas 
Memorial Hospital Bill. I’d be curious to hear what the 
minister’s comments might be with respect to that Bill. Did he 
see some merit in a Bill of that nature? 
 
I understand, you know, that Mr. Douglas’s daughter will be in 
the province shortly. I wonder if you might take it upon 
yourself to ask Mr. Douglas’s daughter what her opinion would 
have been . . . 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order, order. Order, order. Order, order. 
Order. Understandably this question has generated some 
feelings on members of both sides of the legislature. However, 
for the . . . we are in Health estimates, the hon. member for 
Thunder Creek has the floor. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Deputy 
Chair, to the minister, you know what our position is on the 
Plains hospital. I think we’ve made that perfectly clear. 
 
We’ve taken the concerns of some 8,000-odd individual 
responses to our office alone, well over 100,000 people’s names 
on petitions in this province concerning the issue. And you’ve 
been a witness too because, credit to you, you’ve attended our 
meetings across the province, and some 8,000-and-some odd, or 
several thousand anyway, I’m sorry, odd people that have 
attended these meetings as well. 
 
We don’t have to tell you, in terms of the politics of the issue, 
what a slippery slope you’ve embarked upon when you’ve stuck 
to your guns against what is all the common sense that can be 
provided to you with respect to this issue. It won’t be that far 
off until you will have that message loud and clear, I’m sure. 
 
We’ve asked for you to put a moratorium on the closure of this 
Plains hospital until after the next provincial election. All 

indications are from your side that you’re not giving any active 
consideration to that. We would just urge you for your own, for 
your own sakes that you should be considering the merits of 
that. 
 
I would maintain to the Minister of Health certainly that there is 
one man opposite sitting amongst him that certainly could, 
certainly could change that decision at the snap of his fingers. 
One man who could do that. 
 
(2115) 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I just can . . . Before I take my place, you’ve 
been warned. It will be the issue that will defeat your 
government. I’ve heard the Premier say before, the Premier said 
before, it’s his own words: that governments defeat themselves. 
And that’s the route that you’re headed on. That’s the route 
you’re headed on and you’re doing it for the wrong reasons. 
You’re doing it for the wrong reasons, because you had the 
opportunity, you had the opportunity to show that you really 
cared about the people of this province, and you didn’t avail of 
yourself of that opportunity. 
 
I’ll give you this much, that all the years that you battled the 
deficits, the debt that the Tories left you in, in this province, I’m 
sure it put a hard edge on your government as a result, but it 
was time to take that hard edge off. It was time to start caring 
about the people of this province. It was time to start putting 
human need ahead of strictly dollars and cents and let yourself 
be guided. But you’re on the wrong route and I would only urge 
you again to reconsider this whole decision. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chair, I appreciate the 
comments that the member opposite has made. He and I have 
been on the same platform for several months. And I want to 
say to the member opposite that we value the decisions that 
district health boards make in this province. We support the 
democratic process in which the district health boards do their 
work. 
 
And I want to say to the member opposite that the decision that 
they made around the Plains Health Centre was really made in 
1995, or 1993. And I say to the member opposite that I 
appreciate the passion in which they have taken this issue on 
and understand the number of issues that Saskatchewan people 
in the South have raised as concerns. But as we’ve said on 
many occasions over, that in southern Saskatchewan today and 
in Regina you’re going to have better health care services at the 
end of the day with the new additions that have gone onto the 
General and to the Pasqua. And the decisions around the Plains 
Health Centre are really behind us, in my opinion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. And good evening, 
Mr. Minister, and welcome to your officials. 
 
Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could give me an update on the 
status of the redevelopment project at St. Elizabeth’s Hospital. I 
heard today that you had in fact met with town council officials 
and . . . 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order. Order. Now committee members 



1854 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 1998 

will come to order on both sides of the House. Now . . . Order. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair, and thank you for 
bringing order to the House. It’s really beneficial when the 
minister can hear me and when I can hear him, so thank you. 
 
Mr. Minister, could you please give me an update on the status 
of the redevelopment project of St. Elizabeth’s Hospital in 
Humboldt? I understand that you have spoken with town 
council and I’m hoping that some decisions were made that 
were favourable to the redevelopment taking place immediately. 
And if you could be so kind as to inform me of that decision. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member from Humboldt, 
just to say to you that there has been an ongoing discussion and 
dialogue right now that’s going on with St. Elizabeth’s, with the 
municipalities that are around the Humboldt area, the town of 
Humboldt themselves, and the physicians, in terms at looking at 
what the broader strategy and the broader plan for the 
community is. 
 
And that work is in progress today, and I can report that we’re 
hoping to see in fairly short order some conclusions to that issue 
that you raise and are familiar with, that we’re also concerned 
about and want to bring it to resolution. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I was, I guess, expecting 
to hear a little bit more than that. But I will accept what you 
have said for now and will be looking forward in the days ahead 
to finding resolution and certainly to doing it as best for not 
only the community, but for the wishes of the people as far as 
what kind of a facility and basically who manages the facility, 
etc., in Humboldt. So I thank you. 
 
Mr. Minister, there’s also another issue that has been brought to 
my attention by some Regina doctors and the issue surrounds 
the need for a DEXA scan which is in fact used for diagnosing 
the extent of osteoporosis in patients. Now it’s my 
understanding from the doctors that this DEXA scan would cost 
about $60,000. It would really serve them very well in not only 
diagnosing but in prescribing the right sort of treatment for 
osteoporosis patients. 
 
And I understand that there is nothing like this in Regina at this 
time, and so it leaves the doctors in a bit of a quandary as to 
detecting to what extent osteoporosis is taking place. And I 
know that they want to be able to prescribe the best treatment 
for their patients. 
 
So is this something that you’re department has been 
considering? Are you looking into getting this kind of 
technology here? If you’d comment on that please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Yes, thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Chair. I’m informed that my deputy minister has been meeting 
with the society and he’s very much involved in these 
discussions. They’re ongoing right now. 
 
My understanding is that the osteoporosis society is going to be 
providing a plan to the department within the next couple of 
weeks and that plan will be looking at some of the issues 
you’ve identified — the type of equipment that is necessary to 
provide this work that you’re talking about, and sort of the 

broader issues as to where this equipment might be located and 
the types of services that we need to build around it in order to 
provide them. So this is where we are today with this 
discussion. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’d like to address you 
with one more question. Last week in the House you and I 
spoke, I believe during question period, about the necessity for 
senior citizens of the province who are physically and mentally 
incapacitated, to have somewhere to go. 
 
With nursing home beds being strapped for cash due to deficits, 
with private care homes costing these people a great deal of 
money, much more than many of them have coming from their 
pensions, I believe the suggestion that you brought forward was 
home care. And we both know that home care does not provide, 
certainly not in all districts, 24-hour care. And so that leaves 
these people in this impossible position of not having the care 
that they really do need. 
 
So do you foresee in the near future, in the next budget or 
whatever, having more funding going for home care so that in 
fact people can have 24-hour service and have it without 
question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Deputy Chair, just to say to the 
member that we’re working very closely, in particular with the 
federal government, is some of where our discussion is going 
today because community-based services are what we want to 
enhance and enrich across the province. And when you ask the 
question about whether or not we intend to enrich or grow home 
care dollars in this province for broadening those services, the 
answer to that is that we are. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
It is a pleasure for me to be able to ask you questions this 
evening, Mr. Minister. And the reason for that is we don’t really 
get very much time to address some issues in question period 
since I’m often limited to two questions at a time. 
 
I wish to begin to make one specific comment before this 
Assembly and anyone who doesn’t have a life and is watching 
television this evening, and that is that I want to express my 
level of appreciation to you for your willingness to listen to me 
any time I have approached you about particular issues, 
especially with regard to individual cases in the province of 
Saskatchewan or where people have required your 
understanding and assistance. 
 
The other thing is to make comment to those who care to know 
that you are a minister, I would say, of compassion. And I think 
people need to know that as well. 
 
Given the interruption that you are experiencing, I’m going to 
repeat that. I think you are a man of conviction and someone of 
true compassion. And I want you to know that that is 
appreciated by those who I have represented to you. 
 
I have different areas of concern this evening. And I shan’t keep 
you long because I quite frankly think that I have some 
understanding of what this session has been like for you. I’m 
just guestimating, of course, but it hasn’t been the most easy of 
times. 



June 9, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1855 

I, as you know, raised questions regarding medical research 
funding on different occasions at the beginning of this session. 
And one of the great concerns that I had and I expressed was 
not only the difficulties that were raised with federal policies 
regarding their funding of medical research, especially through 
the different funding bodies, the different granting agencies, 
and the decision made at the federal level to address the huge 
deficit that the government was facing, and some of the 
decisions they made that had serious implications with regards 
to the funding of medical research throughout the country, but 
the one thing that did make, I think, inherent sense was to get 
some comment from your government and from you as the 
minister about the decisions made by the province of 
Saskatchewan regarding medical research funding. 
 
So I’m on record as far as the concerns that I . . . some of which 
were addressed in the federal budget. But I still remain 
confused by, and perhaps bewildered by, some of the decisions 
of the provincial government with regards to medical research 
funding. 
 
One of things that I raised was to ensure that there would be a 
targeted amount from the Health budget that would go to 
medical research funding. And as you know I, as an example, 
raised tuberculosis. We have a far greater occurrence of 
tuberculosis in Saskatchewan because of our aboriginal 
population and it’s of grave concern. And now of course I’ve 
heard that this will not be funded. It has not received any sort of 
resources and it’s just really confusing how that could be the 
case. 
 
I’m wondering what your plans are as far as your budget is 
concerned with medical research funding. Is there going to be 
some hope in the future that the province of Saskatchewan will 
give a targeted amount? I know that there has been a request 
from the medical research community that Saskatchewan 
consider what other provinces have done, with 1 per cent of the 
budget going to medical research funding. That has not 
happened to date and I’m wanting to know what your plans are, 
if you have any. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I first of all want to thank the member for 
her earlier comments in terms of some of the issues that we’ve 
been able to attend to over the last several months. And I know 
that they brought resolve which I think have been satisfactory in 
a number of fronts, and appreciate your comments very much. 
 
I want to say to the member that I know that you have been a 
strong advocate for growing the research funding in this 
province and have reiterated that on a number of occasions. 
And we share the same view as you do. Currently today we’re 
investing about $4.6 million and we know that that’s not 
enough and would like to do a lot more. And as our resources 
get richer in this province, and as we move along, our intent is 
to make a larger investment in those areas. 
 
And this year, when the research funding was capped to 
Saskatchewan, or when we had our 26 projects that were 
submitted and none were approved, we went to the aid of those 
projects and invested an additional $200,000 to try to make sure 
that they get out of the chute and we could hold them until such 
time as the additional funding was made available if it was. 
 

And as you know, the federal government funding on MRC 
(Medical Research Council) has shrunk to about $266 million 
or from $266 million back up now to $215 million. We’re 
starting to see some growth in that again, and to a large degree 
our research community here really depends on that funding 
into the future. 
 
So our commitment to you will be, and is, that we’re going to 
continue to try and grow that throughout the future. We know 
that the quality of health care in this province depends on good 
medical research. Often you don’t see your rewards 
immediately. You capture them several years down the road 
and in many ways Saskatchewan has been a leader in health 
development, in health strategy, only because they’ve had good 
research in the past. 
 
And so like you, we’re going to continue to work at growing 
our provincial budget, work closely with the federal 
government in ensuring that the MRC funding grows and try to 
provide some kind of avenue of support to the research 
committee. 
 
(2130) 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, with regard 
to this, before I leave this topic, one of the things I had raised 
with your government earlier in this area was if you would 
consider taxation incentives. And the reason I raised that was 
because I actually phoned some companies that had made a 
decision to invest in other provinces. And I asked them, why 
was it that you chose to go to Alberta? Why was it that you 
chose to go to Ontario? 
 
And their explanations were quite explicit and clear, and that 
was because, even though there’s a higher incidence of certain 
disease in our province where they could have access to 
tremendous data collection and an opportunity to exercise their 
particular product with probably more promising results, was 
because of the tax considerations given to them by other 
provinces. 
 
Now I guess what I’m hoping to hear from you tonight is that 
when you are undergoing consideration of the 1999 budget year 
that in fact what you will make as part of that . . . and I know, I 
know that you’re asked to think about and give monies to 
everything, okay. But I most certainly hope that what you will 
do is to examine what the ultimate return will be to this 
province, not only the beneficiaries being those people who 
have a particular illness but the beneficiaries in terms of 
investment, the beneficiaries in terms of those people with 
extraordinary talent who will come here and pay the high 
income tax levels that we have here, and so forth. In other 
words, contributing to our economy. 
 
Would you comment, please, on whether or not you believe that 
there will be a targeted percentage given of the health care 
budget to medical research funding, and whether or not your 
department is examining tax considerations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chair, to the member, 
we’ve had considerable discussions with, as you know, Dr. 
McLennan. And we’ve had those discussions around trying to 
look at how we might be able to grow the research value in the 



1856 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 1998 

province. We have a research council today, are exploring some 
of those very issues that you talked about today in terms of tax 
opportunities. 
 
Now I know that you’ve raised, from time to time, sort of the 
base level of trying to put in 1 percentile of your overall 
expenditure. Those are the kinds of issues that we’re discussing 
today with the Research Council, and are looking at bringing 
about a set of measures that we would have in this province in 
comparison to what’s happening across the country and try to 
make those investments in research. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Chair, Mr. Minister. I’m realistic enough to know that you can’t 
make any specific commitments. I most certainly would be 
heartened by you saying that this is going to be a priority for 
particular sorts of reasons. 
 
You know and I know when we lose certain personnel, when 
this province forfeits some of the most talented people that have 
come here because they have an interest in and a commitment 
to an area of research that could have profound impact on some 
of the people in our province in huge numbers, that we don’t 
simply replace those people directly. I mean this is something 
that is a loss for a long time. 
 
And research, as you’ve stated and well stated, is not something 
that is a short-term investment. That’s part of the problem. I 
know from a political point of view that there aren’t quick kind 
of results from something like this. 
 
And I think it’s about time that perhaps for a change we could 
put some partisanship aside here and truly give the sort of 
support to government that’s necessary in giving a strong 
message to the public about how important this is for us to 
identify those areas in which we can be best, those areas that 
would benefit the people of Saskatchewan most, those areas in 
which we already have expertise and where investment would 
make a profound difference. And we would have short, 
long-term, I think, results that would be so terrific for everyone. 
 
I would most certainly be a part of the message. I would be a 
messenger if that would help in this case. And I just use 
tuberculosis again as an example. What a tremendous 
opportunity we had and what a tragic set of circumstances that 
this research is not funded in the province where it would make 
the greatest difference. 
 
I will give you an opportunity to respond to that before I move 
on. I have no intention of belabouring this. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well I just want to reiterate one more time 
that we recognize like you do the importance of growing the 
research funding in this province. We know that in 
Saskatchewan we’ve been leaders over the years because we’ve 
made the investment in ensuring that we can provide the right 
technology at the right time. 
 
And we want to build centres of excellence that you talk about 
like tuberculosis, MS in this province. Of course we want to do 
more around cancer. We’re leading in many ways. And so your 
comment certainly begs the response that we’ll continue to 
provide the resources that we can as we move along. 

We’ve bridged a couple of programs this year with the 
investment of the $200,000 to try to save some of those projects 
that were in some jeopardy. But the discussions need to 
continue with the federal government, with the MRC, with the 
College of Medicine, to identify which priorities are going to be 
ones that we want to enrich, where in Saskatchewan we can be 
leaders into the future. And that will be our commitment and 
will continue to be our effort. 
 
And we appreciate your comments about your involvement 
whenever it can be taken to help enrich and develop this in a 
better fashion for Saskatchewan people. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much. I have a really 
straightforward and simple question and I just simply don’t 
have the answer for it. I understand in Regina there’s going to 
be another MRI — not another one in Regina but another in the 
province and it will be in Regina. I’m wondering if you can tell 
me when that will occur, if it has in fact occurred, because I 
simply don’t know. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Deputy Chair, our hope is that it will 
be in place early in November or mid-November, and hopefully 
operating by possibly the new year, is what we’re hoping would 
be the case here. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — If I may, I’d simply like to go on record 
for letting people who are observing tonight know the 
significance of that second MRI. 
 
Unless people have participated in some direct way in the need 
for having this kind of diagnostic procedure, I don’t think they 
know, have any comprehension of the incredible stress that this 
puts people under to not simply have access to something that, 
if they would pay directly for it, they could receive within 24 
hours in Calgary or North Dakota. 
 
I most certainly hope that what this will do by having another 
magnetic resonance imaging machine in Saskatchewan, that it 
will alleviate some of this extraordinary pressure on the system 
and some of the great difficulties that people have had as a 
result of not being able to access it. 
 
Earlier today, Mr. Minister, during question period I got 
through only half of my questions, so you are now going to be 
able to answer the rest of them. As you know, I was talking 
earlier today about the treatment of multiple sclerosis in 
Saskatchewan. And given its high, high incidence in our 
province, it makes sense that our provincial government should 
take a particular interest in this disease. 
 
I asked you at that time about the procedure that’s involved in 
approval for treatment. And I do know that we have taken some 
steps that other provinces had taken earlier, in terms of 
treatment for people primarily with relapsing, remitting 
multiple sclerosis. I know that other provinces are still at the 
waiting stage, which is incomprehensible to me, and I want to 
commend the government for taking some action. 
 
However I think there are some burning questions and I think 
they really deserve some response. The one I asked you earlier 
today really came from — and I will give credit where credit’s 
due — some of the neurologists in Saskatchewan who believe 



June 9, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1857 

that the criteria that are used by the panel are as they quote, and 
I will from earlier today, “too arbitrary and utterly ridiculous.” 
 
And what I posed to you was the fact that one of the criteria 
was to — well a criterion — was to have to walk a hundred 
metres unassisted. And I posed a question from them, so what if 
they can only walk 99 metres? It is bewildering to a lot of 
people that the very individuals that they have to treat who are 
the most disabled, who have the greatest challenge in life, who 
need the most hope, are the ones who are receiving virtually 
nothing. 
 
And I really do feel quite strongly about this because people 
have said to me, how can they know? How can they understand, 
this panel that makes these decisions, about me as a person and 
make decisions that can affect my quality of life when they’ve 
never laid eyes upon me? 
 
Now earlier today you indicated that this is a standard 
procedure. If you will, it’s a standard protocol of different 
panels throughout the country. And I can understand where 
there has to be a line drawn in the sand, okay. I do understand 
that. But what I posed to your government — not days, not 
weeks, but months ago — were some potential alternatives. 
And that’s really what I want to ask about now. 
 
There is no other treatment of any other disease with such 
absurd restrictions. Like let’s just get that on the table now. And 
what has happened, not just with your government but other 
governments who have established these kinds of panels, is that 
they have chosen to discriminate against this kind of disease, 
this particular disease, and the patients who have it. 
 
And I guess I feel strongly about this because I think that it flies 
in the face of not only compassion, but it flies in the face of the 
concept of medicare. For the cost of $1.2 million — are you 
ready for this because probably I sound like a broken record 
tonight — for a cost of $1.2 million over four years, you and I 
know that there could be a clinical researcher hired at that 
expenditure which is minuscule compared to the 18 and 
$20,000 per year per person who is on Betaseron and slightly 
less for Copaxone. 
 
For $1.2 million over four years, there could be dollars targeted 
to an individual who would be charged with overseeing people 
not just with relapsing, remitting MS but those with chronic 
progressive MS. Where there are companies who are not only 
willing, able, but champing at the bit to have their new products 
brought forward for trial . . . and these trials would take four 
years. And they would supply these products for nothing to the 
province of Saskatchewan . . . one of which would cater to 
potentially the needs of both of the primary groups of MS — 
relapsing, remitting, and chronic progressive . . . one 
one-thousandth of the dosage of Betaseron, potentially with 
virtually none of the side effects and very, very little of the 
expense, costing people nothing in this province and potentially 
giving great hope and possibilities to people with multiple 
sclerosis. 
 
And I ask you, since you have said to me that you don’t believe 
that your government can simply target monies like that — you 
target money every single day. You target money when you 
create a budget — why, sir, would you not target $1.2 million 

over four years for such unbelievable potential? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well just to comment on a couple of issues 
that you’ve raised with me. For sure, the criteria that’s been 
developed . . . and I say to the member opposite, that criteria 
has been developed by physicians, by professionals across the 
nation, and we’re using that criteria today. 
 
Now part of the issue, of course, is that when the material gets 
submitted to the panel and it comes in different forms, 
sometimes it comes fully prepared, and the panel has a good 
appreciation of the case and of the status of the individual. In 
other cases, the material doesn’t come very well prepared, and 
so the panel struggles to make a decision. And from time to 
time, that’s why you get some of the inequities in the 
decision-making process. 
 
But I say to the member opposite that the plan will continue to 
unfold as we move along, and the panel is often prepared to 
send a case on for yet another examination by another 
neurologist or maybe a general practitioner, or they’ll send the 
information back for broader detail prior to making a decision. 
And I would hope that a physician who does the test on an 
individual, who says that they only walk 99 metres as opposed 
to a hundred, that they might actually say that they’ve walked a 
hundred metres because I’m sure that if you’re within that kind 
of range, physicians are probably giving the benefit of the doubt 
to the patient. And what you’ll see on the form is the hundred, 
and so you need to make the cut-off somewhere. 
 
In respect to your comment and your question that you raised 
about making an investment in a project in Saskatchewan that 
would make us a centre of excellence, I think is one that we’ve 
been exploring from when you raised it with us and one that 
I’ve had a personal discussion with now with the individual 
who we have in mind who might be able to lead some of that 
into the future. So it’s very much on the burner. It’s not 
disappeared, and we appreciate the kind of ability that I think 
this project would be able to provide. 
 
(2145) 
 
It requires a commitment, of course, from a variety of different 
people including the manufacturer of the drug, as you talk 
about, who would be anxious to be involved in the trials. You 
need a community of people who would also be involved in 
that, and so we continue our work and dialogue with the people 
who we think could be instrumental in helping to move that 
ahead, and that’s the commitment that I continue to make. But 
although the wheels look like they’re moving slowly, the 
answer is that they’re still continuing to turn. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Well gosh, you’ve almost made me happy. 
I mean anything that gives me a sense where you’re not giving 
me sort of political babbleness is making me happy. That is a 
positive statement that it’s still in the works. Whatever I can do 
to move that along, I will most certainly assist. 
 
You know, one of the amazing assets that we have in 
Saskatchewan is data, and as you know, knowledge is a 
tremendous asset. And one of the things that . . . I don’t want to 
get into SHIN (Saskatchewan Health Information Network) 
tonight, or we’ll be here for hours, but data is tremendously 



1858 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 1998 

valuable because of the knowledge that it provides. We have 
almost . . . I would say the most invaluable asset on data 
collected on multiple sclerosis that would exist on the North 
American continent. And the person who of course can be given 
credit for that is Dr. Hader. He really has done an admirable job 
in collecting information on people. 
 
And there are groups, some of whom I’ve actually brought to 
this province, who want to access that data to be able to prove 
that the product they have is the answer. And the few things that 
stand in the way I think can be fixed. I would like to be around 
when they’re fixed. I don’t want one more person to go blind, 
one more person to be incapacitated in not being able to walk, 
one more individual not to be able to speak to their loved ones, 
not one more person who has to stop work, not one more 
individual with MS who can no longer care for their children. I 
don’t want any more of this to take place than has to. 
 
And really if there’s anything that should spur on decision 
making in the bureaucracy, it should be knowing that each and 
every day there are people whose lives can be changed by 
thoughtful decision making and efficiency within the system, 
just being expedient about coming up with a plan. Really this is 
about looking at what the objective will be and committing to it. 
 
And I most certainly hope that you will do that because you 
hold far greater power than I think you know. I don’t believe 
that it simply is in your lap, but I do know that if this were a 
priority for you, with your cabinet colleagues and with your 
caucus, that there isn’t a person who sits on the government 
side who wouldn’t say, since we’re the Mecca of multiple 
sclerosis, we should be the best at fixing it. I hope that you will 
do that. 
 
Now I’m not going to keep you any longer because I actually 
made a promise to your Government House Leader. But I do 
have one final question. And this is going to provide I think a 
reassurance to people in the province. I know that there’s a give 
and take in this Assembly which oftentimes leaves human 
frailties and human realities out of the equation. And that is 
everybody is spending so much time playing politics that we 
ignore the important things at hand. 
 
It’s far more simple to simply lay the blame at the feet of other 
people, either past governments or present government in 
Ottawa or whatever. The truth of the matter is that your 
government came to power in 1991. It made a decision then to 
commit itself to what was called the wellness model. 
 
The federal Liberals did not come into power until 1993. 
Decisions made regarding the federal budget and what they 
would do to address the federal deficit were not made until after 
that time. There were at least three to four and potentially five 
years before any dollars were seriously affected in the province 
of Saskatchewan. Fifty-two hospitals were closed before the 
federal government had any influence on what was happening 
potentially. 
 
And I don’t want to say for one moment that the federal 
government’s decisions have not an impact on the kinds of 
decisions that your government has had to make. I completely 
concur with that. I don’t want to diminish the importance of that 
because the decisions that your government has made have 

seriously affected every municipal government in the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
And if anybody has to live each and every day dealing with 
their own personal budget, they know that if they’re in the hole, 
tough decisions have to be made. And the federal government 
had to make those decision regardless of who was in power. 
You had to make the decisions you did regardless of who was 
in power. The municipal governments have to make the 
decision they make. And the people are the only people with 
dollars that provide for all of these different levels of 
government because governments have no money. It’s just the 
people’s money. 
 
One of the things that people need reassurance about . . . 
because as you know every single person with whom one could 
speak in the province of Saskatchewan concluded one thing: 
things in health care had to change. Decisions had to be made. 
There is a paradigm shift. Whether we want to agree with it or 
not, whether we feel that’s it’s difficult or not, it is inevitable, 
and someone had to take the bull by the horns. However one of 
the things that I have heard over and over again consistently is 
that they had no sense that there was an overall plan. And I 
believe that people now need to know what the priorities are of 
your government. 
 
You’ve been governing from 1991 to 1998. It isn’t about the 
Devine Conservatives anymore. And the plan that you have, the 
direction that you’re taking the province has little to do in terms 
of the overall plan for where you want to go, your objectives -- 
okay -- the timeline in which you want to meet those objectives, 
whether or not those objectives are measurable which I would 
hope that they are, when you’re going to report on absolute 
versus your projected results. All of those things, sir, are your 
government’s responsibility. 
 
And what I would like to be able to hear from you, to provide 
reassurance to the people of Saskatchewan, is that there is a 
plan. Are we going to be the best in multiple sclerosis? Is there 
a plan for elder care in a province where we have such a high 
dependency ratio? One part of that dependency ratio has to do 
with elders in our province, the seniors in our province. I mean, 
what are we going to do about areas of specialization that we 
want to be focusing on? 
 
I mean, I want to know, for the sake of all the people who 
deserve to know, where is it that you’re taking the province of 
Saskatchewan in health care? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Chair. To 
the member, the question that you raise is a very important one 
and one that we’ve been talking about for some time, and 
certainly I’ve been talking about. 
 
When you ask where we’re going in terms of health care and 
the direction that we’re taking into the future, I want to say to 
you there are probably three or four areas that are highly 
important for me that I think the people of Saskatchewan would 
expect from us. 
 
What we want is to provide some balance within the province to 
ensure that we can have both comprehensive services in rural 
Saskatchewan and urban Saskatchewan to ensure that we have 



June 9, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1859 

that kind of a balance so that people can receive services as 
close to home as they possibly can. And so we want to try to 
provide that balance across the piece. And so you’ve seen 
across the province over the last several years an enhancement 
at the community-based level where you have community 
centres, health centres. And you’ve seen a strengthening of the 
tertiary centres across the province to a large degree. 
 
And we continue to talk about how we might enrich into the 
future, regional centres, community hospitals, larger community 
hospitals. And that process we’re continuing to address and to 
look at how we might be able to meet those demands. We talk a 
lot about community-based services where we’ve moved from 
institution to community, which is not only a Saskatchewan 
model, but is one that you see across North America today, 
where we’re depopulating, deinstitutionalizing, and providing a 
stronger community level of service. 
 
So you’re seeing growth in home care, respite care, palliative 
care, and enhancing all of those community-based services: 
community-based mental health services, drug and alcohol 
addiction. So we see that as being a stronger influence into the 
future where we’re not having people needing to be in 
institutions for in order to get the kinds of quality care services 
that they receive. 
 
We talk a lot about, as sort of a third bullet, of being able to 
sustain what we have into the future. Today we talk a lot about 
investing $1.72 billion. It’s the amount that we have today, and 
we think that we’ll need to grow into the future, that level of 
funding. And we’ll need the dependency on the federal 
government to help us through that process. 
 
And as much as we often banter and debate about the 
investment that federal governments make in health care across 
the country, the reality is, as Allan Rock said at a meeting that 
he was at this last summer when he was talking to the Canadian 
Medical Association in Vancouver. He acknowledged that in 
Canada today the federal government has relaxed its investment 
in health care across the nation, and when I sit and meet with 
him on a regular basis he reaffirms that. 
 
And so in order for us to enhance and grow health care in 
Canada and in this province and sustain it, we need to have the 
larger participation on the part of the federal government. And 
so we talk a lot about sustaining health care into the future by 
making a sufficient financial investment which is a partnership 
in my opinion. 
 
And I think finally on two other points, we want to build a 
strong human resource system so that you have adequate staff 
within the community to do the work that we need to do -- 
physicians, nurses, support staff — in such a way in which 
Saskatchewan people would benefit from the value of front-line 
staff and good primary care services, good research staff, 
specialty services. And we’re challenged, at the same time 
committed, to ensuring that we strengthen the human resources 
piece within the delivery of services. 

And finally, I think as much as we need to have good facilities, 
we need to develop and strengthen our technology. And in order 
to provide services closer to home, to people, we need programs 
and projects like SHIN (Saskatchewan Health Information 

Network). We need to advance the opportunities of renal 
dialysis sites, the cancer chemotherapy sites in rural 
Saskatchewan. We need to be able to make the linkages with 
the specialties here in the larger tertiary centres through 
technology. So the investments would be really in those five 
areas is what we see into the future. 
 
So when people ask about what my vision is or what our health 
care plan is, that would be it sort of in a nutshell in terms of 
context, and of course there are a whole host of other issues that 
spill out from that, but those would be the five primary areas. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair, and Mr. 
Minister. I don’t know if most of the public realizes that when 
your officials are here that you rely on their expertise and their 
comments, and in particular the sorts of specific information 
that they have at hand that you can’t be expected to know. 
 
But one of the things I most certainly think that they should 
know is that you didn’t ask for any advice on what you just 
said, and you most certainly outlined more than I can say that 
I’ve heard in a very long time about what your priorities are for 
the government in health care. And I want to thank you for that. 
 
You mentioned something which has twigged my memory, and 
I do want to raise this although I most certainly would be 
perceived as digressing from what we’ve discussed at hand. 
And I’ll be not asking much more after this although I have a 
comment following this particular thing. I very much want your 
comment about it. I don’t expect you to know the details, and I 
would be probably satisfied if what you could do is get back to 
me on this issue. 
 
Data is being collected. I don’t know if you know this, but there 
is one condition to approval by the panel that decides on 
whether or not people receive Betaseron and Copaxone, and 
that is providing data on the effects of these drugs. I don’t know 
if you knew that or not. And I’m wondering if you can find out 
for me, is this research approved by an ethics committee 
because, as one who has done research in the past, I most 
certainly know when you’re dealing with individuals such as 
this, it’s not only imperative but it’s required. 
 
If so, I would like you to tell me who the members are of the 
ethics committee that has made this decision. I also wish to 
know if the patients are made fully aware that they are in fact 
participating in research that has not clearly had its objectives, 
its methods, the reliability, and validity reported. Indeed some 
are wondering why this data is being collected, given that the 
researchers have already completed the studies on Betaseron. 
 
And so it does leave, I think, a plethora of questions here, and 
I’m wondering what you could do this evening in terms of 
placating me and telling me what the intentions are of this data 
collection, if you know. 
 
(2200) 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — The process is subject to an ethics review. 
The patients are aware. And I’ll need to get back to you on the 
membership or the make-up of the individuals who are on the 
committee. 
 



1860 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 1998 

Ms. Haverstock: — Well that’s very reassuring. I’ve actually 
had not so many patients, but neurologists raising this with me, 
so they’ll certainly be pleased that this has gone through 
approval. 
 
I have a final comment to make. You most certainly can 
respond, Mr. Minister, if you wish. Well I think comments are 
rife in this Assembly about the fact that one side wants a 
two-tiered system, and the other side says that we don’t have 
one. I think most people would concur that we most certainly 
do have one. I can speak from personal experience that if one 
has the resources you can get a lot of not only diagnostic but 
prognostic information from elsewhere. If you don’t have those 
resources you may have to wait two and three and sometimes 
four months for very, very important diagnostic information. 
 
I don’t want to argue about this case in point. I do want you to 
comment, if you will, about whether there comes a time when 
we have to operationally define what medicare is and be very 
thoughtful about . . . these are the things on which we will make 
no kinds of exceptions but that there are other areas in which 
we must because they’re already occurring. 
 
And I know that I don’t want a simple political answer on this 
because I know that it would be not an intelligent thing to do, to 
say that well of course on certain kinds of items we should 
allow people to pay for their services. But the truth of the fact is 
that there are not simply dozens. There are not simply hundreds. 
I think that there are thousands of people in Saskatchewan who 
have been forced to do this and are willing to do it. 
 
I’m wondering if you would please just state to me, is there 
going to be a time where we can . . . maybe we can just as a 
group of 58 people sit down and say, lookit, this is the way in 
which we are going to define what medicare means in 
Saskatchewan. We’re going to acknowledge these certain 
realities, and we’re going to also allow for some of these kinds 
of exceptions. 
 
And I’m not saying having private care, you know, or private 
people come in and open up hospitals and everything else. I’m 
just saying that some things are happening in spite of 
everything. And if we want to have thoughtful direction given 
and a sense of control, then we most certainly have to have this 
conversation. And I don’t think it simply has to be debate; I 
think it has to be conversation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Just to say, Mr. Chair, to the member, that 
I appreciate your comments as it relates to the broader issue of 
medicare and how we might preserve that in Canada. This is a 
long, philosophical debate that we are going to have, and you’ll 
be a partner in in the future, but this is broader than just the 
province. 
 
This is a discussion that needs to take place and is at the 
federal-provincial tables today with Health ministers, is with 
first ministers across the nation, and as we work I think 
collectively. And I appreciate your comment that sometimes we 
need to set our politics aside and then develop a strategy that 
looks at how we’re going to maintain and sustain medicare in 
Canada. 
 
We’re committed to it on this side of the House and as this 

government. I know the federal government is, and we’ll 
continue to work together in partnership to try to develop that in 
the future. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — What I will do, Mr. Chair, and Mr. 
Minister, is just simply thank your officials and you for your 
candour this evening, and I look forward to our continued 
discussions behind the bar and in your office. That’s not in the 
bar; that’s behind the bar. As well I do reserve for future 
reference discussions about SHIN which I hope we’ll be able to 
have in your office because I’ve had numbers of concerns raised 
about it. So with that I thank you for your time. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, and to your 
officials, a few quick questions. I’d like to pose questions that 
were brought to my attention that I need to raise. 
 
Number one, Mr. Minister, a letter from Waldon . . . or Weldon, 
I believe, was brought to our attention talking about a 
co-operative care home. The concern that even going with the 
co-operative care home, the care home is difficult to pursue 
because of the fact that what they need from clients — and most 
of the clients they are dealing with are on pension — and 
wondering whether the province has any assistance for 
co-operative care homes in providing some assistance for 
individuals in order to make these a viable proposition. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, there aren’t any incentives or 
financial packages that we have in place today that would be of 
any assistance in those areas. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I was 
quite well aware of it but I was wondering if you were looking 
at some. I know you probably had a number of concerns raised 
in this area. 
 
Mr. Minister, I just received another — an issue from an 
individual who had the home that they were running be 
certified. And rather than getting into detail, I will certainly get 
a copy . . . I will get a letter over to your office and ask for a 
response in regards to that. 
 
Another issue I’d like to raise, and this issue came from a 
couple that I met at Val Marie at one of the Plains rallies, in 
regards to oxygen supply. And as I look at the, look at the need 
and the amount of oxygen supply that this couple is going 
through, we’re looking at in the neighbourhood of 4 to $500. 
And for a couple on a fixed income that gets to be fairly 
expensive. 
 
As I understand it right now, there isn’t any financial support 
through the Department of Health for individuals who may need 
oxygen, oxygen supplies. Is that true? If not, what amount of 
assistance is there available? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, in the SAIL (Saskatchewan 
Aids to Independent Living) program there is no deductible, 
I’m told, for the program. And also if there is an upgrade of the 
equipment, then the individual is expected to pick that up — the 
difference. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, as well when we talk about oxygen 
supply, the couple that I chatted with who were raising this, 



June 9, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1861 

they mentioned something about air machines being available. 
And it looks to me like they would be much more economical 
than filling up bottles is. Do you have any knowledge about 
these and is there anything like that available for individuals 
who might have to rely on extensive use of oxygen? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Chair, there are some options I 
think that are available here. I wonder if you might provide me 
with the detail on that particular case that you’re working with 
and we’d be happy to try to help you sort through that. And it 
would also help me sort through it as well. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, certainly I’ll send a bit 
of information that I have, and name and the phone number of 
the couple as well that raised this concern with me, and actually 
took a fair bit of my time at the meeting raising the issue and 
bringing it to my attention, which I’m quite well aware of 
having dealt with some others in the past. 
 
Mr. Minister, a quick question, and here’s another issue that I’m 
not sure how far we can get into. But back in February, a young 
woman died and there’s currently . . . I believe there’s a bit of 
an investigation. It came as a result of an injury sustained 
through chiropractic service. 
 
And I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, if your department has had 
this issue raised with you or what you are pursuing at this time 
— I believe it was a stroke that resulted as a result of a 
chiropractic procedure — and what kind of concerns have been 
brought to your department and what your department is doing 
to review this type of issue that may arise. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — My knowledge of this is that you’re 
correct, Mr. Chair, that there is an inquest that is being held. 
Once the inquest is completed, the professional association will 
then be looking at it and then will be dealing with the matter 
after they receive that information. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, and Mr. Minister, as well, will your 
department then be taking a closer look at it or sitting down 
with the chiropractic association to discuss this concern. It 
seems to me . . . I believe there was a program on TV regarding 
it as well. And there are more. This just basically was the tip of 
the iceberg and, as I understand, a number of cases have come 
forward as well. 
 
It seems to me it’s the type of thing that your department will 
have to certainly take a closer look at, and I’m sure that the 
chiropractic associations are very concerned as well. So I would 
hope that you would take a look at it and, Mr. Minister, I’d be 
pleased as well to receive a bit of a background once you’ve got 
some more information and they’ve reviewed that. 
 
Mr. Minister, three other questions just quickly. A question I 
received regarding palliative care. We’ve been informed that if 
a person who’s staying in a palliative care bed in a health care 
centre, such as the one in Langenburg, they pay a daily fee of 
$25, but if they’re staying in a palliative care bed in a hospital 
there is no charge. Is that true? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, we’re reviewing that policy. 
We recognize the anomaly in it and are currently reviewing that 
policy. 

Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair. Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Minister, and certainly we’ll be waiting to hear how the 
department is addressing it because, here again, it almost would 
come back to this two-tier comment. That certainly appears like 
where there is a definite two-tier use of the health care system. 
 
Another question, in regards to advanced clinical nurses, where 
are we today? What stage are we at in pursuing the program? 
Are you still looking at that program as something that may be 
of benefit in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member, we’re 
continuing to train advanced clinical nurses. They continue to 
be placed in places across . . . or positions across the province. 
They continue to work with districts to ensure that some of 
these advanced nurses are finding a home in some of the 
environments across the province. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, as well, 
just an update on the SHIN program. Number one, the 
legislation has been pulled. I know there have been a number of 
concerns raised especially in regard to confidential issues. 
 
And a couple questions I’d like to ask. Where is your 
department today in regards to the Saskatchewan Health 
Information Network programing? What process did the 
department follow through in hiring Mr. Nystuen to manage the 
program? How many people were short-listed for the position? 
 
And, Mr. Minister, how was this arrived at? Was this decision 
. . . at the end of the day, did it come about as a result of your 
involvement, or who made the decision to finally hire Mr. 
Nystuen for this program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, I might just say to the member 
that the master agreement is now in place; it’s been signed with 
SAIC (Science Applications International Corporation). 
 
The question about the development of the project, SHIN, itself, 
we have the board in place today. And they’re examining all of 
the opportunities that will be out there across the province, and 
we’re in fact . . . and how we’re going to be providing the actual 
technology to wire the province in such a fashion that we can 
do the interlink that we want to provide. And so the board is 
working on that process today. 
 
Your question about how Mr. Nystuen got to the position that 
he’s in today, as I said, in the past, there were 43 applications 
for this job short-listed down to five. The board had a 
committee of people who were involved in that hiring process. 
The ministry or the department was not involved in that 
process; he was short listed, I believe, then to five, and then was 
selected as the suitable candidate by the board to provide those 
services on behalf of the board. 
 
(2215) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, and, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, can 
you give us a list of the board members for SHIN as well as the 
board members who were on that short listing, the applications 
for head of the SHIN program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, there’d be no difficulty with 



1862 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 1998 

that at all. We’ll provide the list for you, both lists for you that 
you’ve asked for. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, and, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, over 
the past few months, we’ve been raising a number of concerns 
in the area of health. Mr. Minister, you’ve been giving us the 
assurances that everything is moving along as well as it should 
be. You’ve basically said that wellness model is working. 
 
I chatted with a lady today — and this comes up as a result of 
some of the door knocking in Saskatoon — a Mrs. Constance 
McRobbie. And she said I can use her name as much as she 
wants. In fact, she wants you to know that she is not pleased. 
 
For your information, Mr. Minister, however, she had indicated 
that she was at the opening of the City Hospital and she said 
that when Ms. Simard stood up and talked about wellness, her 
comment was, this is not wellness at all. And that was back in, I 
believe, 1993, ’94 . . . Or I forget the date. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, what she’s saying what happened in her case 
and the reason she brought it to our attention was back in 
September 1997, just last fall, her husband was admitted to City 
Hospital and in October was moved from City to University, or 
Royal University, was moved at 11:30 a.m. At 10:30 p.m., he 
had still not been moved from the gurney in emergency to a bed 
in Royal University, which really created a problem for her. In 
fact, she finally screamed out and said if it happened to be Mr. 
Romanow’s wife or somebody else in government, he probably 
would have a bed, and shortly after, someone came running and 
he got into a bed. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, if you want to talk to her, you’re certainly 
welcome to give her a call because I know she said she would 
love to come down here. I had to tell her though that she could 
not . . . she could come to the gallery, but she couldn’t speak 
from the gallery — she could certainly talk to you outside of the 
gallery. 
 
Mr. Minister, when you talk about the fact that . . . And then to 
add insult to injury, her husband passed away in October; she 
received a letter in February from the hospital indicating that 
her husband now had an appointment to meet a specialist. You 
begin to wonder about the vital statistics program we have. I 
think maybe your officials are now recognizing who I’m talking 
about. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, I think what we have here and what you’re 
saying, that is just one case of a number of issues and concerns 
that have been brought to our attention. While you’re saying on 
one hand health care and wellness is working well, while the 
Premier I think made a comment about more acute-care beds in 
this province per 1,000 population than any other part of 
Canada. Mr. Minister, as was reported most recently, in fact 
Saturday, June 6, Saskatoon Star-Phoenix, the comments: 
 

Time to abandon two-tier myth. 
 
If there is no crisis in health care today, there is certainly a 
crisis of confidence. Hardly a day passes without someone 
raising questions about the quality of care available and its 
human cost. 
 

Polls regularly show that Canadians believe health care in 
this country is getting worse, not better. 

 
And if you’re saying it’s just some fictitious comment, I run 
into that on a daily basis, Mr. Minister, when I’m in my 
constituency. And it says: 
 

This perception is borne out through lengthening waiting 
lists and operating room shutdowns. 

 
So, Mr. Minister, when you look at people, and I think one of 
the editorials most recently where it talks about your 
government losing compassion, Mr. Minister . . . whether you 
have 6.1 beds per a thousand population, somebody’s got 5.34. 
I’m not exactly sure if we measure health care based on the 
number of beds available. The public themselves look at health 
care, look at the dollars they’re putting into health care. They 
look at their tax dollar and they view health care on the ability 
to receive quality care when they need it, not a month or a year 
down the road. 
 
Another interesting article I was just reading, “Nothing 
‘elective’ about waiting in pain”. I think your comments most 
recently where you say that some surgeries are not emergencies. 
Yes, that’s true, Mr. Minister, not everyone needs immediate or 
emergency surgery. But however, Mr. Minister, persons who 
need surgeries are not always in an emergency situation, may 
not be life-threatening, but can be certainly hampering to a 
quality of life that they may be going through at this stage in 
their life. And that operation may be important to them. 
 
But to wait for a year to receive that operation is certainly a 
long wait. I would suggest to you that anyone sitting in this 
room today, if you had a complication that may not be 
life-threatening but you are under constant pain or having to 
take painkillers, and I’m not sure about other members or other 
individuals. I myself don’t really enjoy taking painkillers all the 
time. I’ve been blessed, I haven’t had to. To be honest with you, 
I haven’t had to. But I run across people who have to live with 
this. 
 
Mr. Minister, to say that we’ve done everything right, I think 
you have to admit that no matter how hard you work and how 
hard you try there are occasions and unfortunately many 
occasions where there are individuals that have to deal with, if 
you will, waiting-lists. 
 
And just a comment here: 
 

Whoever came up with the term “elective surgery” was a 
genius. (This is what the article was saying.) Not a medical 
genius, but a devious, political genius. It is creative use of 
language at its worst. 

 
Mr. Minister, I think you and your Premier and your 
government need to acknowledge that maybe you’re on the road 
to what you’ve designed and called a wellness program. And 
maybe down the road at the end of the day you’ll finally 
achieve a point in time where this program is indeed meeting 
the needs of the public who are looking . . . through their tax 
dollars believe they have paid for the service. And maybe we’ll 
achieve that. 
 



June 9, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1863 

But Mr. Minister, when we see people waiting on long 
waiting-lists for health care services, to say that we’ve achieved 
the Utopia, that we have the best health care system that’s 
available, maybe that’s true, with the current dollar levels 
you’re working with. I don’t know. 
 
But I think, Mr. Minister, it’s certainly important to recognize 
the fact that, yes, there are people who have to deal with 
difficult circumstances in their lives and the health system we 
have today may not be meeting all of those needs. 
 
I believe, Mr. Minister, that you and your government need to 
realize that we have to go further, we have to work harder. And 
I’m not necessarily saying we have to just start putting more 
money into it. We can blame the federal government — as you 
do on an ongoing basis — about the lack of funding that has 
come for health care. Or you can talk about the . . . you can 
blame somebody else. You can blame governments of the past 
about the lack of services. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, I think it’s time your government accepted 
some of the responsibility as well. Responsibility for some of 
their decisions and recognize that, while you may have a vision, 
that vision may not always go along with how people perceive 
they’re receiving health care. 
 
Mr. Minister, I could go on at length, but I think it’s time for us 
to recognize that whether change takes place today, tomorrow, 
or in the future, somebody comes along . . . another government 
will be elected in the future that may have a different vision, 
and then people are going to be put through another process. 
 
Mr. Minister, all the officials in the department today may not 
be in their position . . . the same positions tomorrow. I see a 
rotation. Even in the last eight years I’ve seen a significant 
rotation in departments. 
 
And so we need to acknowledge that while we have visions, 
somebody else is going to come along that may have a different 
vision. 
 
And I think, Mr. Minister, as was mentioned by the member 
from Saskatoon as well, at some point in time we all have to 
reach a point — what do we want to achieve in health care? 
What services do we want to have available? 
 
I know in talking to people on the street, everyone has got a 
different view. Someone talks about the fact: why don’t we 
have an insurance premium? Well maybe if that person wants 
an insurance premium, maybe they can look at . . . I believe one 
article I’m quoting from here talks about the fact that even if 
you go out of the country now — people are beginning to look 
at going out of the country and finding services available to 
them. 
 
And I’ve actually chatted to some local constituents who’ve 
decided that that might be an option. In fact one individual, 
rather than waiting till last October for a MRI, went across the 
line back in May and by June had their operation and were 
living a quality life. And they went to Minot, North Dakota for 
that MRI scan otherwise they’d have been waiting till January 1 
of this year. 
 

So, Mr. Minister, rather than going into an extended debate on 
the issue I would suggest to you, Mr. Minister, that it’s time you 
acknowledge that wellness, while that’s a vision your 
government has, that there are a number of areas we need to 
work through. And don’t be afraid to accept the fact and 
acknowledge it rather than just blaming someone else all the 
time, let’s accept the fact that health care affects every one of 
us. 
 
It affects others differently than you or I may face health 
decisions right now but acknowledge the fact that there are 
concerns and issues out there and begin to show some of the 
compassion that the media are indicating you are not showing. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — A couple of really short questions, Mr. 
Chairman. Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could tell us what the 
exact number of acute care beds are in Saskatchewan presently 
and the exact number of long-term care beds. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Number of acute care beds is, Mr. Chair, 
3,117. And, Mr. Chair, 9,203 long-term care beds. So 3,117 
acute care; 9,203 long-term care. 
 
Subvote (HE01) agreed to. 
 
Subvotes (HE02), (HE03), (HE04), (HE06), (HE08), (HE09) 
inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 32 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1997-98 
General Revenue Fund 

Budgetary Expense 
Health 
Vote 32 

 
Subvote (HE08) agreed to. 
 
Vote 32 agreed to. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chairman, just to say thank you. I realize the 
officials are not present but the minister can express our 
appreciation for their time and thanks to the minister and his 
officials for having taken the time to respond to the questions. 
And we look forward to responses to the questions we’ve asked 
for and the minister has given his assurances that he will get 
back to us later. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — . . . express my appreciation to the 
members opposite for the questions that they’ve asked. I know 
that they’ve been very informed on the issues of health care 
across the province, and through this kind of dialogue, I know 
we can build a better health care system. And we’ll share with 
my officials your comments. 
 
Thank you very much for your informed questions. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
(2230) 
 



1864 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 1998 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 57  The Education Amendment Act, 1998/ 
Loi de 1998 modifiant la Loi sur l’éducation 

 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move 
that Bill No. 57, An Act to amend The Education Act, 1995 be 
now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 26 — The Oil and Gas Conservation 
Amendment Act, 1998 

 
The Chair: — Before we start I would ask the minister to 
introduce his officials please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much. Mr. 
Chairman. I’ll be very brief. To my right is Dan McFadyen, 
ADM resource policy and economics; to my left is Bruce 
Wilson, executive director of petroleum and natural gas 
division; behind him is Myron Sereda, the director of 
engineering services branch; and behind me is Gerald Tegart, 
Crown solicitor, Department of Justice; and Trevor Dark, 
director of energy, economics branch. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 
Minister, I’d like to welcome you and your officials here this 
evening — late evening. 
 
Mr. Minister, perhaps you could give us some indication of 
what The Oil and Gas Conservation Act is about and why it 
exists. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Speaker, what we are 
doing is moving to allow for the suspension of gas removal and 
gas-use permits so then by that it will no longer require natural 
gas permits. And what we are attempting to do is eliminate 
what we see to be unnecessary regulation. 
 
It also establishes penalties for late or incomplete submissions 
of drill core samples, because those are the records that the 
department needs to carry on its long-term business. It was felt 
by the department and in discussion with consumers, people 
who purchase gas in Saskatchewan, that deregulation appears to 
be working and the market is supplying in an adequate way. 
And it was felt that the permits were an unnecessary process 
that would be best suspended for now. 
 
I might add and say, Mr. Chairman, that this is not a deletion of 
course of the permits. We’re merely suspending them in case 
some unforeseen action would require permits to be used again. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, there must have 
been a purpose for the permits at some point in time. You’re 
suspending them now, saying that things are working good. 
Well what has changed in the system since they were first put 
in? And if it’s working without the permits now, why not just 

simply abolish the whole permit system instead of just 
suspending it for awhile? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, natural gas permits 
were put in place to facilitate the transition to deregulation. 
These were put in place in 1987. I think the fact that consumers 
are confident that the market-place works, they suggest that 
permits are no longer permitted, but in the event . . . that they’re 
no longer required. But in the event that permitting would be 
required, the option is still there for government to move. I 
mean we could have taken the step to abolish, but that would 
have created perhaps an unnecessary delay in putting the 
process back into legislation again. 
 
The suspension I think is a reasonable interim measure. We 
would want to use the suspension and I would foresee 
somewhere down the road that that would be carried for the 
next step that you suggest. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, why would you 
argue that there is a need to have the ability to issue permits 
again? What do you foresee happening in the future that would 
allow or require that those permits be put in place? And what 
purpose would those permits serve? Do they serve a purpose 
sort of as a quota system that says there’s X amount of gas 
available and you’re permitted to sell this much to A, this much 
to B, and this much to C? What is the purpose for having the 
permit in there? Like what service does it provide? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well I want to say, Mr. Chairman, 
and to the member opposite, that initially I think the purchasers, 
consumers were concerned that there would be, under a new 
system that hadn’t been tried here in Saskatchewan — that 
being a deregulated market-place — there was some concern 
that perhaps there wouldn’t be a secure supply. Discussions in 
consultation with industry and users of natural gas told the 
department and told us that there was some security and that 
they were comfortable that if we were to suspend the 
unnecessary process, the permits, that that would be a step that 
they would feel comfortable with. 
 
And as I said before, the suspension will eliminate the need for 
the regulations to be used and if at some point in time the 
market-place wouldn’t be providing a secure supply, then they 
could be reinstated. Consumers have told us that they’re willing 
to assume the responsibility for securing their own supply so I 
think this just makes common sense what we’re doing here. It’s 
just cleaning up and eliminating unnecessary regs. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, we’re always in 
favour of the elimination of regulation where and whenever 
possible. That’s why I wonder why you didn’t go the whole 
step and simply abolish the whole permitting system. 
 
I believe one of the other areas involved in this Bill deals with 
the . . . provides for penalties for late or incomplete submissions 
of drilling cores. Is that the case? And is that becoming a 
problem? I guess probably the most famous case we’ve heard of 
in the last number of years of faulty drilling cores is with 
Bre-X. I don’t think we’re anywheres into that league at all, but 
is faulty drilling cores, are they a problem? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — I want to say, Mr. Speaker, 



June 9, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1865 

Saskatchewan firstly has taken I think a proactive move. We are 
the first province as I know it to eliminate the need . . . to 
suspend the need for the regulations. We don’t foresee frankly 
an instance where penalties for late or incomplete submission of 
core samples would be a problem. We just don’t think it’s going 
to be a problem. 
 
Most companies are very much in compliance with the 
requirements and understand the need for the core samples, and 
so we don’t see that as being a major problem. But in the event 
that there would be, we would like to be able to deal with it, and 
I think it’s a prudent approach. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Minister, how much of the core 
sample do you require? Do you require 50 per cent of the core 
sample, a split down the middle and you get half and the 
company keeps half? Do you require a core sample that 
encompasses the entire pay zone that’s being drilled through? 
Just what do you require for a core sample? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, we require all of the 
core sample, other than a small component that goes to do the 
analysis of the core sample. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — So you don’t get a split core sample, 
you get the entire core sample. And what does the company do 
if they want to keep a core sample? They have to re-drill 
alongside, or how does that work if you’re taking the entire core 
sample minus a very small sample? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I’m told by the 
officials that the drill of the companies have free and open 
access to the core sample. We have storage facilities in the 
province here in Regina and other areas, where the core samples 
are stored. And if anybody wants access to them they’re there 
for that purpose. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Are those core 
samples available for inspection by anyone, or by the company 
that submitted them to you? 
 
(2245) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, kept confidential for 
one year, but after that anyone has access to them. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’d like to 
thank you and your officials this evening for answering our 
questions. 
 
I guess the only question I have left for you is, The Oil and Gas 
Conservation Act, does that encompass more purpose than 
what’s been stated here this evening, the permitting? Does it 
deal within the oilfield of the necessity to contain and to shift 
the production of gas off of oil production? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, the Act is very much 
a broad base and all-encompassing. It deals with the drilling and 
the drilling requirements. It deals with abandonment. It deals 
with environmental issues and it deals with production issues. 
So it’s very broad based. These are just amendments to a part of 
that Act. 
 

Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 26  The Oil and Gas Conservation 
Amendment Act, 1998 

 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill 
be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave of the 
Assembly to move to revert to motions for returns (debatable). 
There are seven motions there which I hope to dispose of in 
short order. 
 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Debatable) 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave of the 
Assembly to issue an order for return, for returns no. 1, 6, 8, 12, 
and 13 presently on the order paper. 
 
The Speaker: — Just for the information of the Chair, to make 
sure I heard that correctly, that was items 1, 6, 8, 12, and 13? 
 
Let me just check again in the interests of accuracy that the 
Whip has indicated the desire to provide returns no. 1, 6, 8, 12, 
and 13. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — That is correct, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Then returns 1, 6, 8, 12, and 13 are provided. 
 

Return No. 7 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I move that 
an order of the Assembly do issue for a return no. 7 showing: (l) 
the number of women and men in total that graduated from the 
University of Saskatchewan, College of Medicine, (a) in 1990; 
(b) in 1995; (c) in 1996; (d) in 1997; (2) the number of these 
graduates who are men; (3) the number of these graduates who 
were women; (4) the number of male physicians and surgeons 
who are currently practising in Saskatchewan; and (5) the 
number of female physicians and surgeons who are currently 
practising in Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — Does the hon. member have a seconder for 
the motion? 
 
Ms. Julé: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, the seconder will be the 
member from Athabasca. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Speaker: — Hon. members, if I may just revert with the 
cooperation of the members of the Assembly, to the previous 
item. The Whip requested leave, and the Chair presumably did 



1866 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 1998 

not confirm that of the House. And if with the cooperation of 
the House, can we go back to the previous item, and may I put 
it to the House as to whether leave was granted to provide 
returns nos. 1, 6, 8, 12, and 13. Is leave granted? 
 
Leave is granted. And those returns are provided. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:58 p.m. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1787 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1787 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1787 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1787 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1787 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1787 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1787 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1787 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1787 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1788 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1788 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1788 
  McPherson...............................................................................................................................................................................1788 
  Haverstock...............................................................................................................................................................................1788 
  Goohsen ...................................................................................................................................................................................1788 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................1789 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Crown Corporations 
  Lorje.........................................................................................................................................................................................1789 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1789 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1789 
  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................1789 
  Scott .........................................................................................................................................................................................1796 
  Nilson .............................................................................................................................................................................1799, 1816 
  Whitmore.................................................................................................................................................................................1835 
  Trew .........................................................................................................................................................................................1845 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Forest Fires in the North 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1789 
 Twinning of Trans-Canada Highway Begins 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1790 
 Saskatchewan Roads 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1790 
 Open House at Pacific Regeneration Technologies 
  Langford ..................................................................................................................................................................................1790 
 Party Lines 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1790 
 Bengough Health Centre Anniversary Fair 
  Bradley.....................................................................................................................................................................................1791 
 Integrated School-Linked Services 
  Whitmore.................................................................................................................................................................................1791 
 New Column Proposed 
  Van Mulligen...........................................................................................................................................................................1791 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Pasture Land Lease Rates 
  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1792 
  Upshall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1792 
 Out-Migration  
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1793 
  MacKinnon..............................................................................................................................................................................1793 
 Payment of SGI Death Benefit 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1794 
  Lingenfelter .............................................................................................................................................................................1794 
 Waiting-lists for Cancer Patients 
  McPherson...............................................................................................................................................................................1794 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1794 
 Storage of Blood from Umbilical Cords 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1795 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1795 



  

 Multiple Sclerosis Treatments 
  Haverstock...............................................................................................................................................................................1796 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1796 
MOTION UNDER RULE 46 
 Deteriorating Agricultural Conditions in Saskatchewan 
  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1797 
  Upshall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1799 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1800 
  Goohsen ...................................................................................................................................................................................1801 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1803 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1803 
TABLING OF REPORTS 
  Speaker ....................................................................................................................................................................................1803 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................1803 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund 
 Highways and Transportation — Vote 16 
  Bradley.....................................................................................................................................................................................1804 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1804 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1804 
  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1805 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1806 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1806 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1809 
  McPherson...............................................................................................................................................................................1809 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1813 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1814 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1818 
  Goohsen ...................................................................................................................................................................................1824 
 Supplementary Estimates 1998-99 — General Revenue Fund — Budgetary Expense 
 Highways and Transportation — Vote 16................................................................................................................................1827 
 General Revenue Fund 
 Health — Vote 32 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1827 
  McPherson.....................................................................................................................................................................1827, 1848 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1827 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1839 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1843 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1852 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1853 
  Haverstock...............................................................................................................................................................................1854 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1860 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1863 
 Supplementary Estimates 1997-98 — General Revenue Fund — Budgetary Expense 
 Health — Vote 32 .......................................................................................................................................................................1863 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 57  The Education Amendment Act, 1998/Loi de 1998 modifiant la Loi sur l’éducation 
  MacKinnon..............................................................................................................................................................................1864 
 Bill No. 26  The Oil and Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 1998 
  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................1865 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 Bill No. 26 — The Oil and Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 1998 
  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................1864 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1864 
MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Debatable) 
  Kowalsky .................................................................................................................................................................................1865 
 Return No. 7 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1865 
 


