





























































Hansard: March 12, 1998


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 65 
 March 12, 1998 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I present petitions on behalf of many concerned 
citizens of Saskatchewan about the practice of night hunting. 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with aboriginal and Metis leaders and wildlife and 
sportsmen organizations in the province of Saskatchewan 
in an immediate effort to end the destructive and dangerous 
practice of night hunting in the province for everyone 
regardless of their heritage. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

I so present. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present to this Assembly regarding the night hunting 
issue. And I’ll read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with aboriginal and Metis leaders and wildlife and 
sportsmen organizations in the province of Saskatchewan 
in an immediate effort to end the destructive and dangerous 
practice of night hunting in the province for everyone 
regardless of their heritage. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, the petitions I am handing in this morning 
are signed by individuals from Porcupine Plain and Saskatoon, 
Spalding and Quill Lake, Watson, and many other communities 
in the province. I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, I also have petitions to 
present to do with the twinning of No. 1 Highway. The prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reach necessary agreements with other levels of 
government to fund the twinning of Trans-Canada 
Highway in Saskatchewan so work can begin in 1998, and 
to set out a time frame for the ultimate completion of the 
project. 
 

The people are from the communities of Broadview and 
Grenfell, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
a petition, and I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reach necessary agreements with other levels of 
government to fund the twinning of the Trans-Canada 
Highway in Saskatchewan so work can begin in 1998, and 
to set out a time frame for the ultimate completion of the 
project. 
 

Signed by people from Swift Current, Avonlea, Saskatoon, 
Simmie, and pretty well across the province. I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have petitions 
to present on behalf of citizens discussing night hunting: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with aboriginal and Metis leaders and wildlife and sports 
organizations in the province of Saskatchewan in an 
immediate effort to end the destructive and dangerous 
practice of night hunting in the province for everyone 
regardless of their heritage. 
 

People who have signed these petitions are from Quill Lake, 
from Kelvington, from Melfort, from Wadena — all over the 
province. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise today 
to present petitions on behalf of citizens concerned about the 
escalating incidence of youth crime. The prayer reads as 
follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that the 
Parliament of Canada and the legislature of Saskatchewan 
enact legislation and policies to deal with the problem of 
youth crime. 
 

The petitioners are from throughout the province: from 
Muenster, from Humboldt, from St. Gregor, from Warman, 
from Annaheim, Lake Lenore, Leroy, and Lanigan, Carmel. I so 
present. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 
petitions on behalf of citizens throughout the province 
concerned about the twinning of the Trans-Canada highways. 
And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call upon the provincial and 
federal governments to meet immediately and conclude a 
cost-sharing agreement on the twinning of the 
Trans-Canada Highway in Saskatchewan so that twinning 
of the remaining portions of the Trans-Canada Highway in 
Saskatchewan can begin at the very earliest possible date. 

 
And those who have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, some 
6,000 names here are from throughout the province. I so 
present. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also would like to 
present petitions, and I’ll read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 



66 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 1998 

Assembly may be pleased to call upon the provincial and 
federal governments to meet immediately and conclude a 
cost-sharing agreement on the twinning of the 
Trans-Canada Highway in Saskatchewan so that twinning 
of the remaining portions of the Trans-Canada Highway in 
Saskatchewan can begin at the very earliest possible date. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The people that have signed the petitions, Mr. Speaker, are from 
— primarily the front pages — Lafleche, Saskatchewan; and we 
have 6,000 names drawn from various areas of Saskatchewan. 
And I so present. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too stand to 
present petitions today on behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan. The prayer reading: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call upon the provincial and 
federal governments to meet immediately and conclude a 
cost-sharing agreement on the twinning of the 
Trans-Canada Highway in Saskatchewan so that twinning 
of the remaining portions of the Trans-Canada Highway in 
Saskatchewan can begin at the very earliest possible date. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I have about 6,000 signatures here, ranging from 
Regina, Moose Jaw, Davidson, Outlook, Swift Current, Gull 
Lake, all across Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
with my colleagues to also present petitions on behalf of the 
citizens of Saskatchewan, and the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call upon the provincial and 
federal governments to meet immediately and conclude a 
cost-sharing agreement on the twinning of the 
Trans-Canada Highway in Saskatchewan so that twinning 
of the remaining portions of the Trans-Canada Highway in 
Saskatchewan can begin at the very earliest possible date. 

 
Signatures once again, Mr. Speaker, some 6,000 from virtually 
every corner of this province and every community, small and 
large. I so present. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m honoured to 
rise today and join my colleagues in the Liberal caucus in 
bringing forward petitions regarding twinning of the No. 1 
Highway. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call upon the provincial and 
federal governments to meet immediately and conclude a 
cost-sharing agreement on the twinning of the 
Trans-Canada Highway in Saskatchewan so that twinning 
of the remaining portions of the Trans-Canada Highway in 
Saskatchewan can begin at the very earliest possible date. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this stack is near 10,000. It brings the total here 
today of over 30,000 signatures on this issue, and they range all 

over Saskatchewan. There is no particular area. It’s really the 
wish of the people that these go forward and be dealt with. I so 
present. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy today on 
behalf of the people of Saskatchewan to add more names to the 
pile. And I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call upon the provincial and 
federal governments to meet immediately and conclude a 
cost-sharing agreement on the twinning of the 
Trans-Canada Highway in Saskatchewan so that the 
twinning of the remaining portions of the Trans-Canada 
Highway in Saskatchewan can begin at the very earliest 
possible date, with or without federal assistance. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will humbly pray. 

 
I’m happy to present these on behalf of the people from Maple 
Creek, Golden Prairie, Fox Valley it looks like, and Gull Lake 
and surrounding communities. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 

Of citizens petitioning the Assembly to enact legislation to 
completely ban the practice of night hunting; and 
 
Of citizens petitioning the Assembly to cause the 
government to reach necessary agreements with other 
levels of government to fund the twinning of the 
Trans-Canada Highway; and 
 
Of citizens petitioning the legislature to enact legislation 
and policies to deal with the problem of youth crime; and 
 
Of citizens petitioning the Assembly to act to save the 
Plains Health Centre. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 9 ask the government the following questions: 
 

To the Minister of Intergovernmental and Aboriginal 
Affairs: in the past years consultation between the 
Government of Canada and the Government of 
Saskatchewan regarding Canada’s negotiating position on 
a multilateral agreement on investment, (MAI), what areas 
of the Saskatchewan economy has the Government of 
Saskatchewan demanded be exempted from foreign 
investments? 
 

And I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Ms. Murray: — I would like to preface my introduction with a 
question. What is the definition of a gentleman? A man who 



March 12, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 67 

knows how to play the accordion but doesn’t. What is the 
definition of an optimist? An accordion player with a beeper. 
 
Not so in the case of Canada’s Polka King, three time Grammy 
winner Walter Ostanek. Walter’s touring schedule includes over 
250 dates a year in Canada, the United States, and Europe. And 
tonight he is in Regina, appearing at the Regina Ballroom. 
Tomorrow and Saturday, Walter takes his show to 
world-famous Danceland at Manitou Beach. Walter is seated in 
your gallery, Mr. Speaker, along with his wife, Irene, and 
saxophonist, Allistair Robertson of Birmingham, England. 
Please extend a warm Regina welcome to our very famous 
guests. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Johnson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me a great 
deal of pleasure to introduce to you and through you to the 
Assembly, five constituents of mine. They are here in Regina 
attending the SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities) convention: Hugh Otterson, the administrator; 
Eric Jensen and Sharon Banks, who are the . . . who are 
councillors for the Canwood RM (rural municipality); Darlene 
Bradley and Eugene Swanson, both councillors and reeve for 
the RM of Big River. 
 
These two municipalities almost cover half the boundary of the 
P.A. (Prince Albert) National Park, and the federal government 
hasn’t seen yet to allow an entrance from these RMs into the 
park and they’d like it. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish you well. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
present to you and to the members in this legislature, a noted 
Prince Albert musician and entertainer, Barry Scaife. He’s 
seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Barry is on the board of directors of both the Saskatchewan 
Country Music Association and the Prince Albert Country 
Music Association. And he’s here in Regina today to promote 
the Saskatchewan Country Music Association’s ninth annual 
country music weekend and award show in Prince Albert, 
March 18 to 22. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Renaud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce to you and through you to other members of the 
Assembly, four members of the RM of Leask, No. 464. And I’d 
ask them to stand, please: Real Diehl, Joe Brad, Art Gampe, and 
Rick Poole. 
 
Of course the RM of Leask, normally the member for Redberry 
would have introduced them, except it’s my old stomping 
grounds, Mr. Speaker, and that’s all I’ll say about that. Please 
welcome our guests. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I as well 

would like to introduce several guests that I have from my 
constituency. Seated in your gallery is Isabelle Jasper. Isabelle 
is the RM administrator of Frenchman Butte. And beside her 
also is Lenora Eaton. Her husband, Doug, is the Reeve of the 
RM of Frenchman Butte. I had the pleasure of visiting with 
them last night at the SARM banquet, and I would like all 
members to welcome them to the Assembly here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you 
and through you to the legislature, one of my constituents, Mr. 
Gary Carlson, sitting in the west gallery. As many of you know, 
Mr. Carlson is an able spokesperson on behalf of the 
home-based businesses in Saskatchewan, along with many 
other organizations. Welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Jess: — I would also like to ask members of the Chamber 
to welcome the group from Leask. And now that I know that 
not only are they well aware of the member from Carrot River’s 
background, but I understand Mr. Diehl is a cousin of his, I will 
be informing the caucus as to some of his history. Thank you, 
gentlemen. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

1997 Citizens of the Year 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
volunteers are the backbone of rural Saskatchewan. Today I 
would like to bring to your attention three individuals who have 
been recognized in their communities as the 1997 citizens of the 
year. 
 
The town of Rose Valley recognized Larry Bjerland as the 
Citizen of the Year at their winter festival. Larry has spent 
countless volunteer hours working for the betterment of his 
community. 
 
Bill and Shirley Chyz of Watson are recognized for their work 
in initiating Sunshine Manor, a single-level apartment complex 
for seniors. If you’re driving through Watson, you’ll see another 
major accomplishment of the Chyz family and the community 
— the Santa Claus statue. Retirement has just meant that Bill 
and Shirley have spent more time in their community. 
 
I would ask all members to join with me in thanking Bill and 
Shirley and Larry for their involvement in their communities 
and the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Opening of Employee Career Development Centre 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday the 
Minister of Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training, the 
hon. member from Regina Centre, at a ceremony held at the 
University of Regina announced the launching of a joint human 
resources initiative, an announcement which includes the 



68 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 1998 

opening of the employee career development centre on both 
campuses. This development is a key part of how we are 
investing in people by investing in training and development for 
the new century. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, this initiative is another impressive example 
of our university’s commitment to cooperation and 
revitalization growing out of the MacKay report. The minister 
commended the universities and all members would like to join 
her. 
 
The two centres will assist individuals in assessing their career 
potential and opportunities, helping them analyse current and 
future job requirements, meeting the training needs for the 
future. They will also help senior administrators, university 
department heads, and directors to manage more efficiently and 
effectively. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we often forget that work and learning are two 
sides of the same coin. This initiative is committed to creating a 
culture of lifelong learning, to the ongoing development of 
knowledge and skills needed to spur our economy and enlarge 
our lives. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Funding to Support Medical Research Projects 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Liberal caucus is pleased that the government has provided 
bridge funding to support medical research projects at the 
University of Saskatchewan College of Medicine. The NDP 
(New Democratic Party) government is implementing the first 
part of our Liberal policy on medical research funding as 
announced by our leader, Jim Melenchuk, on February 13. 
 
We hope that the government will also implement the second 
and third point of our Liberal platform. We will be watching the 
budget to see if there is an increase in the dollars allocated to 
medical research to 1 per cent of the health funding. That is our 
second point and it was also the recommendation of the 
government’s own task force on health research collaboration. 
 
The third part of the Liberal commitment is the introduction of 
a limited provincial income tax credit for monies raised for 
medical research here in this province. This tax credit would 
match the federal government’s commitment to medical 
research under the federal Income Tax Act. The Canadian 
medical discoveries mutual fund, for example, is ready to raise 
and invest new funds in this province for research. 
 
And we are pleased that the NDP government is following our 
constructive suggestions and hope that they will implement 
other Liberal ideas to spur medical research here in 
Saskatchewan. Let’s be leaders and not followers in this 
province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Emu Farming 
 
Mr. Ward: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The member for 
Cannington is too modest to mention a local success story, so as 

his neighbouring MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) I 
will. 
 
There is a growing diversity in the provincial economy driven 
by the invaluable efforts of the men and women of 
Saskatchewan. Two such people are Jim and Carolyn Shirley 
from the Carlyle area. 
 
The Shirleys are farmers of a special sort. They raise and 
market emus and emu by-products. Emu fat is condensed into 
oil; the oil is bottled for sale to 35 health food stores. The oil 
has many uses — the treatment of sunburns being one of them. 
 
The Shirleys also market the meat, infertile eggs, and feathers 
of emu. Emu meat is low in cholesterol and is an excellent 
substitute for those on low-cholesterol diets. The eggs are used 
in arts and crafts and the feathers are used by fly-fishing 
enthusiasts to make lures. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the economic climate in Saskatchewan is blowing 
a favourable wind across the prairie province of ours. The good 
people of Saskatchewan are responding with hard work and 
ingenuity. It is this hard work and ingenuity, Mr. Speaker, 
which has helped to ensure that the Saskatchewan economy 
continues to thrive. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Teacher Receives Agribition Award 
 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
recognize a teacher from the school at Bruno, Mr. Garry Sibley. 
Mr. Sibley was the recipient of an Outstanding Agricultural 
Ambassador Award at an Agribition ceremony held in Regina 
last November. 
 
The award is based on teachers integrating agricultural content 
into their classroom teachings. Mr. Sibley, who is the 
vice-principal at Bruno School, integrates agriculture into his 
grade 7 and 10 science classes and grades 11 and 12 biology 
classes. Some of his teachings include grain seed experiments, 
soil tests, field trips, water tests, and lecture topics on 
bio-technology, food safety, crop protection, genetic 
engineering, and prairie grasslands. 
 
Mr. Sibley was also instrumental in starting the Carleton Trail 
Regional Science Fair. 
 
I would like to congratulate Mr. Sibley and ask the members of 
the Assembly to do the same. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Visitor Services Nominated for Award of Excellence 
 

Ms. Murray: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I once asked one of 
the legislative tour guides what was the strangest question asked 
by a visitor to our wonderful place of business here. She 
thought a moment and then said, a school student asked “How 
much does this building weigh?” Too much obviously, given 
the work to be done. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I know the question was answered with the 



March 12, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 69 

courtesy and consideration given all due to his questions and 
the quest for information by our excellent staff of Lorraine 
deMontigny, Linda Spence, Arnold McKenzie, and Diane 
Normandin. They make our visitors welcome and they 
coordinate our own special constituency visits with great 
efficiency, as we all know. 
 
There is a phrase we are fond of using: “Things don’t just 
happen; they are made to happen by people who know what 
they are about.” 
 
I am happy to report to the Assembly then that our Visitor 
Services staff have been nominated for two awards at the 
upcoming Tourism Saskatchewan Awards of Excellence gala to 
be held in Saskatoon this Friday. The whole staff has been 
nominated for the Customer Service Award of Excellence. And 
Arnold McKenzie, the man who knows where all the bodies are 
buried and secrets hidden in this building and much, much 
more, is nominated for the Saskatchewan Welcome Award of 
Excellence. We all know that they should win, but even not . . . 
even if not, we know and publicly appreciate all they do to 
make this truly the people’s legislature. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Provincial Court at Beardy’s Reserve 
 
Mr. Johnson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Experience has 
taught us that community-based solutions to local problems are 
always successful. This government is seeking to establish more 
of these types of solutions. 
 
On February 2 a new Provincial Court was established on the 
Beardy’s Reserve. The court meets in a local senior citizens’ 
centre twice per month and makes use of the traditional 
aboriginal justice approaches. This latest cooperative venture 
between the province and Beardy’s Reserve is proof that this 
government is committed to improving the lives of citizens in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask you and members of this Assembly to join 
me in congratulating the members of the Beardy’s First Nation 
as they take another step towards self-government. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Farm Safety Week 
 

Ms. Murrell: — Mr. Speaker, as you are aware, March 11 to 
18 has been designated Farm Safety Week for the province of 
Saskatchewan. With the help of many local sponsors, the 
Department of Labour has issued a farm safety calendar which 
is illustrated by young artists from throughout the province. 
 
In particular I would like to congratulate 13-year-old Sara 
Shulmacher and 14-year-old Travis Suchan from McLurg High 
School in Wilkie on their illustrations being selected for the 
months of November and December in the farm safety calendar. 
 
On another note, I would also like to make mention of the fact 
that the Flying Fathers will grace Wilkie and area for a charity 

game versus Team Cey. Proceeds will go towards renovating 
the windows at the Wilkie Community Centre. 
 
As many of you are aware, the Flying Fathers were here in 
Regina the other night. I just wanted the people in Wilkie to 
know what they’re in for. Sixty-four-year-old goal-tender 
Father Quinn was quoted as saying: 
 

I can’t see the puck, so I close my eyes and listen to it. I 
listened to the puck the other night and I took shot on the 
nose. 

 
In victory over a local celebrity team from Regina, the Flying 
Fathers were awarded 6 points for a touch-down. Father Quinn 
told the crowd that the Fathers wouldn’t kick the point after 
because the Fathers are Catholic priests and don’t think it’s 
charitable to kick converts. Quinn was also quoted as saying: 
“We always win — we cheat.” 
 
The game starts at 7 o’clock p.m. tonight, but let’s face it — 
Team Cey doesn’t have a prayer. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

SaskPower President’s Severance Package 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of CIC (Crown Investments 
Corporation of Saskatchewan). Mr. Minister, you’ve got to be 
kidding. Jack Messer’s negligence and incompetence just lost 
taxpayers $10 million — $10 million, Mr. Minister; $5 million 
because he forgot to read the contract. He failed to properly 
report the purchase of Channel Lake; he failed to properly 
report the sale of Channel Lake. He lost millions of dollars 
because he failed to read a contract and what does the NDP do? 
They give him a big fat severance payment that will add up to 
almost $300,000, Mr. Speaker. You shouldn’t be paying Jack 
Messer, you should be suing Jack Messer. 
 
Will you immediately cancel this obscene severance payment 
and launch legal action against Jack Messer to recover the 
millions of dollars he lost the taxpayers of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, just to correct the 
member opposite, who once again is off base with his numbers, 
but to quote from today’s Leader-Post, to quote from today’s 
Leader-Post: “Assistant provincial auditor . . .” 
 
Mr. Speaker, in today’s Leader-Post, and I quote: 

 
Assistant provincial auditor Fred Wendel agreed with the 
(provincial) government on a cash-flow basis (that) 
SaskPower made $2 million more than it originally 
invested — but noted all financing and administrative costs 
are not included. 

 
So first of all, sir, I would ask you to get your story straight. 
 
As to the issue of the settlement . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. I’ll ask all hon. members 



70 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 1998 

to allow the question to be heard with the same graciousness 
with which the question was able to be asked, intelligently. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I say to the member 
opposite in a quote from the press release, the media statement 
issued today by the Vice-Chair, Mr. Milt Fair of SaskPower, 
and I quote: 
 

“I was given the responsibility as vice-chairman of the 
Board to resolve the issue of severance for (the) former 
president and chief executive officer, John R. Messer. I 
have officially advised the Minister Responsible for the 
Crown Corporation earlier today that we have reached an 
agreement with Mr. Messer, based on the advice of legal 
counsel, that provides for a severance of fifteen months 
salary with benefits. Additional severance provides an 
option for three months further if Mr. Messer has not 
obtained appropriate employment. 
 

So, Mr. Speaker, I say, on behalf of CIC, we have received 
from Mr. Milt Fair his advice that a settlement has been 
reached. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, this 
is unbelievable. Jack Messer just lost the taxpayers $10 million. 
How on earth can you justify giving him 300,000 more 
taxpayers’ money as a reward for his negligence and 
incompetence? 
 
Mr. Minister, this is a slap in the face to every taxpayer in the 
province. It’s disgusting. It’s obscene. It’s wrong. You should 
be suing Jack Messer and putting a lien against his fly-free 
farm, not giving him severance. 
 
Will you answer the question, Mr. Minister? Will you 
immediately cancel this obscene severance package and initiate 
legal action? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — The members opposite say that we 
shouldn’t have politics on the boards of our Crown 
corporations, i.e., SaskPower. So when the severance issue of 
Mr. Messer came up, I referred it to the new board, to Mr. Milt 
Fair, to Mr. Milt Fair who went outside and got legal counsel. 
 
Mr. Member, this is a legal issue, not a political issue. And I say 
to you, come clean. You’re saying we should involve ourselves 
in a political way, and I say to you that is wrong. This is a legal 
issue, and Mr. Messer should be treated in the right way — the 
way Mr. Milt Fair, with legal counsel, has brought about a 
solution. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
minister tells us that there’s been a thorough investigation of the 
Channel Lake deal. Yet in today’s paper he makes the 
incredible admission that he still doesn’t know who signed the 
contract. In other words, he still hasn’t read the contract 
himself. 
 
He still doesn’t know who signed the botched deal that gave 

away $5 million of taxpayers’ money. Mr. Minister, this is a 
critical question in determining liability. Did Jack Messer sign 
the contract? Did Jack Messer fail in his responsibility to 
present proper information to the SaskPower board and cabinet? 
If so, why on earth are you giving Jack Messer severance? Why 
aren’t you suing him? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — If the member would read the 
Deloitte & Touche report — if you would read it — you would 
find all of the clauses, including the fact that members of the 
management of SaskPower were responsible for the issue that 
we’re dealing with. 
 
And I say to the member opposite that you should come clean 
with the people of the province. Read the document. Read the 
document; not try to twist the truth on whether there was a 
profit made or not. The auditor speaks to that issue here. Why 
don’t you come clean and tell the truth here in the Assembly? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, on Tuesday we 
heard you trying to sound contrite. You said: we made a 
mistake; we learned our lesson; we’re sorry; we’re going to 
make changes. Mr. Minister, you’ve learned nothing and you’re 
changing nothing. You’re still paying off your buddies no 
matter how badly they’ve messed up. And you’re still using 
taxpayers’ money to do it. 
 
Mr. Minister, there’s only one change that’s going to make a 
difference, and that’s when the people of Saskatchewan throw 
out your government and elect a Saskatchewan Party 
government in the next provincial election. And today’s pay-off 
of Jack Messer just brought that day one day closer. Mr. 
Minister, when will you learn? Are you going to cancel this 
obscene pay-off? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Let me get it straight again. The 
member says that the arrangement made by Milt Fair, with legal 
consultation in a non-political way, should be cancelled and that 
I as the minister, the politician, should take that deal and scrap 
it. That’s what you’re saying. 
 
I would ask you to get your story straight. Do you want the 
old-style boards with politicians making the decision or do you 
want what . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. Order. Now all 
hon. members will recognize that the Minster for CIC is not that 
far away from the Speaker and I’m having difficulty being able 
to hear — order — and I’m having difficulty being able to hear 
the answer being provided. I will ask all hon. members to allow 
the courtesy of the minister to be heard in providing the 
response. 
 
Next question. 
 

First Nations Financial Accountability 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Tuesday when I 
called on the Minister of Aboriginal Affairs to meet with the 
first nations accountability coalition, I was accused of playing 
partisan politics. Later, after throwing me out of his office, he 



March 12, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 71 

basically dismissed the native group by saying it was a federal 
problem. The poverty they are living in was not his 
responsibility. 
 
This government has a plan for poverty, a plan for child 
prostitution, for fetal alcohol syndrome and so on, yet it is the 
natives who suffer the most from these problems. 
 
Native people are telling you two things — there is enough 
money in the system but the system is failing the need of native 
people and the programs for these problems are just band-aid 
solutions because the government refuses to address the big 
issue. 
 
Why did you spend thousands of dollars to deal with the 
national unity question when it was not necessarily your 
jurisdiction, yet you refuse to take responsibility for the 
aboriginal portfolio? 
 
Mr. Minister, will you commit today to work with the first 
nations people and an all-party committee to develop an action 
plan for aboriginal poverty and accountability? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker. If the member is suggesting 
that the national unity of this country is not something that this 
government and all of us should be concerned about, I can only 
say that I have to disagree with the member; it is a concern for 
us. 
 
And with respect, Mr. Speaker, to any funds within provincial 
jurisdiction, our processes are good. And although we don’t 
provide much by way of direct funding to Indian bands, when 
we do, we demand, Mr. Speaker, full accountability and full 
auditing with respect to those funds. And in the event that there 
is no full accountability and full auditing, Mr. Speaker, we stop 
payment. That’s what we do. 
 
There is no problem with respect to the . . . any provision of a 
small amount, in rare instances, of funds to Indian bands. I say 
to the member, the member well knows that Indian bands are 
funded by the federal government and we join with the member 
in saying that the federal government too should demand full 
accountability. We have no disagreement with the member in 
that regard, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Health Care System Review 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is to the Minister of Health. Mr. Minister, six years 
into the NDP’s health care reform program and what have we 
today? We have chaos — doctors leaving, hospitals closing, 
waiting-lists growing. Mr. Minister, it’s clear your health 
strategy is on life support and it’s time to do something about it. 
 
Mr. Minister, the Conference Board of Canada has called for a 
full and thorough review of the health care system across the 
country. Today after question period we will be introducing a 
Bill that will be calling for and allowing for that procedure to be 
completed. 

Mr. Minister, will you join with us and will you indeed commit 
yourself to a complete and full review of health care in this 
province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you, thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. To the question from the member from Moosomin, in 
Saskatchewan, as the member knows, over the last five years 
we’ve been proceeding with the help and assistance of 
Saskatchewan people in developing a health care system that in 
fact is going to be compassionate and caring and 
accommodating and reflects the needs of all Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, we have 30 health care boards in this 
province, in the southern part, and two now in the northern part 
of this province, who in fact are delivering a comprehensive 
series of health care services for which the public are grateful 
for. In the days to come, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to continue 
to work with those district health care boards to enrich, as we 
have, one of the richest health care programs in the province. 
And we’ll continue to work with the district health care boards 
to ensure that that continues. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
question is to the Premier. Mr. Premier, last week we saw Tom 
Crosby, an elected member of the Regina Health District Board, 
speak out about the need to keep the Plains hospital open. Now 
a second elected board member, Dr. Borden Bachynski, is 
indeed speaking out. He’s a respected physician in the province 
. . . in the city of Regina. 
 
Mr. Premier, yesterday you told SARM that you were calling 
for a moratorium on branch line abandonment until a federal 
grain transportation . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Now once again all hon. 
members will recognize that the hon. member for Moosomin is 
not seated all that far away from the Speaker’s chair and is 
unable to be heard in putting his question. I will ask all hon. 
members to allow the hon. member to be heard and put his 
question. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, and to the 
Premier: yesterday, Mr. Premier, you called for a moratorium 
on branch line abandonment until the federal grain 
transportation review is completed. 
 
Mr. Premier, will you today now walk the talk, and will you 
indeed do the same thing and call on your Health minister to 
call for a moratorium until a full review of the health care 
system in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I want to reinforce a statement that I made 
yesterday when I spoke to the SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association) convention and was asked the very 
same question. And the member from Moosomin knows full 
well — at the SARM convention, excuse me — the member 



72 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 1998 

knows full well that over the past five years there have been 
three district health boards that have now acted on the 
recommendations. And there have been two recommendations 
and two studies that have been completed. 
 
Those recommendations have said that in the city of Sask . . . of 
Regina and for southern Saskatchewan, we will have two health 
care facilities. And these two health care facilities are going to 
serve not only the city of Regina but are going to serve the 
southern part of the province, in an efficient and an effective 
manner. 
 
Associated to that, Mr. Speaker, will be the inclusion of 
additional equipment — a new MRI (magnetic resonance 
imaging), a new scanner for . . . a new CAT (computerized axial 
tomography) scanner, and there’ll be additional new equipment 
for the cardiology department. 
 
So today we’re going to have more advanced technology and 
we’ll have more services for people today than we’ve ever had, 
and we’re associating our work around services to people and 
not to the retention of buildings, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Multiple Sclerosis Drugs 
 

Mr. McLane: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday in this House we 
urged the Minister of Health to adopt the Liberal opposition’s 
Made in Saskatchewan solution to the current problem that the 
victims of multiple sclerosis are facing. As we pointed out, the 
present arbitrary criteria is preventing many MS (multiple 
sclerosis) victims who might benefit from Betaseron or 
Copazone access to these drugs. Mr. Minister, you’re picking 
winners and losers. 
 
Following question period yesterday the Minister of Health 
indicated to the media that if people are being turned down 
simply because they are not ambulatory, then the criteria is 
flawed. Mr. Minister, you admit the criteria is flawed; what are 
you prepared to do about it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, as I said to the member from 
Arm River yesterday, is that we have a panel in Saskatchewan 
that is providing the kinds of services that are consistent with 
the assessments and evaluations in final decision-making of the 
three other provinces that have insured both drugs for people 
who are MS victims. In Saskatchewan today three-quarters of 
the people who have in fact . . . 75 per cent of the people whose 
applications have been submitted to the panel have in fact been 
approved. 
 
Yesterday I said, Mr. Speaker, and confirm again today, that if 
there are people who have in fact been inhibited or in fact their 
claims have been of concern because they were not ambulatory 
at the time that they made their submission to the panel, then in 
fact that particular piece of the, of the review, that particular 
piece needs to be reviewed. And the panel will do that. 
 
But to date, Mr. Speaker, there have been no applications that 
have come to the panel in where somebody has not . . . where 

somebody has not been ambulatory because they’re in a 
wheelchair. We have not yet received any of those, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, we 
heard yesterday how people are being victimized by your 
policy; you saw them here in this House. That should be enough 
visual for you to make a change. 
 
The criteria to access these drugs is not fair and it must be 
changed. But what concerns these people even more is that a 
government which is supposed to represent them is 
discriminating against these people. This government is turning 
a deaf ear on their concerns. This government is refusing to 
provide them with hope — what these people need — so that 
these drugs might help them live a normal life. 
 
How can you continue to support arbitrary rules which are 
preventing MS victims from accessing drugs which will let 
some of them lead more active lives, more normal lives? Why 
won’t you support these changes, Mr. Minister? Is it because 
you need the money to back-fill your fiascos in the Crown 
corporations? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, first of all, I want to 
say to the member opposite that in Saskatchewan today, we’ve 
made a commitment. This government has made a commitment 
to support people who have MS in this province and are putting 
into the pharmacare program a significant injection to ensure 
that people are covered off. Unlike, Mr. Speaker, six other 
provinces and two other territories in this country who don’t 
insure any medication for multiple sclerosis. 
 
But for the member from Arm River to be talking about our 
financial commitment to the province of Saskatchewan is a joke 
compared to what he’s done in terms of assisting us on the 
federal cut-backs across this country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today in this province, we are . . . we’ve picked up 
every penny of federal cut-backs. And in this recent budget, 
we’ve seen a significant reduction again to our programs and 
services, a greater enhancement. Has the Liberal member stood 
forward, stood up, and recognized the losses that we’ve had 
from the federal government? The answer is no, Mr. Speaker. 
They have not. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Twinning the Trans-Canada Highway 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to introduce the Minister of Highways to Joan Kortje, her 
husband, Jim, and other family members and friends who have 
joined us in the legislature today. 
 
Madam Minister, the Kortje’s daughter, Jennifer, and 
granddaughter, Michelle, were killed during the Christmas 
holidays, both travelling on the single-lane stretch of the 
Trans-Canada Highway near Gull Lake. Since this tragic 



March 12, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 73 

accident, Joan has helped the Liberal opposition with a petition 
drive aimed at convincing you that 49 deaths on the single-lane 
portions of the Trans-Canada in the past 10 years is too many; 
that the time has come for a commitment to twin Highway No. 
1. 
 
Madam Minister, are you prepared to make that commitment 
today? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s always 
tragic any time there is a death on any roads in our province. 
And I really do have sympathy for the family that faces that 
kind of tragedy. 
 
And I am pleased though that our government has been able to 
make a commitment of $2.5 billion over the next 10 years in 
Highways and Transportation, make a commitment, make a 
commitment to twinning over the next 15 years. 
 
As I was saying, it is always tragic when there is an accident 
and it is incumbent on us as a government to do the very best 
we can to make our roads safe, to make sure that vehicles on 
those roads are safe, and that the people driving those vehicles 
are safe. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Supplementary to the Minister of Highways, 
Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Joan Kortje and the Liberal 
opposition are not alone. More than 30,000 people have now 
signed petitions calling on you to get to work. To date we’ve 
heard nothing but feeble attempts aimed at shirking your 
provincial responsibility. 
 
Madam Minister, your government says you’ll get to it in 15 
years. In spite of the fact that 49 people have died and more 
than 2,000 accidents have occurred on the two single-lane 
stretches of the Trans-Canada in the past 10 years, it doesn’t 
appear in the department’s top 20 list of priority projects. 
 
Madam Minister, the Premier often speaks about finding Made 
in Saskatchewan solutions to problems but surely part of that 
solution has to include your government caring. How many 
more accidents must occur? How many more people must die 
before you develop a Made in Saskatchewan solution to this 
issue? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Like I said previously, we’ve made a 
commitment; we’re going to be putting money into the 
highways in this province and into the twinning. 
 
But I would like to say that we also . . . this is a national 
highways program, that we have been at the table. We’ve put 
our money on the table and the response that we’ve got from 
your federal cousins has been zero. And so we have taken our 
responsibility very seriously. We have made a commitment to 
it. I’d like to know where the federal government is. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Second supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Madam 
Minister, in next week’s budget, one week from today, you’ll 
have the opportunity to do what you should have done a long 

time ago. You have the opportunity to return most of the $187 
million that you’ve taken from the Highways budget since 
coming to power to ensure that the Trans-Canada can be 
twinned now, not in 15 years. 
 
I invite you to meet the Kortjes in the rotunda following the 
question period so they and the Liberal opposition can present 
you with petitions containing 30,000 signatures. Will you meet 
with them? Will you make a commitment to the Kortjes to show 
that their daughter and granddaughter didn’t die in vain? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Yes, I’d like to thank you again for that 
question. We have made our commitment — our dollars are on 
the table. I certainly hope that you’re also making the same 
letters . . . the same concerns made to the federal government. 
Because if we could get cost sharing, we would certainly do this 
in half the amount of time. 
 
I certainly will . . . I would certainly meet with the family. I will 
certainly be interested in the petitions that come in. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Sale of Channel Lake 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve now heard that we’ve 
coughed up a quarter million for Jack Messer so that there 
won’t have to be a court case that might get a bit sticky. But 
what about Lawrence Portigal? He’s the guy that the Deputy 
Premier told us in December had simply quit and got another 
job. And now I understand he’s giving interviews in Calgary 
saying he never did work for SaskPower in Channel Lake; he 
was a consultant. Did we in fact pay any severance pay to Mr. 
Portigal? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I want to make it clear to the 
member opposite when he raises the issue of the severance 
package, and because it was so extremely noisy in the 
Assembly and I know you’re just returning from the press 
conference, I want to read an important part into the record 
because I’m not sure it was all carried. But I want to quote from 
the press release in which Mr. Milt Fair says: 
 

I was given the responsibility as vice-chairman of the 
Board to resolve the issue of severance for (the) former 
president and chief executive officer, (Mr.) John R. 
Messer. I have officially advised the Minister Responsible 
for Crown Investments Corporation earlier today that we 
have reached an agreement with Mr. Messer, based on the 
advice of my legal counsel. 

 
It goes on to say: 

 
In undertaking this assignment to determine severance, on 
behalf of the new SaskPower Board, I engaged the services 
of Rob Garden, a well-known employment lawyer with 
McPherson, Leslie & Tyerman in Saskatoon. 

 
I say to the member opposite that this was the best deal that 
could be arranged by Mr. Fair on behalf of the shareholders of 
the province of Saskatchewan. As to the role of Mr. Portigal 



74 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 1998 

that you raise, I want to say to you that Mr. Portigal was on 
contract with SaskPower on a month-to-month basis. That 
contract ended on June 4, 1997. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, with leave, 
to introduce a guest. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I note in 
your gallery a gentleman who just joined us following the 
introduction of guests, Mr. Randy Rapitta, who works in the 
Kipling hospital. In fact he’s an orderly in the hospital. He runs 
and manages the Kipling & District Ambulance Service and, 
Mr. Speaker, he certainly does a fine job. I think he’s a person 
that anyone could count on. And so I’d like the Assembly to 
recognize Mr. Rapitta, who’s joined us this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Mr. Speaker, another gentleman joined us, in 
your gallery, after the regular introduction of guests and I would 
like to introduce to all members of the Assembly, Mr. Maurice 
Werezak. 
 
Mr. Werezak is a key person in the United Food and 
Commercial Workers all across this province, and is leading the 
Maple Leaf boycott in this province. And I would like members 
to welcome him to the chambers. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 1 — The Arts Board Amendment Act, 1998 
 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 1, 
The Arts Board Amendment Act, 1998, be now introduced and 
read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 2 — The Correctional Services 
Amendment Act, 1998 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 2, The 
Correctional Services Amendment Act, 1998, be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 3 — The Public Utilities Easements 
Amendment Act, 1998 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 3, The 
Public Utilities Easements Amendment Act, 1998, be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 4 — The Saskatchewan Evidence 
Amendment Act, 1998 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 4, The 
Saskatchewan Evidence Amendment Act, 1998 be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill 206 — The Community Associations Residential 
Telephone Rate Designation Act 

 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move the first reading 
of Bill No. 206, The Community Associations Residential 
Telephone Rate Designation Act. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 208 — The Legislative Assembly 
Public Presentations Act 

 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that the 
Bill, An Act respecting Public Presentations to the Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan be now introduced and read for the 
first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
Bill No. 209 — The Public Inquiries Amendment Act, 1998 

(Health Care System Review) 
 

Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, I move Bill No. 209, The Public 
Inquiries Amendment Act, 1998, be now introduced and read 
the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 213 — The Local Government Election 
Amendment Act, 1998 

 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 
move first reading of Bill No. 213, The Local Government 
Election Amendment Act, be introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 



March 12, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 75 

(1430) 
 

Bill No. 217 — The Legislative Assembly and Executive 
Council Amendment Act, 1998 

(Sessional Dates) 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
move that a Bill to amend The Legislative Assembly and 
Executive Council Act respecting the termination of sessional 
dates be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 221 — The Legislative Assembly and Executive 
Council Amendment Act, 1998 

(Duration of Assembly) 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
move that a Bill to amend The Legislative Assembly and 
Executive Council Amendment Act, 1998 (Duration of 
Assembly) be introduced now and read for the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 233  An Act to amend The Surface Rights 
Acquisition and Compensation Amendment Act, 1998 

 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to move first 
reading of a Bill — Bill No. 233 of 1998, An Act to amend The 
Surface Rights Acquisition and Compensation Amendment Act. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

Hon. Ms. Bradley: — I request leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Thank you. I wish to introduce in your 
gallery, Mr. Speaker, to the Legislative Assembly, two people 
from the RM of Weyburn. The Reeve, Phil Barbiarz, and 
Councillor Ron Lutz. And I’m really pleased that they’re here 
today and I’ll be meeting with them shortly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Jess: — I request leave to introduce a guest. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Jess: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to introduce 
to you, Mr. Glenn Tait in your . . . in the Speaker’s gallery, a 
councillor from the RM of Meota . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Yes, and a former NDP candidate. So welcome him here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of Ms. Hamilton, seconded by Mr. Ward, and the 
proposed amendment thereto moved by Mr. Krawetz. 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I had the opportunity to make a few comments 
yesterday and I just didn’t quite finish so I would just like to, I 
would just like to make a few more comments, if I could, before 
I close my comments on the debate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said yesterday, and repeat today, I’m very 
proud to stand here and to wholeheartedly endorse the throne 
speech and a speech that invests in people and builds on our 
common values. I’m very proud of that theme. 
 
And of course, I’m more proud of the substance in that theme. 
 
And investing in the future, investing in building on our 
common values, well, what does that really mean? I just want to 
recap. That means investing in jobs; it means investing in 
families, investing in health care, education, transportation — 
not just highways but a transportation policy in a 
comprehensive way, within a fiscal framework that’s 
responsible. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m very proud of those 
priorities. 
 
Now with regard to investing in families. I think every member 
of this House would agree that the level of family poverty, child 
poverty, family poverty, children live in families, is 
unacceptable in Canada. It just simply is a blight on everyone. 
And we need to remind ourselves that we are committed to the 
United Nations declaration — the elimination of poverty. And 
that isn’t just a slogan. We have to deal with it, treat that very 
seriously. We have to walk the talk as my colleague from 
Saskatoon Southeast says. 
 
And we believe . . . Although we would certainly appreciate a 
little more federal support, but we can’t wait on that. We have 
to try and do what we can ourselves, as Saskatchewan people 
have done many times over the years and have a proud record 
of leading in innovative and creative ways. 
 
From our point of view, we believe that the Child Benefit which 
now the federal government has agreed to join us on . . . I want 
to give a lot of credit to lots of people, but certainly we know 
that our Premier is at the forefront of this discussion as a 
Premier in Canada, as a national leader, and has been promoting 
that alternative, positive agenda for some time. And that 
program will make a big difference to many low income 
families, Mr. Speaker. And I know that all members of the 
House would support that. I would hope all members of the 
House would support building on that kind of a program. 
 
In addition to that . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . that’s right. 
We have to make sure that we’re vigilant in ensuring everyone 
does. 
 



76 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 1998 

Secondly, the Saskatchewan employment support program. 
Again that is . . . I know that all members are legitimately 
concerned about raising everyone up. We have to be. That’s our 
responsibility here — supporting families, raising them up and 
giving them opportunities. But the employment support 
program does just that. It does just that. It’s an innovative 
program. As it unfolds during the budget speech and the 
Minister of Social Services talks more about that, I think people 
will see that it is an innovative program like we haven’t seen for 
25, 30 years. It’s of that magnitude. It’ll make a big difference. 
 
Of course we know, Mr. Speaker, that there are low income 
families who are worried at times about their ability or inability 
to cover certain health care costs. Now we believe that we’re 
pioneering in Canada on this front too. Now that’s a matter of 
public record. We’ll be pioneering in Canada on this front while 
we provide health care benefits to low income working families 
who are not on assistance. And we’re very proud of that. 
 
In addition, of course we already are providing training support 
to families with our training strategy based on their needs, their 
family needs, and the number of children and so on, so that it’s 
a realistic amount to live on. 
 
So when you take that package as a whole, when you take that 
package as a whole, with a buoyant economy within the good 
fiscal framework that we’ve been able to build in the province, 
a partnership with government and communities, I think that 
bodes well for the future. 
 
And so we’re very proud of the investment in families part of 
the throne speech. We’re very proud of the economic activity 
around the province. We’re very proud of the job numbers. It’s 
a credit to the Saskatchewan regional economic development 
authorities and to the small-business sector, to the co-op sector, 
to the partnershipping that’s occurring around and within the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
There was a representative here today from the home-based 
business association; an explosion in Saskatchewan perhaps like 
no other province. Which again shows that if you create the 
right climate and provide the right supports, Saskatchewan 
business people are creative and innovative and will rise to the 
top. That’s been our history in that area too. 
 
But certainly on the job front, the research and development 
initiatives that will be announced shortly, certainly the 
innovation, the market capability — we’re already tapping 
world markets in many important ways, and this throne speech 
builds on that expansion. And it certainly builds on the rural job 
creation focus — which is not unrelated to what I’ve said to this 
point — but there will be certain initiatives as well that will 
complement that in the budget. And of course strengthening the 
co-op sector, which is critical. That’s one of our trademarks in 
Saskatchewan, is how we work collectively together. This is 
why our theme of building on our common values is sort of an 
integrated part of that whole package. 
 
The third investment we’re making in the throne speech — 
investing in education and training, which sort of go hand in 
hand. Education doesn’t stop when you sort of finish grade 8 or 
grade 12 or SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science 
and Technology) or university or whatever. And that is the key 

to getting out of poverty. 
 
Lifelong education is the key to best position our 
Saskatchewan, not only our young people — but certainly our 
young people — but all people, all people, to give them the 
opportunities for advancement and to compete and to continue 
to expand the tax base, which is what everybody wants to do 
and which is happening in Saskatchewan. We’re very proud of 
that. We’ve got more people working today than ever before in 
the history of this province. And I think Saskatchewan people 
should be — but they are — proud of that. And we just need to 
continue to build on that. 
 
So investing in education and training. We have a training 
strategy. We will see in this session and of course in the budget 
the continued strengthening of the university and the SIAST 
sector, the technical sector. You’ll see an expansion of the 
JobStart, Future Skills programs, and the aboriginal 
development programs in terms of, given the demographics of 
the province and the position of many aboriginal people in 
terms of the lack of opportunities. This is another important 
partnership that is vital to the future health of families, 
aboriginal communities, and of course the province as a whole. 
And of course the expanded — another part of that — the 
expanded apprenticeship program. 
 
And I might say as a matter of public record, as businesses 
know, we pretty well let our apprenticeship programs go by the 
wayside in the 1980s. And that was I think, partly because the 
economy was in a downturn and people simply fled 
Saskatchewan to go to other provinces for jobs. Fortunately 
many of those people are coming back and we’ve been building 
the apprenticeship programs back up again and we will continue 
to do that. And again, it will be strengthened in the budget 
speech, I’m sure. 
 
Health care, Mr. Speaker — the fourth investment in the throne 
speech. Very precious, always, in Saskatchewan. I might say, if 
I can, very precious within the movement that I’m proud to be 
associated with — the CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth 
Federation)-NDP movement. 
 
Health care has been a sacred trust that has been moulded and 
shaped with Saskatchewan people under the governance of our 
kinds of philosophy and government. And I won’t say anything 
about those who opposed it. I think that’s pretty clear in the 
minds of Saskatchewan people — who you can trust and who 
you can’t trust with the health care file. 
 
But this budget will strengthen that to make sure that health 
care will be there, good research and development will be there, 
and the kind of security that people feel that has been eroded by 
the national $7 billion cuts to the health care budget in the last 
two years. We think we can. We’ll have to restore it without 
federal support, because it’s obvious that the federal 
government . . . Mr. Chrétien is saying that the medicare system 
in Canada doesn’t need any more support. 
 
Now we don’t agree with him on that, and I think that most 
Canadians don’t agree with that. I know that the provincial 
Liberal Party agrees with the Prime Minister that health care in 
Canada is adequately funded. We don’t agree with that. And 
we’re hoping to convince our colleagues of this — in the 



March 12, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 77 

Liberal Party — to join us, that health care in Canada is not 
adequately funded. 
 
But as we had to in medicare initially, we went it alone, and 
we'll have to do it here too, if necessary. We’ll do that, Mr. 
Speaker, but I would urge, I would urge the Leader of the 
Opposition, or the Leader of the Liberal Party, third party, who 
I know is very concerned about the health and well-being of 
Saskatchewan people, to take Mr. Rock’s invitation to write to 
the Prime Minister and say that health care does need some 
more money. And that would also be a big help to us in 
Saskatchewan. But we’ll continue to build alone anyway. 
 
(1445) 
 
Of course, Mr. Speaker, transportation is the fifth piece of 
investing in people. And I think the Minister of Transportation 
did a pretty good job today by saying that this is another area 
where the feds are getting off the hook. 
 
I mean when you think about the, you know, the No. 1 
Highway, the Canadian highway that sort of links east and west 
from sea to sea, but somehow the federal government all of a 
sudden, unilaterally, says that we don’t have any responsibility 
here when historically that’s been the case. And again I have to 
say this — and I hate to say this; it hurts me to say this — but 
the Liberal Party of Saskatchewan lets them off the hook. And 
they know that that’s been a national highway system. 
 
They didn’t say anything when the Crow left. They’re letting 
railways be abandoned left, right and centre. And the 
Saskatchewan government just simply can’t, on its own, 
support the kinds of responsibilities that Canada as a country is 
obligated to assist in — and it has traditionally done that. 
 
And that’s one of my concerns about the federal government, is 
whether it’s highways or health care or a social program, 
including health care programs, or the aboriginal treaty rights, 
they simply walked away unilaterally from their 
responsibilities. 
 
In the area of . . . And they’ve even walked away, they walked 
away when they’ve had legal responsibilities not to walk away. 
But I think that’s very serious, Mr. Speaker, and we just simply 
can’t . . . you can’t run a country that way, you simply can’t run 
a country that way. 
 
And it’s no surprise to me, it’s no surprise to me that the people 
are looking across, are looking at what the national symbols are 
when we continue to dismantle the national symbols, like the 
threat to the CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation), the 
national highway system, the Crow rate, and of course we 
abandon the health, education, and income security programs. 
You can’t keep a country together when you don’t focus on the 
symbols that have held us together over the years. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, that’s not the way Canada was built. 
That’s not the way we’re going to pull together as a country in 
the future. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, that all comes within a physical framework. 
All of that package comes within a good physical framework. A 
sort of, the mess of the 80’s is still with us. That mess, that Tory 

mess of the 80’s, which is the same Saskatchewan Party, that 
mess will be with us for generations. It’s a sad legacy on the 
Devine Tory era — that is the same party — and future 
generations are going to pay for that. 
 
They are going to pay for that because they’ve got to pay down 
the debt. Young people are going to have to pay their own way 
more than they did in the past because there isn’t going to be 
the money. They’re not going to perhaps have the same 
opportunities, especially if the federal government keeps 
pulling out of education and health care and so on. And that’s 
putting young people on their course, accumulating high debts 
in terms of their student loans. That’s created a lot of anxiety 
amongst our younger generation, and of course our older 
generation as well because they see the erosion of the national 
programs that they built and thought were in place. I guess that 
shows us that you can’t take these things for granted. 
 
Once they’re in place you have to be vigilant and always fight 
to make sure that governments don’t come along . . . Now this 
started, much of this started under the Mulroney Tories, as it did 
the Devine Tories in Saskatchewan. But the problem with the 
current federal government is they promised to do something 
different and they accelerated these dismantling processes that 
were started under the Mulroney administration. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we believe — well we don’t only believe, we 
know — we’re in step with Saskatchewan people on investing 
in jobs, in families, in health care, education and training, in 
transportation. Given Saskatchewan’s geographic make-up and 
economy and the importance of highways and transportation, 
we have to view that as an investment. That is in sync with 
Saskatchewan people, and of course within a good physical 
framework. 
 
So we believe we’re in step with Saskatchewan people. We 
know we are. We just have to ignore the calls of the opposition 
and say that those are the wrong priorities. They’re just 
fundamentally wrong. And we’ll keep building. We’ll keep 
with Saskatchewan people, providing some hope and 
opportunity. And the future prospects do look bright. 
 
That’s why when I look at the amendment that the Leader of the 
Opposition . . . I want to highlight this because I think that the 
House Leader will feel a bit embarrassed about this after what 
I’ve just said. 
 
When I go over these six priorities that . . . I know he’s a family 
man and he knows he supports families and he’s a health care 
critic. And so I know that investing in those things would be 
important to the Opposition House Leader. 
 
But then his colleague, his leader, says . . . makes an 
amendment to the motion on the Speech from the Throne. He 
says, the official opposition: 
 

regrets the lack of a new vision and direction of the 
government and calls on the government to change this 
course through meaningful consultation with 
Saskatchewan people through a re-examination of the real 
priorities of taxpayers; and further, calls on the government 
to adopt the policies of grass roots voters as reflected in the 
policies of the Saskatchewan Party. 



78 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 1998 

Well I don’t know what the grass roots policies of the 
Saskatchewan Party are. So that’s like saying, give us a blank 
cheque and we’ll fill it out. And I don’t know what that means 
because, Mr. Speaker, there’s a valid . . . I would like to see that 
grass roots policy statement, because I think Saskatchewan 
people would like to see that statement because . . . And they 
say that this is a new approach. 
 
Just criticizing to criticize is not a new approach in politics. 
That’s not like a breath of fresh air. That’s as old a style of 
politics as you can get — just to condemn something because 
you’re opposition. That doesn’t make any sense. 
 
Now the Leader of the Opposition was up yesterday and he 
didn’t say one thing . . . Or I stand to be corrected. He might 
have said one or two things, but nothing of substance that the 
Saskatchewan . . . the Conservative Party stands for. All he did 
was criticize the current administration for investing in people, 
for investing in jobs, for investing in agriculture and roads. 
That’s all he did. And then he gets this negative amendment 
that he makes when we don’t even know what their policies are. 
 
What we do know though, what we do know is that the 
Conservative Party by any other name, which is the 
Saskatchewan Party now, they are going to be negative and they 
are going to be cynical. And they like to . . . I know that my 
good friend doesn’t like to hear this — but the Tory Party in the 
’80s and into the ’90s is divisive; they like to pit one group 
against each other. 
 
There are many examples of that. I’m not saying this; people 
are telling me this. They like to pit many examples, whether it’s 
urban/rural or whether it’s different groups within communities 
or different groups across the province. 
 
And they want privatized medicine. We know that. So they’re 
clear about that. They want privatized medicine. At least the 
Liberals only want two-tier medicine. You want privatized 
medicine all the way — Alabama-style medicine. At least the 
Liberals only want two-tier, so at least we can work on that. 
 
And they want . . . So that we do know, and I respect that. If the 
Saskatchewan Party says that we want privatized medicine and 
we want to sell the hospitals and we want profit-creating health 
care, at least they’re honest about it, and I can respect that. I 
don’t agree with them but at least they’re honest, and that I 
respect. I respect it less when we see the federal Liberals 
campaign on one thing and do something else. 
 
Now I can only assume that the provincial Liberals, if they ever 
had the opportunity, would do what Liberals have always done 
— they’ve campaigned on one set of agenda, one platform, and 
then they change it to another. In fact in 1995 — and the 
member will know this, your leader will know this — the 
Liberal Party of Saskatchewan started campaigning on one 
thing about economic development and they thought: well 4 per 
cent growth isn’t enough; we’re going to raise it to 8 per cent. 
So we rubbed out the platform and put in 8 per cent, and then 
they didn’t know what to do. 
 
So now the current Leader of the Liberal Party is saying, well it 
can’t be 8 per cent, that’s not realistic. But the point is, their 
record is campaigning on one view and doing something else. 

So if they believe in two-tier medicine, I’d like to know what 
that second tier includes. And I think it’s up to . . . the Liberal’s 
have to explain what they mean by what should belong to that 
second tier. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, what I would like to do is to hear more about 
what the Liberals really stand for, because again my good friend 
from North Battleford — now he was very complimentary to 
me so this sort of hurts me to say this — but my good friend 
from North Battleford, apart from complimenting me, he 
criticized this government on every front. Like if you read that 
speech, which I did today . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well I 
got the press. Because he reads . . . but it isn’t that bad. 
Saskatchewan people . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Don’t do 
that. Saskatchewan people are not that depressed. But he 
criticized the government, which is fine, but he didn’t offer, he 
didn’t offer any alternatives. And part of a 
government-in-waiting, which he says he is, says you’ve got to 
offer alternatives, and he didn’t do that. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, they’ve never . . . And I would say that the 
Conservative Party, trying to rename themselves the 
Saskatchewan Party which, by the way, a lot of Saskatchewan 
people are quite offended about, but you’ll have to deal with 
that in the polls. But the Conservative Party, along with the 
Liberal Party, these are nice, very nice, caring people, but the 
record shows — the record shows — in the House, that they 
have not voted. They have not voted. And I don’t know if all 
members realize this, but the record shows that they have not 
voted for things that would lift people up. 
 
They voted last year against a budget that gave support to low 
income people, that gave support to aboriginal people, and that 
gave support for better housing. There were housing initiatives 
— social housing initiatives — announced in 1997. You did not 
support those. They did not support those, and yet they say 
they’re concerned about social housing, especially the member 
from the North. And he did not support, he did not support a 
budget that supported . . . And not only that, he let his federal 
counterparts off the hook by pulling out of social housing. I 
don’t know how he justifies that, and then says that he’s 
interested in representing his people in the North, Mr. Speaker. 
So he’s got to spell out what he means. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, all we know to this point is that the 
Conservative Party has to have two-tier health or they want to 
phase out the health care system for private health. They want 
to privatize the Crown corporations, and at least they’re honest 
about that. They’re honest about that. 
 
They want to phase out unions and they’re on record — if not 
saying it directly — all of their votes would indicate that that’s 
their position. 
 
And what offends me, and I think offends a lot of people, is a 
Saskatchewan Party continues to criticize aboriginal 
organizations. They continue to, and then do the political 
manoeuvring that they were trying to do today to somehow 
pretend that they’re supporting aboriginal people. 
 
Aboriginal people have a very clear idea that the Saskatchewan 
Conservative Party does not support their initiatives. And 
there’s no mistaking about that. And they know. And we’ve got 



March 12, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 79 

no lessons to learn from the member from Kelvington on this 
front, who is lecturing us today about what we should learn 
regarding working with first nations and Metis people. 
 
And the final thing we know about them, is they want to lock 
up young people and throw away the key. And I just simply 
don’t support that kind of simplistic approach, which was why 
we’re in the mess we’re in today, is because that’s what 
approach they used 12 years ago. 
 
So apart from those things, I don’t know how they’re in step 
with grass roots Saskatchewan people because they haven’t 
said. 
 
Now we’re not quite finished with the Liberals yet because we 
know that they . . . because their positions are even less clear. 
And I would say that there is less frankness from them on this, 
therefore. 
 
Now the member from . . . my good friend from Melville — he 
is a very good friend — he says that we’re stealing your ideas; 
that the government is stealing the Liberal ideas on health care 
research. Well I hope he can send a few more over because we 
would like to see what they’re thinking; because Saskatchewan 
people don’t know what they’re thinking. They just don’t know 
what they’re thinking. 
 
And I would say that we are open; this is the openness we’ve 
had. Yes, we’re open to any good ideas. They’ve got some good 
ideas; we’d love . . . because that’s what partnership, that’s 
what building on your common values is all about. So have you 
got any more good ideas? We’d love to hear them, and we’ll 
work together. 
 
But we do know that you support two-tier health care. We know 
that you support two-tier health care and I think your leader is 
going to have to explain what he means by firing elected health 
boards, because he’s not come clean on this. Firing elected 
health boards and replacing them with people who know what 
they’re doing. That’s what he’s saying. I assume he means, my 
medical friends. I don’t know what he means by that. 
 
(1500) 
 
And I think there’s some anxiety around that. There’s also a fair 
amount of anxiety, Mr. Speaker, about the fact that the 
provincial Liberals are totally letting the federal Liberals off the 
hook on every front — social housing, the aboriginal programs, 
the treaty rights, the social assistance offloading, the health care 
offloading, and the transportation offloading. And they’re not 
saying anything about it. I just don’t understand that. Why you 
would let several hundreds of millions of dollars slip away, that 
Ottawa is taking, and somehow you believe that you’re 
supporting Saskatchewan people. You know you can’t just be a 
cheerleader for Mr. Chrétien, especially when he takes away 
money from the areas that are precious to Saskatchewan people. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we don’t know what their plan is on 
economic development. I’d like to know that, what the Liberal 
plan is on economic development other than 8 per cent growth 
per year. Now maybe that’s a good goal but is it realistic? I 
don’t know how they plan to get there. 
 

Now to the fairness, to the credit of the current leader, he’s 
saying it couldn’t be 8 per cent, so we respect that. But how 
would he try and get to 4 per cent or 3 per cent? What would he 
do? What would they do regarding training and education? It’s 
fine to say, it’s fine to say, well give the University of 
Saskatchewan $100 million for buildings and $50 million — 
and just pull numbers out of the air — but you can’t do that 
realistically when you’re being reduced by the federal 
government. 
 
So where are they going to get the money? What’s their strategy 
on training and education? What’s their strategy on . . . Sorry, 
what’s their poverty strategy? At least we have one out front. 
And we’re saying look, if we can build on that we will do that. 
 
Yesterday the member from North Battleford, who knows about 
this area — I know he does; he’s a legal-aid lawyer and a 
person concerned about social policies and family violence, and 
all the things that poverty . . . all the social ills that poverty 
creates — he didn’t say whether he has any positive suggestions 
or any positive ideas or views about our strategy to enhance 
opportunities for low income people and unemployed people. 
And I know he would have an important perspective on that. 
That’s the kind of dialogue that we need with the opposition. 
 
I don’t know what the Liberal policy is on transportation. I 
don’t know. I don’t know what their policy is on deficit 
reduction, because if we take . . . I assume there’s not a policy 
worked out yet on managing the debt and the deficit, which is 
fine, which is fine. I realize they lost half their caucus and they 
can’t do everything at once, but they’re going to have to be 
prepared to say what their fiscal policy is going to be, because 
so far I think their promises add up to several more hundred 
million dollars and would put us back where we were out of the 
Conservatives in the 1980s. So Saskatchewan people will need 
to know that. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I guess I would close by saying that I’m very 
proud, as I’ve tried to say, about the theme, investing in people, 
building on our common values. I just can’t see how that’s out 
of step with Saskatchewan people. 
 
And also it’s got substance in each of the six areas that I’ve 
mentioned. I think it’s clear but progressive. It’s a continuation 
— you don’t do this in one year — it’s a continuation of what 
we’ve tried to do for many, many years; what Saskatchewan 
people have tried to do and have told us is their priorities. 
 
There are improvements. We’ve got a long way to go, but there 
are good indicators. And it’s a positive approach which is 
successful, and you can never go wrong when you’re working 
with communities and supporting communities. We know that 
strong families and strong communities go hand in hand. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I can only surmise that the reason that the 
Conservative Party and the Liberal Party are concerned about 
the throne speech and the motion, and why they’ve got this 
goofy, negative motion is because you can’t take issue, you 
can’t take issue of these kinds of priorities because they reflect 
the priorities of the Saskatchewan people. 
 
So from my point of view, I’m proud to support the throne 
speech. I am proud of all of my colleagues, and the people of 



80 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 1998 

Saskatchewan. I’m privileged to continue serving, having this 
be my 10th year in my constituency in Saskatoon Eastview. 
 
And I guess we’ll have to drag the opposition into this century 
as we and the Saskatchewan people move into the next century. 
That’s just the way it is; they’re about a hundred years behind 
and that’s just the way their philosophy takes them, right. So 
we’ve done it in the past, and we’ll do it again, and we’ll just 
keep moving forward. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s certainly 
a pleasure to enter the debate this afternoon and make some 
comments in regards to our party’s view of the throne speech 
that was presented. 
 
First of all, Mr. Speaker, just a recognition of your role as 
Speaker. We certainly appreciate the way we’ve been able to 
work with you in the past and we look forward to that good 
working relationship continuing into the future. 
 
And as well, Mr. Speaker, just to acknowledge the fact that the 
program of visiting the schools throughout the province of 
Saskatchewan has certainly been well received and I commend 
you for that and wish you well. And I hope that this is a 
program that is continued on, that future Speakers continue that 
program. It’s certainly a good educational program and format 
for young people to hear about how this Legislative Assembly 
operates. And I was pleased to have been involved in one of the 
first ones that we had in this province. So I thank you for that, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I was listening to the member from Saskatoon 
speaking a few moments ago, and if he’ll just give me a 
moment, one of my colleagues has just gone to get one of our 
policy manuals and we’re going to send it across to him just so 
he can fill himself in and find out that a number of the policies 
that the Saskatchewan Party has currently developed certainly 
are coming from grass roots people — coming from the people 
of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I find it very interesting as I was listening to the 
member from Saskatoon and his speech. And at one time I was 
tempted to ask for a refund on that tape he had sold me, but 
actually the funds that he was collecting went to a good cause 
so we certainly won’t do that. I’m not exactly sure whether the 
tape was better than the speech but I want to commend the 
member for his comments. However, I have to add that I have 
to take issue with some of the comments he made. 
 
I think if the speaker was talking about being negative and not 
being negative, it seems to me that he could have certainly 
made some more positive comments rather than running down 
the other parties. And the fact that he took direct aim at the 
Saskatchewan Party would indicate to my colleagues and I that 
they have a right to take direct aim at us. They must be hearing 
a lot of the same things we’re hearing. 
 
Even at the SARM convention just recently, as I was talking to 
delegates and we talked about the throne speech that was just 
presented, some of the comments from the SARM delegates 
were basically: well that really doesn’t sound like there’s 

anything new; it doesn’t sound like there’s a vision there. 
 
Certainly I’ve been hearing it from constituents. Indeed the day 
the throne speech was made, I had a number of calls on my 
answering service — my only regret is that people didn’t leave 
a name and a phone number — raising a number of issues and 
basically reiterating the fact of what we were suggesting, that 
there was a lack of substance in the current throne speech. 
 
One of the other things when you talk about this throne speech 
and that it really didn’t have anything new, was the fact that 
even at the SARM convention yesterday when the Premier was 
speaking, a number of delegates not only talked about the lack 
of anything new in the throne speech, they . . . Some of the 
comments coming from some of the delegates were: it seems to 
me I know that speech; I think I’ve heard that for the fifth year 
in a row. 
 
So I think even SARM delegates are beginning to think that 
we’re hearing the same thing, that it really isn’t anything new 
— nothing that gives us any reason to believe that this province 
is listening to the concerns that we’re raising or that the Premier 
or that his cabinet colleagues are even listening. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it’s certainly a pleasure to stand here. And I 
see my colleague has brought in a bit of our platform, “A New 
Vision for Saskatchewan’s Future.” I’d like to send that over to 
the member from Saskatoon Nutana, I believe, at this time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as well, the member talked about . . . 
Unfortunately he brought up an issue that I take a little bit of an 
offence to. And while I acknowledge where my roots are and 
where I came from, I certainly don’t see the Saskatchewan 
Party representing anything different than what the people of 
Saskatchewan are looking for. 
 
But I take offence with the fact that the member would suggest 
that during the 1980s, the ’80s was such a period where 
government made some very difficult decisions and yet it took 
the province down a slippery slope to a place of doom. 
 
If the member would just look back a little bit, he would begin 
to realize, even as the member from Regina Dewdney who was 
the first Finance minister in 1992, acknowledge the fact that the 
only thing that was really doing anything for the province in 
1992 were issues like changes, like the Saskferco company, like 
Weyerhaeuser, like the upgraders. 
 
It’s very interesting. That was one of the first comments that 
was brought forward by the former Finance minister when he 
took over the portfolio following the 1991 election. And he 
admitted and said directly at that time that initiatives created 
during the 1980s were creating a benefit and were a positive 
factor to the economy of this province. 
 
And it’s unfortunate that the member fails to acknowledge that. 
It’s unfortunate that the member fails to acknowledge that the 
’80s certainly were a difficult period. I would like to ask him, if 
he was in government at the time, whether they would have 
been able to address a number of the questions any differently 
considering the fact that many of his colleagues were in 
opposition and were calling for major, major, major changes 
that, when they came to power in 1991, said oh, well we can’t 



March 12, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 81 

do that for you. Sorry, folks; sorry, folks; sorry, folks. We can’t 
do that because we made all these promises and now members 
in the back row are calling, talking about the province being 
bankrupt, but maybe they should go back and look at the budget 
of 1982. 
 
Look at the fact that the minister of Finance . . . I’m sure, Mr. 
Speaker, if the government would have been re-elected in 1982, 
we’d have had the same scenario that they had in B.C. (British 
Columbia) — present a budget in, I believe it was March of that 
year, saying we’ve got $123 million surplus. If they had been 
re-elected I think they would have been saying after the 
election, oops, it’s not quite as rosy as we thought it was out 
there; the numbers aren’t quite the same. 
 
And it’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, how the members like to get 
involved with the debate. And certainly, Mr. Speaker, I 
thoroughly enjoy this so I hope the members continue to get 
involved because that’s one way of just drawing back and 
reflecting on the past. 
 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, it would be a fallacy to say that in 
some difficult times the government of the ’80s did everything 
right. Certainly that has been acknowledged. Even the former 
premier acknowledges that there were decisions made at that 
time, in difficult years, that could have been done differently. 
But I think at the same time let’s acknowledge that there were a 
number of issues, a number of decisions that were made, a 
number of initiatives that the province is benefiting from. 
 
And certainly I would like to thank the Premier of this province 
and his government for the fact that they didn’t change the oil 
royalty structure. Look at the revenues that have been coming in 
as a result of oil development in this province. In fact just 
recently this government realized that they had to even do a 
little more to continue to encourage oil, and the enhancement of 
oil development in this province — because that was one of the 
major injections of cash to the treasury of this province — in 
order to provide the services. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, when we look at the record of this 
government since 1991, there are a lot of things to be 
questioned. There are a lot of . . . a number of decisions that the 
government made, a number of issues that they have entered 
into and, Mr. Speaker, when you look back at it prior to 1991, 
the expectation that people had of the change, how health care 
would change, more funding for health care, more services, 
more doctors, more nurses, more education, and in some of the 
other fields. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what do we have? I think when people look 
back and they say we’ve been hoodwinked, Mr. Speaker, they 
basically look back and see what they thought they were going 
to get in 1991 and they ask themselves, what did we really 
receive? Because have we received more? We certainly don’t 
have more. 
 
And I like . . . The member from Swift Current that’s just 
cropped up again. That 19 billion . . . actually he’s wrong. It 
was 21 billion I believe, the province . . . the Provincial Auditor 
was pointing out — $21 billion. And if you looked at it, Mr. 
Speaker, Mr. Speaker, he would begin to realize that more than 
half of that is directly attributed to his government prior to 

1982, and certainly since 1991. 
 
(1515) 
 
Mr. Speaker, let’s take a look at the Public Accounts, take a 
look at what the auditor is pointing out. It’s very interesting, 
Mr. Speaker. How I enjoy the involvement and the participation 
of other members. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we look at the two parties, when we look at 
the current government, I think you would find, as we found 
even talking to delegates at the recent SARM convention, even 
delegates were bringing up the fact that they are beginning to 
see a worn out and a tired government, a government that 
really, as I indicated earlier, is devoid of any new and real ideas 
— ideas that certainly, as the member from Saskatoon talked 
about . . . carrying us and dragging us into the 21st century. I’m 
not exactly sure if there are any ideas that would really do that. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, if the government were to listen to the 
people of Saskatchewan such as the Saskatchewan Party 
members would have, they would come up with some new 
ideas that we could really look forward to the year . . . to the 
21st century. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we look at the . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . And I like the minister’s comment, the Minister of Labour 
— certainly we do have a lot of new ideas, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, his comment about the old Tories, it just shows you, 
Mr. Speaker, how afraid they are of the Saskatchewan Party and 
the fact that they’re trying to link . . . they’ve done this for time 
and a day, to link a political party or link an individual with 
some other enterprise rather than realizing the mistakes that 
they’re making. I would suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, the 
Channel Lake agreement is something that they’re probably not 
all that proud about. 
 
The announcement today of the $300,000 severance package to 
Jack Messer — I’m not exactly sure if the ministers on the front 
bench are really proud of that today, because there are many 
people across this province who are facing difficult times, such 
as the group of aboriginal people that were in this Assembly the 
other day. And, Mr. Speaker, I have to admit that I was truly 
appalled when we were sitting down and talking to the 
delegation that had come in. I didn’t realize that there are 
circumstances that a number of our aboriginal community are 
facing that are even worse than third-world countries in many 
cases. I didn’t realize that. It seemed to me, Mr. Speaker, that 
. . . and I think most people in Saskatchewan would think that 
every one of the aboriginal community are living in luxury. 
Well that is not so. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is another issue that this government needs to 
look at. I don’t think it’s fair to just blame the federal 
government. Certainly there are issues that the federal Liberal 
Party and government are responsible for when it comes to 
aboriginal questions. There are federal issues but there are also 
provincial issues. And as well, the aboriginal peoples of 
Saskatchewan are looking to this government to give leadership 
in addressing some of those concerns, making sure that they are 
taken to and addressed with the federal Liberal government; so 
that they in turn indeed receive the due benefit for what’s 
supposed to be coming to them. Mr. Speaker, so many of these 



82 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 1998 

issues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since this government was elected in 1991 we 
have heard continually that health care is a priority. We heard 
that health care was a priority in the year that the government 
closed 52 hospitals. And we look at 1998 — nothing has 
changed. Again in the Speech from the Throne, health care is a 
priority. 
 
In 1998 we are again being told that health care is a priority, 
even while this government is closing more hospitals. And 
certainly the one that we all think of — the Plains health care 
centre. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m here today to tell the members opposite that 
the people of this province may have believed you in 1991; they 
may have believed you in 1995 when they said, trust us. These 
cuts may hurt for awhile, but we are making these changes 
because we know what is best for you. I think people want to 
have some involvement. They want to have some say. I believe 
people have risen beyond just letting governments do 
everything for them. I certainly hear that from many people in 
my area. 
 
But if we just hang in there for a little while, the government is 
saying, if you just hang in there for only a little while, we will 
be able to cut health funding to a manageable level but we will 
be left with a new and improved health care system. I would 
suggest to you that there are many people across this province 
don’t see our health care system as new or even improved. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if this is new and improved, if the wellness system 
we have today is this government’s example of the best health 
care system in the world, if the members opposite believe that, I 
think it is about the time they opened their eyes and, more 
importantly, they start listening to what Saskatchewan people 
are saying. 
 
That’s the Saskatchewan Party’s alternative throne speech 
outline. We will be introducing, and in fact we introduced 
today, Mr. Speaker, a private members’ Bill that calls on the 
government to do a total review — a full review — of the 
health care system. 
 
And our Bill, Mr. Speaker, doesn’t just talk about a full review 
of the current health care system. Our Bill has provisions for an 
ongoing review every so many years so people can have some 
involvement in discussing health care and whether or not they 
see the health care program providing the services and meeting 
the needs of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are pleased to bring that forward. It’s 
unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, however, that the Minister of Health 
would not make a commitment to that view. And I guess time 
will tell as to whether or not we will even have the opportunity 
for that Bill to see the light of day in this Legislative Assembly. 
 
And if this government and its ministers and its members and 
the Premier, as he says, are really being open and accountable, 
if they are listening to the people of the province, they will take 
the time to look at our Bill. They will take the time to allow for 
debate on the Bill, and for that Bill to see the floor of this 
Assembly for second reading. And I certainly ask the Minister 

of Health to allow that process and the Premier of this province. 
 
Because, Mr. Speaker, when you look at it, as the Premier was 
addressing SARM, the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities, yesterday, the Premier really spoke quite 
strongly about the transportation system in this province. He 
spoke out about how the fact that his government has been 
lobbying Ottawa and asking Ottawa to rethink its transportation 
policy . . . And yesterday he called on the federal government to 
put a moratorium in place until a review of the transportation 
. . . the Justice Estey report was done so that we could, all 
people of Canada and certainly western Canadians could have a 
better idea and see whether or not there should be more rail line 
abandonment. And the Premier of this province called for a 
review. And I believe that is appropriate. 
 
If you are going to review a system, it seems to me, Mr. 
Speaker, that you would take the time, that you would take the 
time to review totally and not continue to displace or remove 
from that system, that you would indeed leave the system alone 
until you have decided whether or not you should be cutting rail 
lines. 
 
Well it seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that health care is certainly 
another case. And in this case in particular, the Plains health 
care centre is an ideal situation that the Premier could look at 
and ask and give some direction to his Minister of Health and to 
the department to put a moratorium on the closure of the Plains 
health care centre until there was a full and impartial review of 
the health care centre and of its need and of the services it 
provides to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I think of the Plains health care closure . . . 
and it’s interesting to note how many calls just in the last few 
days have arrived in my office, have arrived in my constituency 
office, calls that were left on my car phone, on my answering 
service, individuals. As one lady, one individual indicated, she 
said, her comments were, when you go to the General there’s so 
many nooks and crannies you don’t know exactly where you’re 
going; there’s no parking. And that’s one of the issues that has 
been brought forward on many, many occasions. It’s not easily 
accessible. 
 
Certainly a letter I have here from a gentleman says: “If your 
government stands by and lets the Plains be closed, it will be a 
sorry day for our health care and may well be a sorry day for 
you also.” 
 
And he expresses the same things about many of the problems 
he sees with the closure of the Plains health care centre. 
Problems that are brought out in a letter to the editor today 
written by Mr. Borden Bachynski, a respected surgeon in this 
city, working in the health care system and a Regina health 
board member. He says: 
 

I think Darlene Sterling, who previously served on the 
Regina Health District Board, in a letter to The 
Leader-Post a few days ago, stated it was probably more 
correct saying save health care meant the same as saving 
the Plains. 

 
Now I realize, Mr. Speaker, as we’ve indicated in our caucus 
and indicated the other day, there are more questions to be 



March 12, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 83 

asked rather than just saving a building. But I believe we need 
to answer those questions. We need to answer questions like: 
it’s an old hospital situated in an older . . . or the comments by 
the chairman of the Regina District Health Board, talking about 
Saskatchewan being an old hospital, he said: 
 

It amazes me that the same government, some 15 or more 
years ago under then-minister of health Walter Smishek, in 
going over the (health) problems, wanted two centres of 
excellence in the city and the following facts are as true 
today as they were then. Smishek’s consultants felt that the 
Regina General Hospital should be closed and either 
another hospital built or a second tower at the Plains 
erected to maintain a tertiary-care hospital as being a 
centre of excellence and to continue our teaching program 
as part of the University of Saskatchewan. The reasons 
(were) given . . . for the closure of the General were . . . 

 
And this is back 15 years ago, that it’s “an old hospital,” it 
hasn’t changed other than the construction that’s been added to 
it. It’s inaccessible. It’s: 
 

. . . situated in a flood zone . . . 
 
The accessibility to the hospital is poor because of the 
narrow streets . . . 
 
. . . lack of parking space . . . 
 

There are so many reasons here, Mr. Speaker, that Regina 
General should not . . . or that the Plains health care centre 
should not be closed. Reasons that go beyond just the 
individuals who work in those facilities. Go beyond the doctors; 
go beyond the specialists; go beyond the health care-givers, the 
nurses, and even beyond the patients, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, when you see the number of people who are raising 
the issue, it appears to me that it’s a strong argument to review 
the whole process. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I guess it would be easy to say, well the 
Regina Health District made that decision; that was their 
decision, so therefore they should answer to it. And that’s what 
the government members are saying; that’s right. My guess, Mr. 
Speaker, is the Regina Health Board had no alternative. 
 
Number one, when the district boards were formed the district 
boards were made up of what? — elected individuals there to 
speak on behalf of the people they represented? No they 
weren’t. The member from Regina South obviously hasn’t been 
around long enough to know . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Now all hon. members 
will recognize it is inappropriate to be shouting across the floor 
of the Assembly. And I acknowledge that hon. members may 
have statements that they feel very strongly and would like to 
put on the record, and I encourage them to do that in the course 
of the debate on the response to the Speech from the Throne. In 
the meantime, I’d ask for the cooperation of the members of the 
House to allow the hon. member from Moosomin to be heard. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as we talk 
about the Plains health care centre, and certainly I’ve had the 
privilege on many occasions of visiting at the health care centre. 

I’ve had the pleasure of talking to care-givers in the centre; I’ve 
talked to patients in the centre. I’ve talked to patients and 
care-givers in the Regina General health centre, and certainly in 
the Pasqua health centre as well. 
 
And you can see, Mr. Speaker, that many people are doing their 
best to provide the best form of care that they feel . . . or 
adequate amount of care. But what I hear time and time again, 
is that people are beginning to feel tired, beginning to feel burnt 
out, because there just isn’t enough . . . number one, there aren’t 
enough staff people to cover and to provide for all the services 
that are needed in the health facilities. 
 
Now the government might argue, well where are you going to 
find the extra dollars, if you will? I believe the Liberal 
opposition today talked about putting more money into health 
care. Well maybe more money is not the answer, Mr. Speaker. 
Maybe looking at how we’re spending the current dollars that 
are allotted might be the answer. Maybe we need to look at 
whether the current allocation of funding is being allocated 
properly. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when you look at it, I remember back when 
the government talked about reducing spending in health care, 
and their reasons for closing the 52 hospitals across this 
province and the numerous jobs that went with that. And one of 
the reasons for their move to close the Plains health care centre 
was to cut and to save some money. Well, Mr. Speaker, if you 
look at the audited statement from 1991 to today, Mr. Speaker, 
you will find that we didn’t really reduce any expenditures. 
 
We were expending $1.56 million in 1991; we’re spending 
$1.57 million, almost l.6 . . . or billion dollars, pardon me, in 
health care today. Which tells me, Mr. Speaker, for all the cuts 
that were being made we really didn’t save anything as far as 
any real monetary savings to address the budget. 
 
But what we have done, we’ve created a lot of problems for 
people in this province in the area of health care. Let me give 
you one, Mr. Speaker, when we talk about some of the 
problems people are facing in health care. 
 
The other day, Mr. Speaker, it was brought to our attention that 
a young woman by the name of Jill Miner, a 26-year-old young 
lady with so much potential to be an active member of her 
family and the larger community, is in desperate need of a 
kidney transplant. She has known this for a number of years, for 
a good period of time. She’s been on dialysis three times a week 
since last April. And in December of 1997, hope appeared on 
the horizon. The Miners received some good news that her 
sister was a match and she was prepared to give her sister the 
incredible gift. Jill was told that the transplant would take place 
in January. Then she was told it would happen in February. It’s 
now March and she has not had her surgery. As a matter of fact, 
she is not scheduled for surgery until June 27. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, what do we have here? We have a young girl, 
young lady, who needs a kidney. She has a donor lined up. The 
doctor’s ready to go. But there are no beds allocated for the 
surgery. So let’s talk about money. What does that mean, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
It means that here’s a young person who has to wait. And when 



84 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 1998 

you talk about funding, Mr. Speaker, or Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
the fact that Jill has to wait for this kidney to be donated and for 
the operation means that she continues to be on dialysis, which 
is a continual cost to the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
It means that her sister, who would be able to or had the 
opportunity to find employment, now cannot take the job 
because of the fact she doesn’t know when they may be called, 
and then she has a time period that she’s going to have to 
recover from her operation. So in the meantime she is forced to 
look elsewhere for her finances. 
 
And so when you look at it at the end of the day, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, as a result of the lack of beds — and a closure of the 
Plains just means fewer beds in this province — we have this 
young, vibrant lady, is forced to wait longer. It means an added 
cost to the people of the province of Saskatchewan, to the 
taxpayers. 
 
(1530) 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s just a solid reason, one of the 
reasons, why we believe the government should reconsider and 
rethink and review and relook at the closure of the Plains health 
care centre. It may be a means of providing for Jill or other 
patients in her . . . such as . . . who are facing the same types of 
scenario. Mr. Speaker, it’s not just the Jill Miners of this world. 
There are many people in this province who are facing the same 
problem; many people who are on waiting-lists. 
 
And one of the other . . . another problem that arises, and it 
happened to a neighbour of ours just recently who was sent up 
to the city. This gentleman happens to have Lyme’s Disease, 
and there’s not too many people in this province . . . In fact, as I 
begin to understand it, there really isn’t a lot of knowledge in 
regards to Lyme’s Disease. But it’s a very disabilitating disease 
and it really takes away a person’s ability to really have a very 
functional and positive existence. 
 
And this gentleman was sent up to Regina for some tests — a 
specific time, a specific date. They came up with his wife the 
night before because they had to be in early. They booked a 
motel room, to be available, because of the fact that driving any 
distance is not easy for him. They get down to . . . And this 
happens even in the Plains health care centre, I believe, where 
the tests were done. He got down to the health care centre for 
the test and was told, we can’t do your test today. Why couldn’t 
they do the test today? Because they didn’t have a bed to put 
him in. Well his wife became a little annoyed, in fact somewhat 
annoyed, and I don’t really blame her because they don’t really 
have a lot to operate on because of the fact that the disease he’s 
afflicted with, a lot of the medical costs are laid on his 
shoulders as far as the drugs he is taking. So therefore, Mr. 
Speaker, not only are they facing a challenge on their meagre 
income because of the drug costs, but they’re also facing the 
challenge of having had to drive up here, stay overnight in a 
motel, and then told to go home and come back in, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, for those individuals living in Regina that’s 
easy to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s unfortunate that members 
of this government do not understand the problems that people 
are facing. Fortunately, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the centre finally 
realized that yes, this couple had faced quite a traumatic day 

and they indeed at the end of the day worked in the tests and 
they were certainly appreciative for that. 
 
But the other problem that arises now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 
the fact that there’s very little knowledge of Lyme Disease. 
There is a doctor in Vancouver who has done extensive work on 
Lyme Disease who has come up with a number of alternatives. 
The unfortunate part for the patient that we’re speaking of right 
now is the fact that if he were to go to Vancouver, everything 
would be on his shoulders. He has no help in Saskatchewan, 
and the Department of Health will not even assist him to go to 
another jurisdiction to receive care under the care of a physician 
who has done a lot more research and certainly may be able to 
provide . . . I’m not saying he’s capable or will or has all the 
answers, but who knows? He may be able to provide the 
assistance that would help that patient. 
 
So I certainly ask the Minister of Health if indeed he will take 
the time and talk to his officials and make sure that they are 
indeed meeting the needs of the patients of the province of 
Saskatchewan, and if it means going out of the province to 
assist in those circumstances . . . 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, or Deputy Speaker, when you look at this 
budget and when you look at what the government’s so-called 
commitment to health care through the years . . . and the fact 
that health care has such a priority on their list, one has to 
question just by what we have seen and the changes taking 
place, how much of a priority that is. 
 
I believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we need to look beyond just 
government. We need to look beyond the fact that the 
Department of Health just sets out the criteria. We need to look, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, and allow the public input into their health 
care system. 
 
I believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if the members across the floor 
would take some time to listen to people, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
they would begin to understand that there are many individuals 
in this province who have some sound ideas. And it’s not . . . 
they’re not necessarily always asking for more money, but they 
have ideas of what . . . you can put more services and make 
them more available. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when you look at what people can do for 
themselves, I just raised the issue of the integrated facility in the 
town of Wawota, a facility that was just added on. And when 
the local group that was put in place to look at the idea of 
integrating their hospital onto their care home and tying the 
facility into one, thereby saving costs by the fact that you don’t 
have two kitchens, that you don’t have two heating units, 
everything is under one roof, it’s more easily accessible, and 
you can use . . . you can use labour back and forth and in 
between. I commend the people of Wawota for doing what they 
did and taking the initiative. 
 
But I know when the Wawota board went to the health district, 
the health district came up with a proposal that was much 
higher than what the board thought it should be. But also they 
were going to up . . . The health board was suggesting fewer 
services in the integrated facility, to which the local community 
said no, we do have . . . people have made a commitment; 
we’ve got a foundation grant here. We had a bequeath of a 



March 12, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 85 

significant amount of funds and the bequeath was made on the 
basis that there be services allowed in this community. 
 
And if we’re going to bring a doctor . . . If we’ve got no acute 
care beds in this community, what good is trying to get a doctor 
to the community? A doctor will not look at Wawota if it 
doesn’t have acute care beds; if he doesn’t have access. His 
closest available acute care beds in any direction were at least 
40 minutes away. 
 
So what the community did themselves, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 
they had . . . they brought an engineering firm in that looked at 
the old health facility and they came up with a proposal that 
would move that old structure, the older structure to the . . . in a 
position right beside the care home; that they would add on to it 
and would upgrade it and they would do it for a substantially 
less sum of money than what the board was suggesting in 
building a new facility. 
 
What they have come up with, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for less 
than $700,000, is a nice, integrated — in fact a beautiful — 
integrated facility that continues to provide acute care services, 
some emergency services, and 24-hour observation care. That 
came about as a result of involvement of local people who felt 
that they had something to offer the health care system. 
 
I believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if you look across this province 
you will find that there isn’t a place in this province where there 
aren’t many good ideas that could be used. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when you look at the severance 
package that was offered today to Mr. Messer, I would suggest 
to you that the MS sufferers in this province could certainly 
have benefit from that type of funding. If you want to talk about 
funding, if you want to talk about putting some money into the 
health care system, there were some funds to use. 
 
If you want to talk about meeting the needs of extra beds, or 
even this kidney transplant, there’s an area where you could 
look at some funding or so many other areas, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that we could look at. Even this individual who’s 
being sent . . . they’ve sent out to Vancouver, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. The problems with that individual could certainly be 
met immediately just by looking at how this government is 
spending its funds. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we look at the — if you would call 
them initiatives — I don’t know if you could call them 
initiatives when you look at what the province lost in its 
SaskTel deal in the United States; when you look at the more 
than a million dollars spent deciding whether or not they should 
go to Guyana and build a power plant; or when you look at the 
Channel Lake; or when you look at some of the other 
endeavours that the province is looking at getting involved in. 
 
Number one, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would suggest to you that 
if the companies, if the companies like SaskPower or SaskTel 
or Sask Energy were doing that, if they were private companies, 
that would be a choice that their ratepayers or the owners of that 
company would make. But who are the owners of the Power 
Corporation? Who are the owners of the Crown utilities? I 
believe it’s the people of Saskatchewan. We are all owners of 
these utilities. The utilities were not made to gouge the people 

of Saskatchewan to higher rate increases on an annual basis and 
then turn around and spend the money outside of the province. 
 
I believe these utilities were put in place originally to provide a 
service to the public of Saskatchewan. If the government wants 
to expand out of the province maybe they need to take a look at 
some of the services and some of the companies and allow 
private companies to work outside of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when you look at what the Saskatchewan Party is 
suggesting, the Saskatchewan Party is suggesting a total review 
of Crown corporations. That doesn’t necessarily mean, Mr. 
Speaker, that Crown corporations will be done . . . like 
SaskPower, SaskTel, will be done away with, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. But I certainly believe there are some Crown 
corporations in this province . . . that all the Crown corporations 
should have a total review, especially when we look at the 
fiasco in SaskPower. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, by doing a review the government 
may find that there might be other ways that they can utilize 
their money and utilize it more efficiently to meet the needs of 
the public of Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . and the member from Lloydminster 
is saying, show it to us . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. Order. I would remind 
the people that the hon. member from Moosomin has the floor 
in the House. Now his own members behind him are across at 
the government members and nobody can hear the hon. member 
that has the floor. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, when you talk about reviewing, like our Bill in regards 
to reviewing health care, what we’re asking for is a review 
process that allows the public input. A review process of the 
Crown corporations would allow public input. The public 
would tell the member from Lloydminster, do we need a 
company like the Saskatchewan Transportation Company that’s 
a major millstone around the government’s neck? I don’t know. 
Let’s review it, let’s take a look at it. 
 
Is it possible that a service like bus service in this province 
could be provided by the carriers that are already operating in 
this province? Do the people of this province need to continue 
to fund a utility that continues to be a drain on the coffers and 
the finances of the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Those are the types of things, Mr. Speaker. How do we know 
until we take the time to review thoroughly to determine 
whether or not. And the public will decide; you allow the public 
some input. They after all are the individual care-givers and 
caretakers of this province. They’ve put their trust in us as 
elected members to act as their servants not as their masters. 
 
And I think maybe that’s something the government needs to 
recognize: that they are servants, government members are 
servants; they’re not masters in their health deals and their 
education, in a number of the issues that they’ve been raising, 
the way they’ve been acting. They’ve been acting like masters, 
not servants. And then they turn around if the issue isn’t going 
well, such as in health care — they’ve formed health district 



86 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 1998 

boards and they’ve put the blame on the health district boards. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think it’s time the government took 
responsibility for its own actions. I think you would have to say, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, from the comments I have made today, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, you would have to agree that the throne 
speech that has been presented just a few days ago really 
doesn’t have . . . It’s devoid of a lot of any new ideas. It’s 
basically a throne speech that’s been presented by a lacklustre 
and ageing government, a government that the people of 
Saskatchewan, I’m sure in the not-to-distant future, will get a 
time . . . have the opportunity to judge. 
 
And I would suggest, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that from the many 
people across Saskatchewan already have decided how they are 
going to judge this government, they’ve found it wanting. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I thank you for the opportunity of 
having been able to stand in this Assembly and to speak out on 
a number of issues that not only affect the people across this 
province, but certainly speak out on issues that even my 
constituents have been raising, such as transportation, 
Highways and Transportation, certainly the educational system. 
 
I would like to end on this note, Mr. Speaker. I want to thank 
the people of Saskatchewan, certainly the people of Moosomin, 
for the way they get involved, for the input that they offer, and 
certainly for the voluntarism and the efforts in volunteer work. 
 
And in that regard, I had the pleasure just last weekend of being 
at a recognition ceremony in the community of Glenavon for 
the Glenavon Housing Authority, recognizing one of its 
members who had given 20 years of her life to the Glenavon 
Housing Authority — Agnes Shiplack. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, Agnes just exemplifies many of the people 
across this province who donate of their time to work and 
provide for their community and for their area. And I think we 
need to certainly recognize volunteers such as Agnes. 
 
As well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I had the privilege of being a 
judge at a regional 4-H competition. And I would have to 
suggest to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when you sit down, you sit 
back and listen to young people in this province involved in the 
4-H movement and the way they can get up and speak and 
speak with conviction, certainly it is heartening to know that 
there are young people who are willing to . . . and down the 
road we can look at, at giving real leadership in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So while there are many areas, Mr. Deputy Speaker, where we 
can find want when it comes to government as well as 
individual MLAs, there are many areas too where we may find 
where it becomes . . . Their job of being an MLA may become 
tedious, maybe find it . . . Sometimes you wonder if you’re 
really accomplishing anything. But there are certainly many 
occasions too, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when you feel proud. When 
you look at the people around you and the people who come up, 
pardon me, and acknowledge what you’ve done and thank you 
for speaking out on their behalf. Whether or not you answered 
their question or need, they recognize that you endeavoured and 
you tried your best. 
 

(1545) 
 
So I thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for the opportunity of 
addressing the Assembly today, and I say I look forward to 
continue to represent the people of the Moosomin constituency. 
 
Mr. Jess: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise today to 
speak in favour of the Speech from the Throne and against the 
amendment. 
 
This speech says it all. We have reached a point in our mandate 
and in the life of the government where we can take hold of the 
agenda and once again respond to the social conscience of a 
proud people. The serious damage that was done to the people 
of this province in the 1980s was something which had to be 
dealt with, and deal with it we did. 
 
We have had a series of balanced budgets to prove that we can 
manage this province and care for Saskatchewan people as they 
deserve to be cared for. The Devine years were a grim reminder 
that whatever a government deficit finances, it has to be paid 
back, and the poorest in society pay the price regardless of how 
it is done. 
 
That was what the Tories did to us. They abused the poorest in 
our province. Now we can set an agenda to deal with the social 
needs of the poor once again. 
 
My congratulations go to the mover and to the seconder of the 
Speech from the Throne. The member from Regina Wascana 
did an excellent job, and is justly proud of our government’s 
record, as well as the outline of the future projected by this 
speech. The member from Estevan is also to be complimented 
on his words of wisdom on the throne speech. 
 
The success story about the Estevan area is typical of what has 
occurred and is continuing to occur in this province. 
 
In my constituency, besides the twinning of our portion of the 
Yellowhead, I am pleased to say that the community of Rabbit 
Lake has established a personal care home in the old nursing 
home facility. This conversion is proceeding very well, and the 
local people are to be commended. 
 
Several new and expanded businesses have increased the 
economic activity of the region. The farmers of my area have 
received the changes to crop insurance with open arms, as this 
is one area where the cost of insurance has actually gone down, 
and they are thankful to the government which has their 
interests at heart. 
 
In my part of the world, there is interest in the expansion of the 
game farming industry, as well as a great deal of interest in pigs 
and feedlots. Many of the farms are converting to elk and 
buffalo production. Saskatchewan farmers have proven 
themselves to be very adaptable over the years, and now is no 
exception as they adjust to the new post-Crow era. 
 
This change costs the average Saskatchewan farmer about 
$25,000 annually. And let’s not forget that the Liberals did that 
to us. And we should not forget that the Liberals across the 
Chamber defended the move. 
 



March 12, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 87 

I was sitting in here yesterday and looking across at the 
opposition benches where I see alongside of the official 
opposition, or unofficial Tories, the remains of the Liberal 
Party. I couldn’t help but reminisce for awhile about what I had 
seen happen over there since 1991, when they had only one 
member, only one Liberal — the member from Greystone. Then 
it became two when she took a major problem off our Premier’s 
hands. 
 
Then of course their numbers increased to three with a 
by-election. By the end of the ballot counting in 1995 they had 
increased to 11, which became 10, followed by a drop to 6 — or 
was it 5? — which is now 6 or 8 or perhaps 5 or 9. I found it all 
very confusing until I tried to explain it to my son. He managed 
to clear it all up for me when he said: Dad, you of all people 
should know better than to make that kind of a mistake. All the 
people of this country, Saskatchewan in particular, should know 
better than to count Liberals, let alone count on them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Jess: — He’s right you know. It was the Liberal 
government that killed the Crow, and with that one piece of 
legislation it financially crippled thousands of Saskatchewan 
farmers. It was the Liberal government that totally cut funding 
to transportation. You Liberals and Tories along the 
Yellowhead and No. 1 Highway should ask yourselves — if 
you really want twinned highways — and why, if the Liberals 
paid 50 per cent of the cost of Alberta’s twinning, now say it to 
Saskatchewan, just go your own way. Once again Liberals have 
proven you can’t count on them. 
 
I am pleased to say that the people of Redberry Lake now have 
a twinned highway on the Yellowhead from one side of my 
constituency to the other. Incidentally I thank our Minister of 
Highways for continuing to upgrade the system, and I support 
her and all other MLAs in their efforts to complete the 
twinning. If Ottawa would just do its share, the rest of the 
twinning in other constituencies, not just in Redberry Lake, 
could be completed in a few short years. 
 
But of course these kinds of deals from Ottawa are not unusual. 
The health care funding for instance. In 1967, Saskatchewan 
health care costs were funded 50 per cent by the federal 
government and 50 per cent was funded from our provincial 
treasury. In 1997, 13 per cent is being funded by the federal 
government while the provincial government’s funding is 87 
per cent. 
 
Now we hear in this Chamber the Liberal two-tier system or the 
Tory three-tier system. Either would result in a lot more tears. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Jess: — In this particular case the Liberals — and for that 
matter the former Tories — have failed, not just in a financial 
way, but failed the people, not only of Saskatchewan but also 
the entire country. 
 
We need a strong central government which is dedicated to the 
well-being of Canadian people, not Tory-type Liberal 
governments that are totally corporate oriented. If this kind of 
unfairness continues, the country as a whole and all Canadians 

will be the losers. In fact we may lose our country over this 
approach. 
 
It could be amusing, if it was not so sad, when I see the 
remnants of the former Devine Tories and the others who rode 
the Liberal wagon into the legislature trying to talk about such 
things as accountability — accountability — when they don’t 
even use their Conservative name any more, a name that their 
predecessors in that party destroyed, damaged, to the point at 
where this group is ashamed. Yes, they’re ashamed to be known 
as Tories, but Tories they are. 
 
Granted they are sorry Tories, but Tories just the same. Now 
that they don’t want to be called Conservatives or Tories any 
more, we are supposed to call them the Saskatchewan Party. 
Well we have a situation where these guys are trying to gain 
credibility by using the good name of our province in an 
attempt to escape the damaged Tory label. Much like a criminal 
returning to the community under a different name, this Tory 
group has returned under an alias. 
 
Well we know that the Devine Tories raped this province, and 
now these folks would have us look the other way while the 
Tory rapists move back into our community under an alias and 
rape and plunder some more. 
 
Investing in health care is one of the key items of the throne 
speech and it is a major commitment of any responsible 
government. And just how major is indicated by the fact that 
health care funding is actually increased in this province even 
though Ottawa now pays only 13 per cent instead of the 50 per 
cent that medicare received at one time. 
 
No further proof is needed to point out the fact that if the 
Liberals or Tories were in charge, medicare would be on the 
chopping block. Fortunately for us, our government is investing 
in health care as part of our program of investing in people. 
Home care improvements, first responders, ambulance service, 
and the 911 all have helped and are helping to better provide 
health care needs in rural communities. 
 
Investing in transportation. This is a crucial area of the throne 
speech as transportation and transportation costs are being 
transferred onto provincial governments, rural municipalities, 
Saskatchewan farmers by uncaring federal government and 
railway companies who have no commitment to service. My 
government is working with rural municipalities, local 
communities, as well as cash-strapped farmers to develop the 
best transportation system possible without the required federal 
support. 
 
Investing in people. I like the sound of it. It not only indicates 
our commitment as individuals and as government to improving 
the lives of Saskatchewan people, but also it indicates that it is 
truly an investment, and we are, as Saskatchewan people, well 
blessed with the return on that investment. 
 
Investing in families will no doubt provide the greatest returns 
of all as our government revamps the social assistance programs 
to create a situation where work is rewarded and assistance is 
just that — an opportunity to carry on and to improve . . . for 
the lives of you and your family. It is not to be a future that 
holds out no hope. And of course that is why these changes to 



88 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 1998 

the welfare system are so important. 
 
We are once again, giving families in crisis the most important 
item of all, and that is hope. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Jess: — Investing in jobs. Our province in recent years has 
the best record of employment in the entire country. As was 
stated in the throne speech, more people are working in 
Saskatchewan than ever before. Employment opportunities 
outstrip the number of workers in many communities, and the 
trend continues. 
 
Our government will continue to work with all sectors to 
enhance economic development and employment. In Redberry 
Lake my government is working with local people to encourage 
the comparatively new concept of the new generation co-ops. 
This is a system where people with few individual resources 
can band together to create job opportunities and enhance 
economic development in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Investing in education and training. The key elements in this 
area cover a major number of young people. But our interest in 
education and training also reaches out to many not so young 
that require retraining and adult education. I am pleased to 
announce that well over — pardon me — I’m pleased to 
announce that well over 200 students in rural areas are receiving 
practical agricultural training through the Saskatchewan Green 
Certificate Program. 
 
(1600) 
 
Our record as government on fiscal responsibility over the last 
six-and-one-half years speaks well for the final initiative in 
investing in people by undertaking all of these initiatives and 
doing it in a responsible manner by delivering one balanced 
budget after another. 
 
I believe the throne speech says it best where it states, and I 
quote: 
 

All of these efforts, all of these initiatives, all of these 
plans, programs and proposals are possible because we will 
maintain our hard-won financial freedom. 
 
My government is determined that this province will never 
again return to the days of carefree fiscal irresponsibility. 
My government will not borrow from our children’s future. 
 
Together we are still managing a bitter inheritance from 
the recent past. The third largest expenditure of our 
provincial budget is still wasted on interest payments on 
inherited debt (from that Tory group that is trying to 
re-establish itself under a different name). 
 
But things are getting better. Thanks to the hard work and 
sacrifices of the Saskatchewan people, we are on the path 
of declining debt. 
 
Earlier this year my government had the pleasant duty of 
consulting the people of Saskatchewan on how they would 
like the province to reinvest our modest projected future 

surpluses. My government listened carefully and will 
respond in the upcoming provincial budget. 

 
I am proud to stand in my place in this Chamber and indicate 
that I will support the Speech from the Throne and vote against 
the amendment and continue to be part of this government, a 
government that truly services the needs of the people and 
believes in humanity first. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I just want to take a few minutes to, first of all, pay a 
special tribute to a number of communities that are now 
watching the legislative channel in northern Saskatchewan, and 
probably for the first opportunity is going to be having to watch 
their MLA speak about northern Saskatchewan and some of the 
northern challenges that we face as northern and native people. 
 
I guess the key thing I want to point out, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
the purpose of my getting up today and speaking on some of the 
challenges facing northern Saskatchewan people is that the 
throne speech did in no way, shape, or form give any indication 
or any type of level of support to some of the challenges and 
some of the issues that we have been hounding this government 
on for the past three sessions that I’ve been MLA for 
Athabasca. 
 
And part of the thrust of my presentation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
is that I want to, first of all, expound on some of the successes 
of the Indian-owned businesses in northern Saskatchewan as 
well as some of the great work of some of the communities like 
La Loche, Ile-a-la-Crosse, Buffalo Narrows, Beauval, 
Pinehouse, and so on. 
 
And I also wanted to give, for one minute, the members in 
opposition a perspective of all this federal Liberal bashing that 
they have done as the only strategy that they have for their 
complete lack of commitment to northern Saskatchewan and the 
rest of the Saskatchewan people that are desperately wanting 
some kind of government support and recognition of some of 
their problems, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I’m certainly here to provide the voice of the northern 
Saskatchewan people — something that I wish the member 
from Cumberland would do on a consistent and regular basis. 
And we have found time and time again, as indicated in the 
December vote, when we voted for revenue sharing and he 
voted against, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We need to make sure that 
people get that information and make the point to all our 
leadership in the province that the North cannot and will not be 
denied. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to pay a special tribute to the aboriginal 
people, as a non-aboriginal people as well throughout northern 
Saskatchewan, but in particular the aboriginal people, because 
we’ve seen some of the attacks of the Saskatchewan Party, 
some of the innuendo, and certainly some of the misguided 
information that they’re dispersing throughout this great 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
At first I thought that I really wanted to make a lot of effort and 
bring tons and tons of information here, but we’re not going to 



March 12, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 89 

try and kill the clock, so to speak. We want to bring some very 
precise and some concise information for all the members 
opposite in their deliberations on how do we deal with the 
northern and the native situation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I share with you a publication that was actually 
produced by a Professor Joseph Kalt of the John F. Kennedy 
School of Government at the Harvard University. And why 
Harvard, Mr. Speaker? It’s a world-renowned school for 
excellence. And in fact this article actually includes excerpts 
from a written statement prepared by Professor Kalt for 
presentation to the United States Senate Committee on Indian 
Affairs on September 17, 1996. 
 
And in the report Professor Kalt pretty well summarizes what 
the intent of the report is, and I quote: 
 

. . . the Harvard Project have been working for almost ten 
years for and with tribes and tribal organizations. Our 
primary objectives have been to try to get a handle on what 
is working in Indian Country when it comes to sustained 
economic development and socially successful reservations 
. . . 
 

And just as I mentioned, he followed a number of tribal 
organizations to try and see what they’re doing that would, I 
guess in essence, help the U.S. (United States) government to 
try and deal with this whole situation. 
 
And I credit the Harvard University for doing that because at 
the very least they’re taking 10 years of consultation, 10 years 
of study, and 10 years to try and figure out what they could do 
to again alleviate some of the challenges of the aboriginal 
people in the United States. And I hope that Canada and 
certainly the province of Saskatchewan follow suit. 
 
And I quote again, Mr. Speaker: 
 

. . . there are a number of reservations that are sustaining 
growing economies and breaking the cycles of dependence 
on federal programs. Mississippi Choctaw, for example, is 
now the fourth or fifth largest employer in Mississippi. 
More than a thousand non-Indians migrate onto the 
reservation every day in order to work in the Choctaw’s 
manufacturing, service, and public sector enterprises. At 
Fort Apache in . . . (the) state of Arizona, the White 
Mountain Apache Tribe’s forest products, skiing, 
recreation and other enterprises make it the economic 
anchor of the economy of northern Arizona. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the reason why I’m expounding on some of these 
values is that Professor Kalt at the Harvard University has 
simply stated that the aboriginal community, the enterprises 
associated with the aboriginal community are very, very 
successful in the United States. And they’re primarily 
successful for one reason, and that primary reason, Mr. Speaker 
. . . and he makes the point as well, and I quote again: 
 

Simply having resources —natural, human, or financial — 
does not account for what the relatively successful tribes 
have been able to achieve. To be sure . . . But just having 
resources is not the (only) key — or even a key — to 
getting the reservation economy going. 

I continue quoting: 
 

The relatively successful tribes in the U.S. all have three 
indispensable ingredients in common. These are (1) 
sovereignty, (2) capable government, and (3) a match 
between the type of government a tribe has and that tribe’s 
cultural norms regarding legitimate political power. 
 

Now what that’s saying in a nutshell, Mr. Speaker, is what the 
northern Saskatchewan people have been saying for years, is 
that we want some control over our lives, we want some control 
over the economy of northern Saskatchewan, be it in mining, be 
it fishing, be it in tourism, be it in forestry, and all the other 
opportunities that northern Saskatchewan has at their expense. 
 
But time and time again, control over the northern people 
through systems like social housing, through systems like the 
welfare system, those disincentives have continued to squelch, 
and in fact, that have continued to kill any desire that is out 
there to develop a very strong economy on behalf of the 
northern people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while the legal status, and I quote again from the 
report: 
 

While the legal status of Indian sovereignty waxes and 
wanes with federal court decisions and legislation, it is still 
the case that an assertive and capable tribe can take 
primary control of many economic decisions . . . 
 

And I continue on, Mr. Speaker. Again, a professor at Harvard 
University: 
 

We cannot find a single case of sustained economic 
development where the tribe is not in the driver’s seat . . . 
A tribe laying claim to the right of self-determination must 
be armed with capable institutions and self-governance. 
 

And what that is saying, Mr. Speaker, is exactly what I alluded 
to two seconds ago, is that the NDP government must begin to 
recognize the huge potential that northern and native people 
have to offer this particular part of the world, in particular, 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now all throughout the presentation by Professor Kalt, there is 
some incredible, incredible statements on the innovation and the 
excitement that the aboriginal people have in the States. That is 
very apparent in northern Saskatchewan, and it continues being 
a very sober spot in this government’s hide when you continue 
talking about helping out northern native people, and the North 
in general, yet nothing seems to be done and I get up and I point 
that out. That I know certainly hurts. 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, this document is fairly thick. It’s 
really, quite frankly, a very informative document. And in fact, 
as Liberals always are — we’re very fair, we’re very forthright 
— I’m going to send a copy across to the member from 
Cumberland for his perusal. So he can get some idea of what 
northern Saskatchewan needs and what northern Saskatchewan 
wants. That’s exactly what he needs to know. 
 
Now Mr. Speaker, again, the things that they’ve done when you 
talk about the development and the evolution of aboriginal 



90 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 1998 

people and northern people and the economy of Saskatchewan, 
some of the things they talk about here in the report is, again I 
quote: 
 

An indispensable foundation is a capable, independent 
tribal judiciary that can uphold contracts, enforce stable 
business codes, settle disputes, and protect businesses from 
politics. 

 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to me that is vision. To me that is 
innovation. To me that is excitement. And, Mr. Speaker, the 
people and the aboriginal people in the United States have led 
it, and the aboriginal people in Canada and Saskatchewan have 
been trying to lead it but this government has not responded to 
that initiative. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my one final quote from this article, and I quote: 
 

In a study of 67 tribes for which comparable data are 
available, we found that tribes with constitutionally-based, 
strong chief executives and strong legislature governments 
consistently outperform general council governments. 
Moreover, independent judiciaries promote economic 
well-being under all types of tribal executive and 
legislative systems. 
 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what that says to me is these people, 
again as I mentioned, have vision. And I will again share the 
report with the Minister of Northern Affairs so he is certainly 
aware of what is happening and what is needed to be done. And 
that’s part of our fairness. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, again we can talk at great lengths about that 
report, but I want to show the people that in other countries, in 
fine universities, at the Harvard University by professors — if 
they don’t believe the northern people perhaps they’ll believe 
some of these people — and what we’ve been calling for for a 
number of years. We want to empower communities, ideas and 
people to make a change in northern Saskatchewan for the 
better. 
 
And to bring it closer to home, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I also want 
to share some of the examples of the Meadow Lake Tribal 
Council — the accomplishments. And I go to financial 
management. Full disclosure of all expenditures. That’s news 
for the Saskatchewan Party. Return of taxpayer’s investments. 
$1.7 million of federal funding was invested into MLTC 
(Meadow Lake Tribal Council) forestry and interests which 
resulted in $10.7 million paid in corporate and withholding 
taxes over the three-year period. 250 direct jobs and 750 
indirect jobs created. 
 
(1615) 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is success here. Delivers high quality 
education and health services. Third-party evaluation of health 
programs reveal improvement in health conditions overall. 
That’s from the Meadow Lake Tribal Council. 
 
Now we talk about the PA (Prince Albert) Grand Council; you 
can talk about the tribal council out of North Battleford and 
area; and you can see that they are indeed a political and 
economic strength in this province. They are not downtrodden 

and they are certainly not abusing the system to the point to 
where the Saskatchewan Party said they are. 
 
Now I’ll be remiss in my responsibility to also not respond to 
some of the comments and some of the suggestions by the 
members opposite in this fed-bashing effort. I think it’s 
important that the people of northern Saskatchewan understand 
that there are certain things that the federal government had 
done, and we’re not trying to defend it. It’s not within our 
interest to defend what other political parties do in other regions 
of the country, but we want to explain for a minute. 
 
We have been sitting back and we have been listening to some 
of the fed bashing and the Liberal bashing that’s been 
happening across the way here, and we want to make sure that 
people that are out there listening and watching this Assembly, 
that they be made aware of a few facts. Not those necessarily as 
people that have some dollars in the North associated with the 
highway construction, and I’ve mentioned the Cumberland 
House bridge, Grandmother’s Bay, and other areas in the North 
that have received funding — there’s federal dollars attached to 
that. The Black Lake road all the way up to the far North. But 
here’s a majority of dollars are coming from federal coffers — 
we won’t talk about that either. 
 
We won’t talk about the remote housing program in which a 
family that are working can finally work free of having to come 
back every few minutes and telling the government what they 
make so they are able to charge 25 per cent. We won’t talk 
about that. 
 
We won’t talk about the aboriginal head start program. Don’t 
talk about the millions of dollars put in, invested in job creation 
to the pathways program and certainly to the head start 
programs. 
 
However, I’m going to use quotes again, when this government 
talks about the lack of commitment by the federal Liberals to 
anybody in Saskatchewan and I only do this on one premiss — 
so people out there know the facts. And, Mr. Speaker, I will 
quote from an article of the Leader Post dated March 9, l998. 
And quote: 
 

After years of painful cuts and tax increases, Martin 
(federal Finance minister) was finally able to declare 
victory in the battle against the deficit. 
 

And here, Mr. Speaker, not more than two years ago this 
government stood up and said we have eliminated the deficit 
and the people of Saskatchewan were proud. And so they 
should be. And they’re saying to this day that no other level of 
government are allowed to eliminate the deficit? Is that what 
you’re saying to the Saskatchewan people? The Saskatchewan 
government, NDP government, is the only ones that can 
eliminate deficits? Nobody else can? The fact of the matter, Mr. 
Speaker, the federal government had no choice but to eliminate 
the deficit in the same manner in which the Saskatchewan 
government had to do it as well. 
 
And I will quote, Mr. Speaker, and I will quote: 
 

He doled out $7 billion worth of tax relief over three years 
. . . 



March 12, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 91 

How much tax relief has the provincial government doled out? 
It’s a good question. And another quote, Mr. Speaker: 
 

. . . he increased spending to education with his $2.5 
billion Millennium Scholarship Fund and rescinded $1.5 
billion worth of cuts in transfers to the provinces. 

 
The fact of the matter, Mr. Speaker, we have to look exactly 
what the situation is. And you talk about the lack of 
commitment in health care and education, and I quote again 
from the same article, which is an interview, and I will share 
that with the members opposite if they wish. 
 

Clearly, 80 per cent of our spending (federal spending) 
was on health care and education, and I think everybody 
would agree that both of those areas require it. 

 
This is the federal Finance minister, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And then we continue on with some of the other quotes so the 
people out there know exactly what is happening here, so they 
know the truth. The question that was posed to Mr. Martin was: 
 

How do you respond to critics who say the health system 
is in crisis and that you should have restored all the $6 
billion in cuts to health and social transfer payments? 

 
And the response that the Minister of Finance gave back and I 
quote: 
 

The provinces may come along and say, ‘Look, what 
you’ve simply done is restored a cut.’ And that may well 
be. But every province budgeted on the basis of not 
receiving that money and now they will. And I would 
really hope that the provinces put that money into health 
care and education. 
 
It will be very interesting to see if in fact that occurs. It 
will be interesting to see if hospital emergency rooms get 
more money as a result of that. I would certainly hope so 
. . . 

 
And now we’ll go down the interview a bit further, Mr. 
Speaker, and again the Finance minister indicated, quote: 
 

The fact is provinces are declaring surpluses, or provinces 
are cutting taxes. Saskatchewan cut the sales tax in the 
1997 budget. They made a political decision . . . But don’t 
say then that they were forced into making hospital 
closures. 
 
In Saskatchewan’s case, they started closing hospitals 
before we took office . . . Therefore they made a political 
decision and they should be prepared to stand behind that 
political decision. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, we can continue on in saying why should we 
allow the federal government to continue tackling the deficit. I 
will continue on reading from the same article, Mr. Speaker. 
Quote: 
 

The provinces are still in better financial shape than we are 
. . . When we took office, we spent 36 cents out of every 

dollar on debt service. We still spend 30 cents out of every 
dollar on interest. The provincial average is 14 cents. 
 

So, Mr. Speaker, the deficit in the whole country had to be 
addressed. And the tough steps that were taken, there’s no 
question that Saskatchewan, as the rest of the country, had to 
cover this cost. We had no choice but to bite the bullet. 
 
And the reason why, Mr. Speaker, why should we worry about 
what the federal government does in terms of meeting their 
deficit? And now I’ll quote, okay. Why, why should we worry 
about the federal deficit? Why should we worry about how the 
federal government is measuring up against us? Here’s a direct 
quote: 
 

The federal government should be in better shape than 
anyone else, not in worse shape. Because we’re the ones 
who set interest rates for the country; we’re the ones who 
set the tone of optimism for the (entire) country. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the reason why I share that information is I 
want the people that are listening and all the people out there to 
say one thing: is that if you want to fed-bash, then you ought to 
know that there will be some rebuttal from this side. And we 
will continue holding this government accountable for their lack 
of commitment. 
 
And the only reason that they have given us the last three years 
when we get up and speak is they say, well your federal Liberal 
cousins. And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, and to the entire 
Assembly and to members opposite and to all the people that 
may be listening, that every time one of their members gets up 
and says, your federal Liberal cousins cut this, what they’re 
really saying to you is they’re saying, we’re using them as an 
excuse for not doing anything here in Saskatchewan. That’s the 
real answer, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Now I don’t want to just pick on the New 
Democratic Party, Mr. Speaker. I feel they’ve had a great 
history and they can continue contributing to the province. 
 
I want to take a special aim and a special shot at the 
now-established Saskatchewan Party. The Saskatchewan Party, 
they call themselves, as I mentioned before, are just recycled 
Tories. And we can never forget the legacy of debt that the 
Tories have left this province in. And if eight members now 
want to take credit for each . . . a portion of that debt, they are 
more than entitled to do so. 
 
And I want to say that I was, quite frankly, appalled at the 
efforts of the MLA from Kelvington-Wadena when she brought 
aboriginal people here who were quite concerned as to how the 
finances of any Indian band, in particular theirs, was being 
handled. To me that was the most blatant use of people that I’ve 
ever seen in my entire existence. That they believe for one 
minute, that the aboriginal people believe for one minute, that 
the Saskatchewan Party, the old PC Party, has any use for them 
or has their best interests at heart, I will tell the aboriginal 
people that they are being fooled by their efforts — completely 
and totally. 
 



92 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 1998 

And I urge all the tribal councils, all the aboriginal people — 
Metis, Bill C-31’s, non-status, and the like —to watch very 
carefully on what these guys are trying to do to you. 
 
And now I’ll go to yesterday’s or the day before’s Hansard 
here, Mr. Speaker, and you tell me of the tone of the statements 
of the member from Kelvington-Wadena who’s indicating to 
the people here that she’s concerned. Here’s her tone, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

. . . believe that millions of dollars are being mismanaged 
by band councils and . . . (are) not getting to ordinary band 
members. 

 
Quote: 
 

We spend millions of dollars a year yet there is no 
accountability as to where . . . (the) money is going. 

 
Another quote: 
 

. . . Indian bands don’t need more money. 
 
Other quote: 
 

. . . to write a cheque and turn your back while funds are 
mismanaged . . .” 

 
The final quote: 
 

. . . dozens of examples of mismanagement and corruption 
by band councils. 

 
Now you tell me, Mr. Speaker, and the members of this 
Assembly, that that is complimentary towards the Indian bands 
and the aboriginal people in this community. And I say to you 
with all energy and all vigour, I say not — I say not. 
 
And the reason why we know, Mr. Speaker, is we have a lot of 
evidence that the Saskatchewan Party is simply using the 
aboriginal people to further their very, and I must add, their 
very feeble effort at trying to displace, and I might add, one 
great party; but there’s other great parties as well, but are trying 
to displace a great political party that have a long history except 
for the Tories. 
 
Now I take a page from the Saskatchewan Party platform, Mr. 
Speaker. One point here it says, quote: “Gradual reduction and 
eventual elimination of the PST as the province can afford it." 

 
And then we’ll amble on down to the very next section where it 
says, quote, “Requiring natives to pay the PST for off-reserve 
purchases.” 
 
So on the one hand they want to reduce the PST, want to 
eliminate the PST . . . (inaudible) . . . the people. But hold it. 
The PST will apply to the Indians. That’s what we’ll do. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’ve said it once in this Assembly and I’ll 
say it again: that this has got to be the most misinformed and 
miscalculated effort by the Tory Party to try and diminish the 
importance and the role of the aboriginal people in this 
province. 

And the question we ask is, what are you going to tax? What 
are the Tories going to tax? The aboriginal people for years 
have been living in economic squalor and dependency on senior 
governments. What are they going to tax? 
 
So I make the point to the Saskatchewan Party, is that don’t 
play politics with our people. Don’t use the aboriginal people to 
further your very arrogant agenda. There’s absolutely no room 
in this day and age, 1998, for that type of style. 
 
Now I want to share some information, Mr. Speaker, on this 
first nations’ taxation, again, for the purpose of all the people 
that are here. And this is a letter from myself, and I won’t quote 
because if I’m quoting myself, I may run into copyright laws 
here, so I’ll continue on. The position taken by the 
Saskatchewan Party, “Tory Party,” seems to be taken out of 
political desperation as opposed to a genuine concern, 
responsible governance, and resolution. 
 
There are a number of points that must be made and a number 
of factors that have to be considered in any sensible discussion 
of this pressing issue. 
 
Number one, no Saskatchewan political party can impose 
changes to the treaty signed and agreed upon and enshrined in 
the Constitution of Canada. 
 
Number two, many first nations communities and reserves are 
not receiving education and health services from the provincial 
government treasury, and so they have a good argument as the 
reason why they’re PST exempt. After all, the PST is called the 
education and health tax. 
 
But if these people pay, had to pay the PST, even for 
off-reserve purchases, then the provincial government would 
have to deliver those services. And I can assure you that if the 
member from Kelvington-Wadena had done her math, she 
would find out that the cost would be incredibly high for 
Saskatchewan. At this point in time we can enforce it. And what 
are you enforcing the collection of, which is the provincial or 
federal jurisdiction, and that is the delivery of education and 
health. 
 
Number three, it must be recognized that many first nations 
businesses, joint ventures, partnerships, do pay taxes to the 
provincial government. Furthermore, significant numbers of 
non-treaty people are employed by these enterprises and they 
pay taxes on their income and on their purchases. And I talk 
about the Chotaw Nation in the United States and I talk about 
the Meadow Lake Tribal Council in northern Saskatchewan. 
We pay our share. And for the Saskatchewan Party to be so 
desperate out there to go around telling everybody: they don’t 
pay anything; they’re getting a free ride; that is political 
desperation at its worst level, Mr. Speaker. And I continue on. 
 
Four. There are a number of large, non-aboriginal businesses 
that . . . which take advantage of special tax breaks, exemptions, 
rebate programs, remission, and other tax credit programs 
offered by the provincial government. These include 
exemptions for paying the PST, in many cases. So there is some 
exemptions for PST, not just for the aboriginal people, but other 
organizations as well, Mr. Speaker. That needs to be also 
expressed. 



March 12, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 93 

And number five. Many off-reserve purchases made by the first 
nations people are for items that are tax exempt for the 
non-treaty population — things that we buy that we don’t pay 
tax — things like food, children’s clothing and children shoes; 
the list goes on. Those items — children’s clothing and food — 
account for a huge amount of the first nations’ spending. And 
are you trying to tax them and not tax the others? Well I think 
it’s ludicrous and, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s a shame that they 
continue pushing that down people’s throats as a desperate 
effort to gain votes. 
 
And number four . . . or number six. The most important thing 
is that in many towns and in many cities — and they’ll hear this 
— treaty people make a significant contribution to the 
economy, as do the Metis people and the other aboriginal 
groups, by making their purchases from local businesses. 
 
If a provincial party tried to impose the PST on off-reserve 
purchases, the result would be that most treaty people would 
start buying almost everything on the reserve as opposed to off 
the reserve. This would have a detrimental effect on 
communities like Prince Albert, Regina, Meadow Lake, 
Saskatoon, La Ronge, to name just a few. 
 
Certain businesses would consider moving out of towns and on 
to reserves and, Mr. Speaker, that’s just the tip of the iceberg. 
The fact of the matter, it could have some profound challenges 
and changes to all Saskatchewan communities. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I say to the members from the Tory Party that 
you should not try and utilize or use the aboriginal people for 
your benefit and to try and pretend you care when, in fact, your 
agenda is to try and use a minority of people in Saskatchewan 
for your political purpose. The message will be heard, the 
message will continue being said, and allow me to again say, do 
not use the aboriginal people for your desperate political 
purposes. We are very clear on that. 
 
And now Mr. Speaker, I think the point is I can go on and on 
about the Tory Party, but I’m not going to waste my time here 
talking to the whole issues of what they’re trying to do. We 
know they’re not going to fly. They can talk all about the polls 
and how well they’re doing and everything is going great. 
 
But the fact of the matter is the people of Saskatchewan will 
decide in the next election whether the Saskatchewan Party, 
which quite frankly is made up of a band of misfits, should be 
representing the people of Saskatchewan as opposed to true 
parties like the Liberal Party of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Belanger: — And Mr. Speaker, let’s turn our attention 
now, if I may, to some of the work being done by the northern 
communities, the Metis communities, and the non-aboriginal 
communities that work cohesively and work together. 
 
In Ile-a-la-Crosse, for example, we have the Sakitawak 
Development Corporation which is doing a tremendous job. 
They’ve got ventures, joint ventures in northern trucking. 
They’ve got catering . . . sorry, a security and custodial contract 
at Cluff Lake. And they’re also getting involved with joint 
ventures with the neighbouring communities of Buffalo 

Narrows. 
 
Then in La Loche, you have the Methy Construction Company, 
and they’re also looking at building a road up to a number of 
other communities including Garson Lake. So they are really 
actively and aggressively pursuing economic opportunities and 
employment. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, you would be proud to say that you are a 
part of that community when you see some of the work being 
done by people that really are empowered. And how are they 
empowered? They took the bull by the horns. And these are 
people that do not get millions of dollars in grants from any 
government. These people started by pulling up themselves by 
their bootstraps.  
 
And that is the Saskatchewan way we talk about here. The 
Premier talks about the Saskatchewan spirit. Well these are 
Saskatchewan people in northern Saskatchewan and they have a 
spirit that’s alive and burning and strong. 
 
And I point that out, Mr. Speaker, because many of them are 
now starting to see the fruits of their labour. Many of these 
corporations are taking off. They’re doing what is necessary. 
And I talk about the examples from the United States in the 
Choctaw Nation — I talk about all the different examples — 
and the clear thing that this professor mentioned, Professor Kalt 
from Harvard University, is sovereignty, capable governments, 
and a match between the type of government a tribe has and that 
tribe’s cultural norms regarding legitimate political power. 
 
So I say to the people in the Assembly here, and especially to 
the Saskatchewan Party, do not . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — The Tory Party. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — The Tory Party. Do not use the aboriginal 
people in the light that you have been using them. They are very 
successful people but for years they have been denied, for years 
they have been denied adequate resources, and they certainly 
have been not respected for some of the work that they’re trying 
to do. 
 
Now at the last mini session that we had just before Christmas, I 
sponsored a resolution calling for revenue sharing. And the 
records show, and the record shall be known, that the Minister 
of Northern Affairs, the hon. member from Cumberland, voted 
against the revenue-sharing proposal. And this was in spite, Mr. 
Speaker, in spite of this draft that we took from the Canadian 
Fact Book on Poverty — 1989 in Ottawa, where it says the 
percentage of the population poor in Canada. 
 
And they have different shades of grey. And there is one area, 
Mr. Speaker, one area that’s black. And that area, Mr. Speaker, 
happens to be the constituency of Athabasca and the 
constituency of Cumberland. The entire northern part of 
Saskatchewan, quite frankly, has the highest percentage of the 
population poor. 
 
But the fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker . . . the fact of the 
matter is the people in the North aren’t poor. They have the 
vision; they have proven themselves in terms of building their 
economies. What happens is they’ve got poor commitment from 



94 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 1998 

this government to deal with a number of issues that have been 
affecting them for years and years and years. And to further 
substantiate what they talk about when they blame the federal 
Liberal government — this will be my last point on the federal 
Liberal government — but when they blame them, allow me to 
explain that, yes, the transfers have hurt all the provinces in this 
country and all the provinces have the same federal 
government. And I want to point out, and I quote from an 
article of Thursday, February 26, 1998, in which the columnist 
Murray Mandryk writes: 
 

So Saskatchewan can justify its off-loading because it’s 
really just passing Ottawa’s off-loading on to our own 
municipalities, schools, hospitals, etc.? 
 
“Sure,” Cline said. “And I think it’s a fair justification.” 
 
Well maybe not. 
 
One huge difference between a federal government 
off-loading on a provincial government and a provincial 
government off-loading on a local town or city has to do 
with the capacity to recover money through revenue 
creation. 
 
Towns and cities have extremely limited capacity to 
generate additional revenues. Schools, hospitals and 
highways, obviously, have none. 
 
But a provincial government, as this NDP administration 
has shown since 1991, doesn’t always have to suffer. 

 
And let me give you some example of their additional revenues, 
Mr. Speaker. In 1991 Saskatchewan collected $1.988 billion in 
provincial taxes. In 1997 the province’s tax take was $3.125 
billion. Liquor and gaming revenue in 1991 totalled 297 
million. By 1997, it was 700 million. 
 
Meanwhile, natural resources revenue — 437 in 1991 — 
exploded to $927 million last year. 
 

The point isn’t that Saskatchewan shouldn’t have raised 
taxes or cut spending or off-loaded to balance its book. 

 
And I unquote. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, let’s saunter on down to northern 
Saskatchewan now. And I’ve made this statement again: 3 per 
cent of our provincial population live in northern Saskatchewan, 
which is half the land mass of the entire province. For every 
man, woman, and child, there’s 80 to 90 square kilometres of 
opportunity, and yet we continue suffering the indignation, as 
I’ve talked about, of unemployment, of poor housing, of poor 
roads, and the list goes on and on and on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have talked about all kinds of ideas in this 
Assembly since the day we walked in here. We’ve given all 
kinds of ideas. We’ve come up with resolution. We’ve 
complained, we’ve spoken, we’ve given them stats till they’re 
red in the face, but nothing continues sinking in. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for one minute let us talk about what the North 
contributes. For one minute, let’s talk about what the North 

contributes to the whole provincial economy besides the 
thousands of jobs created for people living in southern 
Saskatchewan. For one minute. 
 
Mining. I’ve talked about the different mines and some say as 
much as 3 billion over the next 10 or 12 years that this 
government will receive in royalties and benefits. 
 
Let’s talk about SaskPower. Would you know, as I mentioned 
before, 43 per cent of the total hydro needs of SaskPower 
comes from northern Saskatchewan? The three power 
generating stations in the North — Cumberland House, one up 
in the far North, and as well, the one in Sandy Lake — 
contribute $374.53 million for SaskPower. 
 
And then you throw in the fact that the Cameco shares, whose 
operations are all over northern Saskatchewan, we see the huge 
amount of benefits when they are sold on the market. And who 
got the money? It wasn’t the federal government. It wasn’t the 
northern people. It was the current NDP government. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, you combine mining, you combine forestry, 
you combine hydro, you combine tourism, you can combine 
corporate and personal income tax, like the Meadow Lake 
Tribal Council as an example, and they have all the other 
people that contribute income tax to this province. You can see 
when the Minister of Northern Affairs gets up in a meeting and 
says, for every dollar we take out of the North, we put a $1.60 
back in. If that was the case, we would be multi-billionaires in 
northern Saskatchewan. Yet, Mr. Speaker, you walk down the 
streets of Ile-a-la-Crosse or Pinehouse or Beauval or any 
community in northern Saskatchewan, you will see that there’s 
no billionaires there. 
 
And that is the problem that we have to begin to address. That if 
you want commitment from the people, then that commitment 
has got to go back. And I say to the people again: in the event 
that this government points their fingers at the federal 
government, be very well advised that they eliminated deficit 
— as the federal government done — be well advised, Mr. 
Speaker, that they have also contributed or reaped a huge 
amount of benefits provincially. And be advised, Mr. Speaker, 
that the North has contributed a great amount of dollars to this 
provincial economy and they can’t deny it. And that’s what 
people are going to remember in the back of their minds. 
 
Now as I mentioned, we spoke about plans. People talk about a 
Metis Act, people talk about a northern Act, but then do we 
even give ideas to this government? And again, I’ll share with 
the Minister of Northern Affairs if he’d like. We have a 
northern community development model. It has all kinds of 
nifty ideas and we identify sources of revenues as well, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And we talked to them about where can we get the money 
from? And we go on to indicate, well, the money can come 
from a number of sources. The sources are all identified here. 
And all it takes, Mr. Speaker, is commitment. 
 
And I say loud and clear to this day, that they can talk till 
they’re blue in the face. They can blame the federal Liberal 
government. They can blame the lack of support from all kinds 
of different sectors in terms of their financial means, but the fact 



March 12, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 95 

of the matter is as long as we have substandard housing, as long 
as we have poor roads, and as long as we continue having the 
social problem that northern Saskatchewan has, then the 
Minister of Northern Affairs and this government should not be 
believed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we need action. We need dynamic, exciting, and 
innovative action from this government and we are simply not 
getting it. Now again if he wishes a copy of this, Mr. Speaker, I 
will most certainly forward all the information to him. And he’s 
got staff — staff can help. And we’re just doing this certainly 
from the bottom of our hearts and certainly on behalf of 
northern Saskatchewan and particularly the Athabasca 
constituency. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, in closing I think it’s very important that 
people begin to realize that we will not be used. And I talk 
about this government’s need. Since they’re the governing 
body, since they have the power, since they can decide what 
decisions are best for the North, that you put some serious 
policies and some serious effort working hand in hand in 
consultation with the northern people. Unless and until we see 
that commitment, then we’re not going to believe you any 
more. We have believed you long enough. 
 
Mr. Speaker, further proof in this party’s apparent lack of 
innovation and excitement is quite frankly revealed in an article 
entitled, The Third Degree. On page 10 of this magazine I 
quote: 
 

Critics say the government has been too focused on public 
administration in recent years and has lost its penchant for 
policy research, analysis, and initiatives necessary to meet 
the challenge of both the immediate and long-term future. 

 
(1645) 
 
In this same article statement, I also pick up this quote: “Once 
considered the best public service in the country, thanks to its 
innovative policy initiatives and programs . . .” And the final 
quote, “. . . some of the brightest minds in the province have 
left.” 
 
So what that says, Mr. Speaker, is it proves that innovation, 
excitement, and dynamic approaches are not being taken and 
have not been explored in any way, shape, or form. This is 
exactly what I speak about when we say we need a new 
approach to our northern and aboriginal people. 
 
The question I have is: why can’t this be done? Why have we 
waited all these years? Why can’t somebody get up and take 
responsibility for what is happening here today? 
 
In the North, many of us are held back. There’s a system of 
disincentives and a system of control that is out there. Some of 
the ideas are archaic policies in housing that hurt working 
families. Mr. Speaker, working people cannot afford the 
housing in northern Saskatchewan. They are being kicked out 
of housing in northern Saskatchewan simply because they can’t 
buy that house at a decent market value and simply because the 
bottom line is they’re working. 
 
Entire communities are still hauling water in 1998 — Stony 

Rapids. Trailers lumped together to act as a hospital. A road 
system that is literally falling apart. An education system that is 
held together on the backs of the teachers and the local boards. 
Many of the elderly people talk about the high costs in power 
bills — some bills as high as 3, 4, 6, $700. Cost of medicine. 
And their list goes on. And the lack of recognition of 400-plus 
disabled people living in extreme hardship in the North and 
elsewhere. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the northern people have been patient long 
enough. The northern people have believed this government for 
so long and now it is time that this government believe in a 
northern people for at least a moment in time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the northern people are full of pride. They have 
always prided themselves on helping themselves out. They want 
jobs for the young people. They want decent homes, decent 
roads, and decent services. That’s all they want. Take all the 
resources but give us our fair and equal treatment. That’s all 
they want. Mr. Speaker, they do not want special treatment, or 
they do not want to be viewed as only wanting hand-outs as a 
party . . . as the Tory Party indicated at Christmas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the northern people have their hand out in 
extension of friendship and the request for respect. We want 
respect. They want equal treatment. They want social and 
economic justice. And above all else, they want to be heard for 
our problems and our challenges. 
 
While this government has treated the North as a third-world 
country, the people of the North have contributed back to this 
province first-class profits in mining, forestry, hydropower, 
tourism, personal income tax, and the list goes on. The northern 
people have given financial commitment. We have given 
political commitment for many years. Now our patience is 
wearing thin. 
 
So in closing, Mr. Speaker, there are many problems facing 
northern Saskatchewan. I’ve spoken on those problems on 
many occasions — housing, health care, social development, 
economic development, infrastructure needs. The government 
has it all. They know what the North needs. They’ve known that 
for 20 years. And I have a list of recommendations here that I 
wish to read very quickly. 
 
Recommendation to the government, number one. That your 
government work in cooperation with the aboriginal community 
to co-design an aggressive and bold new strategy in dealing 
with these Saskatchewan people. The Saskatchewan institute on 
public policy could be the vehicle for the initial thrust in data 
collection. 
 
Number two. Work aggressively to remove the barriers and a 
system of disincentives associated with living in northern 
Saskatchewan communities. Higher utility rates stifle growth. 
Lack of training discourages employment amongst the youth. 
The lack of a clear strategy in economic and social development 
severely limits our future. And the lack of innovation in 
housing, as policies discriminate against the working people, 
the high cost of food, medicine, and gasoline all adds stress to 
the family. These disincentives, coupled with a lack of services 
in health care, highways, and now education, are proof that a 
new approach is needed now. 



96 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 1998 

Number three. Recognize the need for the northern and native 
people to develop their own systems, to operate their own 
systems, and of course allow for growing pains in the 
development of these systems. Yes, the communities and the 
native groups are in the capacity-building stage, but rest assured 
they will deliver. We have talked about the marriage of a 
community development model; the marriage of working within 
a band council system; the marriage of a Metis Act; the 
marriage and premiss of revenue sharing; the marriage of being 
inclusive of all people in the North, which include aboriginal 
and non-aboriginal alike. 
 
Number four. Recognize that aboriginal means treaty, Metis, 
off-reserve, non-status, Bill C-31, etc. 
 
Number five. Do not pose the federal versus provincial 
jurisdictional argument when dealing with a new aboriginal 
planning. As in Alberta’s example, page 3 of the Alberta Metis 
Framework Agreement on August 16, 1993, states under 
section 5.1: 

 
The parties agree that nothing in this agreement shall be 
construed so as to derogate from or abrogate the roles, 
responsibilities, principles, and covenants of the tripartite 
process agreement or the constitution. 
 

Number six. That no community or aboriginal group will act 
against their interest; so approaches cannot be taken at the 
expense of these parties. 
 
Number seven. Respect the relative comparison of the North 
versus the South. The North does not have the economy of the 
South — the infrastructure, the post-secondary educational 
systems, or the financial means — to develop our economy and 
our infrastructure on our own. 
 
Number eight. I understand as well that many first nations are 
also assuming more and more responsibility for management of 
their bands from the federal and provincial level. And as 
mentioned, the capacity-building stage, more time must be 
given to develop those systems. 
 
And number nine. The provincial government should not say 
that they will not make promises that they cannot keep, to the 
aboriginal and to the northern people, with the disclaimer is the 
federal versus provincial jurisdictional question. If you can’t 
make true commitments without improvising and 
compromising the constitution, then don’t make any 
commitments at all. 
 
So in closing, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve mentioned time and time 
again in this Assembly, I cannot support the Speech from the 
Throne. We are waiting in anticipation to see what the final 
details of the budget is; what the final level of commitment to 
northern Saskatchewan is. We have talked about the housing 
challenges, highways, hospitals, young people, infrastructure 
needs. All that information, Mr. Speaker, is in the hands of the 
government. What they do not have is a plan and what they do 
not have is commitment. 
 
So in the end, Mr. Speaker, I say on behalf of my Liberal 
caucus colleagues, is that number one, the Saskatchewan Party 
known as the Tory Party is not the answer for aboriginal people. 

It never was; it never will be. And number two, and as far as 
northern Saskatchewan is concerned, this government had 
better get off your duff and start working hard and heavy, 
otherwise the northern people are going to come back and 
they’re voices will be heard. 
 
So in closing, Mr. Speaker, hear us, respect us, and treat us as 
equals, because the northern part of Saskatchewan and the 
people I represent certainly demand it and they extend their 
hand in trying to accomplish it. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — I’ll be saying more in regards to the 
North at budget speech time, but at this throne speech I’d just 
like to make some quick comments. Because, number one, Mr. 
Speaker, when I was in opposition, the Tories didn’t know 
anything about the North, they didn’t have their facts. And 
when I listen to my other member from Athabasca, I thought he 
would have his facts in regards to the North, being that he lives 
in the North. 
 
But I would say this much quickly in regards to the federal 
issues that he raises. As in regards to the central issue of 
economic development and jobs, I would like to report to the 
people of the province that for the first time in the history of 
northern Saskatchewan, 50 per cent of the people from northern 
Saskatchewan are working in the mines. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — For the first time in the history of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, we do have people who are 
working at the level of over 1,000 jobs in those mines, of which 
over 200 jobs are in the apprenticeable trades in regards to the 
areas of carpentry, electricians, etc., as well as the technical 
trades such as chem lab technicians and so on. 
 
So when you are looking at the situation, Mr. Speaker, we also 
know that in economic development we need the contracts in 
the North. When you look at the history of contracts, right from 
1991, Mr. Speaker, we had approximately $20 million worth of 
the contracts in northern development. I would like to report 
that this past year we had approximately $150 million worth of 
contracts to the northern contractors. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — So, Mr. Speaker, when you are looking at 
the facts, the facts point out a very different situation from what 
the Tories will have to say and what the Liberals will have to 
say. I think that they forget. They think only in terms of the 
social welfare mentality that they both have. 
 
I think that they should look with pride at the Northerners who 
stand up to be counted on the jobs, the over 1,000 that work in 
uranium mining. When you total all the mining in northern 
Saskatchewan, it’s over 1,600. And I think they should be 
standing up in good pride with these people who put food on 
the table for their children on a daily basis. That’s what they 
should be about. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



March 12, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 97 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to say as well 
in terms of the conceptual framework on the self-determination 
of people in northern Saskatchewan in regards to how the 
member from Athabasca alludes to, I would say this much: it 
was our government in northern Saskatchewan, the NDP 
government in the ’70s, who brought in the elected municipal 
government in the North and the Northern Municipal Council. 
And that indeed they formed a basis for control by Northerners. 
 
When you look at the issue of education, the fact that the 
elected boards in northern Saskatchewan for northern school 
board leader on Northern Lights School Division, 
Ile-a-la-Crosse board, were done during an NDP government in 
the ’70s. 
 
When you look at Saskatchewan Indian Federated College, 
when you look at the history of NORTEP (northern teacher 
education program) and teacher education, when you look at the 
history of education and aboriginals controlling this province, it 
was done during NDP government times. 
 
So when you look at what happened with the Tories who are 
sitting . . . those old Tories who are now calling themselves the 
Saskatchewan Party, of all things. They are doing and destroyed 
a lot of what we built in the ’70s. By the time . . . I have an 
example in the mining area. Fifty per cent employment and we 
had it drop to about 20. We had to bring it back up when we got 
back into government. 
 
So they may talk a good line in terms of accountability and so 
on, but these old Tories, don’t look to them. They put this 
province into debt by $15 billion. It’s the same old Tories that 
were talking about accountability with aboriginal people 
yesterday. Don’t believe them. They are not for aboriginal 
people or for Saskatchewan people, for that matter. 
 
So whether you look at it, Mr. Speaker, whatsoever, a quick 
response in regards to the comments by the member from 
Athabasca, and look at the fact that we have to have pride in the 
people of the North, pride in aboriginal people on the building 
that is being done, on the proactive stance that is being taken, 
and in fact say yes to the education-type of successes that 
they’ve had; yes to the economic successes and moving 
forward. 
 
This negative-type criticism that we hear from the Tories, that’s 
all I heard. The same old gloom and doom in regards to running 
a province or in regards to running the ability of first nations 
people and the Metis in this province. They should look at the 
fact that indeed, even in regards to the FSIN (Federation of 
Saskatchewan Indian Nations) there was improvement in terms 
of accountability and expenditures at that level, same at the 
Metis level. They don’t say nothing about that. They just only 
want to listen to the negativity that is there. And I think that 
they’re going to have to start looking at some of the positive 
things, not only for aboriginal people but for all people in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to say that being near 
five o’clock, I move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:59 p.m. 
 





   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Krawetz........................................................................................................................................................................................65 
  Toth ..............................................................................................................................................................................................65 
  Bjornerud ....................................................................................................................................................................................65 
  Heppner .......................................................................................................................................................................................65 
  Draude .........................................................................................................................................................................................65 
  Julé ...............................................................................................................................................................................................65 
  Aldridge .......................................................................................................................................................................................65 
  Belanger .......................................................................................................................................................................................65 
  McLane ........................................................................................................................................................................................66 
  Osika ............................................................................................................................................................................................66 
  McPherson...................................................................................................................................................................................66 
  Goohsen .......................................................................................................................................................................................66 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ............................................................................................................................................................................................66 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Belanger .......................................................................................................................................................................................66 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Murray.........................................................................................................................................................................................66 
  Johnson ........................................................................................................................................................................................67 
  Kowalsky .....................................................................................................................................................................................67 
  Renaud .........................................................................................................................................................................................67 
  Sonntag ........................................................................................................................................................................................67 
  Nilson ...........................................................................................................................................................................................67 
  Jess .........................................................................................................................................................................................67, 75 
  Toth ..............................................................................................................................................................................................74 
  Lorje.............................................................................................................................................................................................74 
  Bradley.........................................................................................................................................................................................75 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 1997 Citizens of the Year 
  Draude .........................................................................................................................................................................................67 
 Opening of Employee Career Development Centre 
  Hamilton ......................................................................................................................................................................................67 
 Funding to Support Medical Research Projects 
  Osika ............................................................................................................................................................................................68 
 Emu Farming 
  Ward ............................................................................................................................................................................................68 
 Teacher Receives Agribition Award 
  Julé ...............................................................................................................................................................................................68 
 Visitor Services Nominated for Award of Excellence 
  Murray.........................................................................................................................................................................................68 
 Provincial Court at Beardy’s Reserve 
  Johnson ........................................................................................................................................................................................69 
 Farm Safety Week 
  Murrell.........................................................................................................................................................................................69 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 SaskPower President’s Severance Package 
  Gantefoer .....................................................................................................................................................................................69 
  Lingenfelter .................................................................................................................................................................................69 
 First Nations Financial Accountability 
  Draude .........................................................................................................................................................................................70 
  Cline .............................................................................................................................................................................................71 
 Health Care System Review 
  Toth ..............................................................................................................................................................................................71 
  Serby ............................................................................................................................................................................................71 
 Multiple Sclerosis Drugs 
  McLane ........................................................................................................................................................................................72 
  Serby ............................................................................................................................................................................................72 
 Twinning the Trans-Canada Highway 
  Aldridge .......................................................................................................................................................................................72 
  Bradley.........................................................................................................................................................................................73 
 



 

 Sale of Channel Lake 
  Hillson ..........................................................................................................................................................................................73 
  Lingenfelter .................................................................................................................................................................................73 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 1 — The Arts Board Amendment Act, 1998 
  Teichrob.......................................................................................................................................................................................74 
 Bill No. 2 — The Correctional Services Amendment Act, 1998 
  Nilson ...........................................................................................................................................................................................74 
 Bill No. 3 — The Public Utilities Easements Amendment Act, 1998 
  Nilson ...........................................................................................................................................................................................74 
 Bill No. 4 — The Saskatchewan Evidence Amendment Act, 1998 
  Nilson ...........................................................................................................................................................................................74 
 Bill 206 — The Community Associations Residential Telephone Rate Designation Act 
  Julé ...............................................................................................................................................................................................74 
 Bill No. 208 — The Legislative Assembly Public Presentations Act 
  Haverstock...................................................................................................................................................................................74 
 Bill No. 209 — The Public Inquiries Amendment Act, 1998 (Health Care System Review) 
  Toth ..............................................................................................................................................................................................74 
 Bill No. 213 — The Local Government Election Amendment Act, 1998 
  Julé ...............................................................................................................................................................................................74 
 Bill No. 217 — The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Amendment Act, 1998 (Sessional Dates) 
  Haverstock...................................................................................................................................................................................75 
 Bill No. 221 — The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Amendment Act, 1998 (Duration of Assembly) 
  Haverstock...................................................................................................................................................................................75 
 Bill No. 233  An Act to amend The Surface Rights Acquisition and Compensation Amendment Act, 1998 
  Goohsen .......................................................................................................................................................................................75 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
ADDRESS IN REPLY 
  Pringle..........................................................................................................................................................................................75 
  Toth ..............................................................................................................................................................................................80 
  Jess ...............................................................................................................................................................................................86 
  Belanger .......................................................................................................................................................................................88 
  Goulet...........................................................................................................................................................................................96 
 
 


