





























































Hansard: March 18, 1998


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 183 
 March 18, 1998 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to present a petition on behalf of residents of 
Saskatchewan. The prayer reads: 

 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures to this petition are from the city 
of Moose Jaw. I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present today. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

These petitions come from Rouleau, Qu’Appelle, Watson, 
Invermay, and Regina, Mr. Speaker. I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

The petitioners, Mr. Speaker, are from Rosthern, Melfort, and 
the city of Regina. I so present. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to 
present a petition and I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And these are signed by people from Balgonie and from 

Regina. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well to 
present a petition. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call for an independent public inquiry to find 
all the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 
The signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from Regina 
and from Glentworth. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
to present: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The people that have signed the petition are from Regina and 
Pilot Butte. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I as well have a petition 
to lay before the people of this Assembly today. The petition is 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call for an independent public inquiry to find 
all the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition is signed by people from Regina, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I as well 
have a petition to present to this Assembly, and I’ll read the 
prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with aboriginal and Metis leaders and wildlife and 
sportsmen organizations in the province of Saskatchewan 
in an immediate effort to end the destructive and dangerous 
practice of night hunting in the province for everyone 
regardless of their heritage. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from 
Saskatoon, Regina, Hepburn, and North Battleford. I so present. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 



184 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 1998 

petitions on behalf of students, parents, teachers, and friends of 
the St. Jerome School community and also of other residents of 
Saskatchewan. And the prayer reads as follow, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to begin the construction of the 
four-lane Trans-Canada Highway between Gull Lake and 
the Alberta border this year. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by over 700 people and 
represents the caring efforts of some grade 6 students sitting in 
your gallery here this afternoon. I so present. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise to 
bring forward a petition. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to begin the construction of the 
four-lane Trans-Canada Highway between Gull Lake and 
the Alberta border this year. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed these petitions and 
were entrusted in getting these petitions done were all from the 
University of Regina administration students. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present a petition: 
 

Your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. Assembly 
may be pleased to save the Plains hospital by enacting 
legislation to prevent the closure, and by providing 
adequate funding to the Regina Health District so that 
essential services provided at the Plains may be continued. 
 

Your petitioners, Mr. Speaker, come from Rockglen, 
Lafleche, Gravelbourg and Assiniboia. I so present. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise to 
present a petition: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Assiniboia, from Willow Bunch, from Viceroy, Rockglen, and 
the list goes on. And I so present. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a petition 
to present today on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to enact legislation to 

completely ban the practice of night hunting in 
Saskatchewan. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people from here in 
Regina, as well as from Pilot Butte and White City. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I also present a petition 
on behalf of the citizens of Saskatchewan: 

 
Whereas your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains hospital by 
enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 

The signatures on this petition are from Lafleche, Assiniboia, 
Limerick, and Viceroy. I so present. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present petitions on behalf of the people who wish to add their 
weight and the concern of the following prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reach necessary agreements with other levels of 
government to fund the twinning of the Trans-Canada 
Highway in Saskatchewan so work can begin in 1998, and 
to set out a time frame for the ultimate completion of the 
project with or without federal assistance. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will every pray. 
 

These folks are all from the communities of Consul and 
Eastend, Mr. Speaker. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) are hereby read and 
received. 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly with 
regard to the funding of the twinning of the Trans-Canada 
Highway; with regard to the saving of the Plains Health 
Centre; in an effort to end the practice of night hunting; 
and to cancel severance payments to Jack Messer, and call 
an independent public inquiry surrounding Channel Lake. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 13 ask the government the 
following questions: 
 

The Department of Highways and Transportation, in 
conjunction with SARM (Saskatchewan Association of 
Rural Municipalities), did a road impact study. Did the 
provincial government pay for the road impact study in 
whole or in part? If so, how much did the road impact 
study cost the government in total? Has the road impact 
study been released? And if not, why not? If the study has 
been released, could the minister please submit the results 



March 18, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 185 

of the study to members of the Assembly. 
 

I so present. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Murray: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me a great 
deal of pleasure this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, to introduce to you 
and to my colleagues in the Legislative Assembly, the grade 6 
class from St. Jerome School, which is in my constituency. 
They are accompanied today by their teacher, Darrel 
Baumgartner, and chaperons Mr. Johnson and Mr. Lake. 
 
I’m pleased to tell you that earlier on this year I visited with the 
school and talked to them a little bit about how government 
worked and what an MLA (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly) did, and I’m very pleased to say that today they 
came and met with the Minister of Highways and discussed the 
twinning of the No. 1 Highway with her. 
 
Please join me in extending a warm welcome to the grade 6 
class from St. Jerome School. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you I’d also like the opportunity to introduce the grade 6 class 
from St. Jerome School to everyone here this afternoon, along 
with their teacher, Darrel Baumgartner and Joan Kortje. And in 
particular, there’s three young ladies in the class, Tara Osiposs, 
Sara Lake, and Amy Uhl, who took it upon themselves to get 
this petition drive under way and certainly are here this 
afternoon to witness the presentation of the petitions, which 
we’ve already done, and the rest of our proceedings. So I just 
ask everyone to welcome them once again. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you 
and all members of the House and to welcome to this House, 40 
public servants who are employed by the Government of 
Saskatchewan. They are here today, sir, in your gallery. They 
are part of a program which brings them to the legislature to see 
and understand and learn of the workings of this Assembly. 
 
They are representatives of the Department of Justice, 
Agriculture and Food, Liquor and Gaming, Energy and Mines, 
Education, the Public Service Commission, Indian and Metis 
Affairs, Social Services, Saskatchewan Gaming, Finance, and a 
representative from the Minister of Labour’s legislative office. 
 
I’d encourage all members to give a sincere welcome to these 
individuals who do provide service to the people of 
Saskatchewan on behalf of us all. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce a visitor that we’ve had to our legislature before, Mr. 
Paul Meio, from my constituency. Now Paul is a man who has 
both feet firmly planted on the ground but he also manages to 
keep an ear to the ground. So today I’d like you to help me 
welcome him and commend him for his political interest and 

his agility. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I was anticipating an introduction to 
come from the other side of the House, but seeing that it’s not 
coming, I would like to introduce to the House a former 
constituent of mine, Mr. Yogi Huyghebaert, whose name will 
be recognized to individuals in this House, who is today seated 
in the opposition gallery. And I’m sorry to say that Mr. 
Huyghebaert seems to have lost his way a little since he left the 
community of Moose Jaw, but we welcome him here, 
nevertheless. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to also 
recognize Yogi Huyghebaert, a good friend and soon to be a 
good colleague in the legislature here, representing the 
constituency of Shaunavon, Wood River, down there. I would 
ask all members, and particularly — particularly — a present 
member to join with us and welcome him here this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Davidson Health Centre 
 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, the member from Arm River, the 
Liberal health critic, spends a lot of his time trashing the most 
effective, most efficient health delivery system on the continent. 
Obviously somebody hid something in his cornflakes when he 
was very young. His outlook on life has been coloured ever 
since. Lately he’s been so busy moaning about the changes 
being made by other health boards that he’s failed to 
acknowledge a very happy and progressive announcement in 
his own constituency. 
 
So let me give credit to his fine constituents who are working to 
make sure their health care delivery system continues to be 
made better. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it has been recently announced that the Midwest 
Health District is now planning and designing a new, one-stop, 
integrated health care facility in Davidson, right in the middle 
of Arm River constituency. Lyle Leys, the chairman of the 
health board said, and I quote: 
 

This innovative project will enable the board to continue to 
deliver quality health care to the residents of Davidson and 
area, meets the health district’s vision of health care 
delivery, and will set the standard for any future health 
centre construction in the district. 
 

The new centre will provide a whole range of health services in 
one location. 
 
It is my honour, Mr. Speaker, to share the latest health system 
improvements with the fine people of Arm River constituency. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



186 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 1998 

Video Robbery Victim 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today in the 
Assembly to draw attention to the plight of Lori Mushanski, as 
it was described in today’s Leader-Post. Mr. Speaker, Ms. 
Mushanski is a 24-year-old mother of two who was fired from 
her job at a video store after a robbery on the weekend. Mr. 
Speaker, she was fired because her employer believed she gave 
the robber too much money. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, Lori had not been employed by the 
store for three months, and is therefore not covered by The 
Labour Standards Act. Mr. Speaker, I think that the members 
opposite will agree that this must have been a horrifying 
experience for her. As we know, such crimes can have lasting 
effects on their victims, but then become a victim twice — 
beyond comprehension. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will be sending over a copy of this statement and 
the newspaper article to the Minister of Labour, and I would ask 
that he look into this serious matter as soon as possible. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Big Bid Barn 
 
Mr. Jess: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just east of the 
Battlefords along Highway 16 you will see the Big Bid Barn, 
new, permanent home of Neil Kramer Auction Sales. The Big 
Bid Barn is a 12,000 square-foot, $325,000 facility, and is open 
for business. The Kramers have been auctioneering just about 
everything you can think of for the past 49 years, starting in 
1949 by former MLA, Eiling Kramer. 
 
They have, however, thought of something new. Neil, who 
assumed control of the company in 1977, is planning to expand 
the Big Bid Barn and is looking to spend another 30 to 40,000 
to fit it with special handling facilities for buffalo and elk. The 
Kramers feel that there is tremendous potential for elk and 
buffalo facility in Saskatchewan and plan to cut into the Alberta 
market. 
 
In addition, when the Big Bid Barn is not stuffed full of big 
bidders, as it was at its opening when 800 customers walked 
through the doors, it is available to be rented for other special 
events. Our congratulations to the Kramers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan economy is strong and it is 
expanding. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Need to Twin Trans-Canada 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on a 
daily basis we become accustomed to people speaking in this 
Assembly with a clear political agenda. I have already 
introduced some very important people who are visiting the 
legislature today simply because they care, and that being the 
grade 6 class from St. Jerome School here in Regina, with their 
teacher, Darrel Baumgartner, and Joan Kortje. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the class lost a very dear friend during the 
Christmas holidays when an accident on the single-lane portion 
of the Trans-Canada Highway claimed the lives of their 
classmate, Michelle Brehm, and her mother, Jennifer. Three 
young ladies from this class, Tara Osiposs, Sara Lake, and Amy 
Uhl, took it upon themselves to start a petition drive aimed at 
convincing this government of the need to twin the 
Trans-Canada Highway. 
 
They did this not for a political reason, but because they lost a 
very dear friend and they want something done about this 
dangerous, single-lane stretch of highway. 
 
I said earlier they came here today to witness the presentation of 
the petitions that were representing over 700 signatures, and I’d 
just like to say on behalf of the Liberal opposition that we’d 
certainly like to salute the efforts of these fine young people 
whose hearts are definitely in the right place. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Agreement between Saskatoon Health Board 
and Area School Divisions 

 
Mr. Whitmore: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased 
to rise in the House today to speak about Saskatchewan’s 
innovative and accessible education system during Education 
Week. 
 
Monday, the Minister of Education attended the signing of a 
cooperation agreement between the Saskatoon District Health 
Board and several school divisions in the Saskatoon area. This 
agreement recognizes that the education system and health 
system, when dealing with the same children, are 
interdependent and need to cooperate. The focus in any such 
situation must be always the best interests of the child and 
family involved. 
 
I want to congratulate Saskatoon District Health, Saskatoon 
Public, Saskatoon St. Paul’s, Saskatoon valley, Saskatoon 
(East), and Saskatoon (West) School Divisions for this 
innovative initiative. 
 
This initiative will give special support to students who might 
not otherwise be able to finish their school. These programs 
reflect the education system to commitment — that all children 
should have access to education regardless of the challenge they 
face. Many of these students are at risk of leaving school and 
have social and emotional problems or acquired brain injuries. 
Using a smaller, more intimate approach, these classrooms have 
lower than usual pupil-teacher ratio. 
 
Bishop Mahoney School is also home for a special program for 
teen mothers. The school provides child care for these young 
girls to continue their education. Both of these programs do 
special support for students who might not otherwise be able to 
finish school. These programs reflect the education system 
commitment to all children and should have access to education 
regardless of the challenges they face. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



March 18, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 187 

Saskatchewan Party Dinner 
 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to be 
here today, Mr. Speaker, because anyone who travelled the 
highways last night knows why. But despite the storm, my 
colleague from Melfort-Tisdale, Yogi Huyghebaert, Elwin 
Hermanson, and myself braved the elements to attend a historic 
dinner for Saskatchewan and the town of Saltcoats. 
 
I say historic, Mr. Speaker, because despite the awful weather, 
over 200 people came to meet the Saskatchewan Party 
leadership candidates. And not just any 200 people, Mr. 
Speaker, but 200 people infuriated with the actions of this NDP 
(New Democratic Party) government. 
 
Two hundred people who believe that the official opposition 
must use every tool at its disposal to ensure a public inquiry is 
held, that the government fully discloses all legal opinions, and 
they immediately cancel Jack Messer’s severance. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the best thing is that there were 200 excited 
by the energy, commitment, and principles of the Saskatchewan 
Party. As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, over half of these 
people were so excited by the Saskatchewan Party they bought 
memberships. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to take a minute to help the members 
opposite with their math. One hundred people bought 
memberships and a hundred people were there that already had 
memberships. That adds up to 200 people who will not be 
voting NDP in the next election. My only regret, Mr. Speaker, 
is that the cut-off is today to buy Saskatchewan Party 
memberships to vote on the leadership race. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Agriculture and Food Week 
 

Mr. Langford: — Mr. Speaker, March 15 to 21 is Agriculture 
and Food Week in Saskatchewan. Saskatchewan Agriculture 
and Food is committed to research and development in 
programs which are practical to us to produce entrepreneurs. 
Since 1993 Saskatchewan Agriculture and Food has provided 
nearly 80 million to this end. By the year 2000 a fund will have 
invested over 90 million to research and development directly 
related to agriculture industry. 
 
I encourage the members of this Assembly and all 
Saskatchewan residents to take a moment to reflect on the 
agriculture and food industry and the impact it has on our lives. 
About 40 per cent of the jobs in Saskatchewan are related to 
this industry. This is why our government has committed such 
resources to its continuing growth and diversification. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I stand here to inform the people of Saskatchewan 
that our government is committed to investing in them and their 
ideas. Together we will continue to lead the way in the 
agriculture industry. Thank you. 
 

Outstanding Achievement for Saskatchewan Citizen 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I want to 
relate to you a series of truly encouraging stories that all of 

northern Saskatchewan can be proud of. Today I want to 
dedicate my statement to Napoleon Jaseyounen — a disabled 
man from Wollaston Lake. 
 
In December of 1994, Napoleon Jaseyounen experienced a 
severe brain injury that left him a paraplegic. Napoleon’s life 
change was challenging enough but he had a personal goal to 
further his education, achieve his grade 12, and find a career 
that would make him self-sufficient. 
 
In 1997, after being inspired by a Gary Tinker Federation 
disability conference in La Ronge, Napoleon set out after his 
goals. The federation arranged for Napoleon to be assessed to 
find out the level of his abilities. Napoleon then enrolled in the 
GED (general educational development) help program offered 
in La Ronge. 
 
At the time concerns were expressed from different agencies 
about Nap’s ability to function away from home. Mr. Speaker, 
I’m pleased to report to the House today that Napoleon is living 
on his own. He has met and exceeded his personal goals and set 
new ones. As well, with the help of his physiotherapist, 
Napoleon can now transfer himself out of his wheelchair and is 
using a walker for a short period of time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Napoleon Jaseyounen has many challenges ahead 
of him, but the courage and determination that he has displayed 
so far will help him succeed in the future. This man is a symbol 
of inspiration to us all. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Examination of Channel Lake 
 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
other day we heard the minister responsible for CIC (Crown 
Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) quote from a 
Leader-Post editorial. I’d like to read the first line of today’s 
editorial, and I quote: 
 

A full public inquiry would be the most appropriate way to 
investigate SaskPower’s botched sale of Channel Lake 
Petroleum. 
 

Even Morris Bodnar agrees, and he dismisses arguments by the 
NDP and the Liberals. 
 
Mr. Premier, it is clear that a public inquiry is the only way to 
get to the truth about Channel Lake. It’s time to end the 
cover-up; it’s time to come clean. Will you hold a public 
inquiry into the Channel Lake fiasco; will you cancel Jack 
Messer’s obscene severance package until the public inquiry 
completes its work; and will you release the legal opinions 
you’re hiding? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the Deputy Premier and 
the minister in charge of the Crown Investments Corporation 
has been answering this question very ably and fully for the 
Government of Saskatchewan. 



188 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 1998 

The Public Accounts Committee is chaired by the Tory Party 
over there. The questioner, who is a member of the current Tory 
Party, sits on the Public Accounts Committee. And we have 
made the commitment that whoever has to be subpoenaed 
relevant to the issue and documents that are relevant to the 
issue, that’ll be the case. We’ll honour that. 
 
Come to the committee on March 31. We invite you to do that. 
Take part in the full discussion. We’ve tabled two full reports 
revealing all of the documents and all the relevant facts. 
Anything more that can come out, will come out. We invite you 
to take part. 
 
And if you take a look at the editorial, it does not say that there 
should be a legal inquiry under The Public Inquiries Act. It 
says that in fact the opposite — you can have a very good, a 
very good inquiry under the Public Accounts. So come on in 
and join us. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — It says the most appropriate way is a full 
public inquiry. It is isn’t only SaskPower people can’t read. 
 
Mr. Premier, on June 20 the SaskPower board met to approve 
the botched Channel Lake deal. That’s when all the dirty details 
came to the attention of the SaskPower board. The board 
included three NDP ministers — the former SaskPower 
minister, the former CIC minister, and the Minister of Northern 
Affairs. Three ministers, Mr. Premier, and did they take 
immediate action to get to the bottom of this dirty deal? No, 
they covered it up. They covered it up for five months until the 
Provincial Auditor brought it to light. Whatever happened to 
ministerial responsibility? Mr. Premier, why are these three 
ministers still in cabinet? Will you fire all three of them for 
their part in this cover-up? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the question of the hon. 
member, of course, is premissed on a very wrong predicate. The 
reports are very clear in this regard. The ministers and the board 
acted on the information which was provided to it on June 20, 
and the report, in a fashion which the opposition says is critical 
of the nature in which the information was tabled, made their 
decisions on that information. 
 
We all have on the desk information that is made available to us 
and decisions are had and taken with regard. So far as we know, 
the ministers responsible had acted in that capacity and no 
blame was attached to them in this regard whatsoever. 
 
But while we’re talking about cover-up and doing the honest 
thing and the honourable thing, will the hon. member from 
Melfort, who swore an oath of allegiance as MLA to the Liberal 
Party, do the honourable thing and resign before you join the 
dead-of-the-night parties, which you have there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’ll 
be elected the member for Melfort-Tisdale for the 
Saskatchewan Party soon enough when you get the courage to 

call an election. Mr. Speaker, there’s been a lot of jokes about 
Jack Messer and his trained monkey . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order, order. Order, 
order. Order. Order! I’ll ask all hon. members on both the 
government side and the hon. members’ colleagues to come to 
order in order to be able to permit the hon. member from 
Melfort-Tisdale’s question to be heard. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, there’s a joke about Jack Messer and his trained 
monkey. It turns out he’s got three trained monkeys. Hear no 
evil; see no evil; speak no evil. 
 
Mr. Premier, just five days after the SaskPower board met to 
discuss the dirty deal in Channel Lake, the former minister of 
CIC had the audacity to release the NDP’s response to the 
Crown corporation review. He released a review that said 
everything was fine in the Crown corporations, including 
SaskPower — just five days after the full extent of the Channel 
Lake fiasco came to his attention. 
 
Mr. Premier, that minister was a part of the cover-up. He must 
be fired. Mr. Premier, where is the ministerial responsibility? 
Will you fire the former minister for CIC for his share in this 
mess? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — The hon. member gets up and says 
that the former minister of CIC tables a report on Crown 
review, which report, by the way, in essence says that we 
should not have ministers as Chair of the Crown corporations in 
order to avoid political interference. That is the basis of the 
recommendations, amongst other aspects of the report. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m having a very difficult time listening because 
these people are so riled up. When you give them a little dose of 
truth they react in a very negative and hostile way. What is it? 
Are they allergic to it or what, Mr. Speaker? 
 
This is the essence of the request of the minister of Crown 
corporations to resign. The fact of the matter is that if anybody 
should be resigning in this House, it is you and your colleagues. 
You talk about three monkeys. I will tell you about eight right 
over there who see no evil, hear no evil, and speak no evil — 
except do evil. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskPower President’s Severance Package 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My questions are for 
the Premier. Mr. Premier, this debate, this debate is far more 
wide-reaching than Channel Lake, although Channel Lake’s a 
big part of it. It’s more than just firing a few ministers, although 
they should go, and you know it. 
 
This debate is about accountability and responsibility. And 
we’ve seen neither from the NDP government. We’ve seen 
nothing but cover-ups, half-truths, and deception. It’s time to 
come clean, Mr. Premier. 
 
Mr. Premier, the clock is ticking. Will you table the legal 
documents? Will you hold a public inquiry and will you put a 



March 18, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 189 

stop to Jack Messer’s obscene severance payments? Will you 
do that for the people of Saskatchewan today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, unlike the Tories on 
their very many huge fiascos, when nothing was tabled ever — 
nothing was tabled ever . . . Back in the period from 1982 to 
1986, that Tory government sold an SGI (Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance) building in Regina, which was the 
subject of a great deal of controversy. This Tory government, in 
its variety of deals, never once told the people of Saskatchewan 
any factual circumstances whatsoever. 
 
What do we do? We come to the House and we table 
documents by Deloitte & Touche. We table documents by CIC. 
We say, come to the Public Accounts Committee. We say, 
subpoena anybody that you think is relevant at Public Accounts. 
We have given our assurance that they will be honoured. We 
say that people will be allowed to be questioned; documents, as 
appropriate and where available, will be there. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Now I will ask for the 
cooperation of the hon. members of the opposition. I’m having 
a great deal of difficulty being able to hear the Premier’s 
response and I . . . Order, order. Order. It is equally . . . Order. It 
is equally appropriate that the hon. member putting the question 
can be heard as the hon. member providing the response can be 
heard and I will ask for the cooperation of the House. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll try one more time 
but they obviously don’t want to hear the truth. And I’ll just 
sum it up very briefly by saying . . . Well here they start again. 
We’ve tabled the documents. These people acting in this kind of 
a disrespectful way of the legislature, this dead-of-the-night 
party with no principles, I don’t expect very much. 
 
We’ve tabled the report, we’ve got the Public Accounts 
Committee report going, we’ve got the subpoenas . . . Well look 
at this. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Now I’ve just asked for 
the cooperation of the House to allow the Premier’s response to 
be heard. I’m having a great deal of difficulty being able to hear 
it and I do ask for the cooperation of the members of the 
opposition to be able to . . . for the House to be able to hear the 
response. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, but they 
clearly don’t want to hear any of the truth. 
 
I will simply say we’re going to be . . . There they go again. 
There they go again, the disrupters of democracy and the 
institutions. There they are. We will be there at the Public 
Accounts Committee on March 31. We’re prepared to subpoena 
anybody who should be legitimately subpoenaed to testify to 
this issue, to add further light to the volume of evidence that we 
have already tabled voluntarily. 
 
I just hope we don’t have to issue subpoenas to you people. 
We’re going to be there; why aren’t you going to be there? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, Mr. 
Premier, let me try one more time. This debate is more than 
about Jack Messer, even though Jack Messer is a big part of the 
problem. It’s about NDP patronage. It’s about a Premier who 
promised to stop patronage and take politics out of the Crowns 
— and who do we get running the Crowns? Don Ching, Gord 
Nystuen, Jack Messer, and the list goes on and on. 
 
Now the Premier wants us to believe that Jack Messer deserves 
$300,000 in severance payments because he’s some sort of 
brilliant chief executive officer. Mr. Premier, Jack Messer 
didn’t climb the corporate ladder, he took the NDP helicopter 
right to the top floor. And when he got in that helicopter, he 
took it out and he crashed it into Channel Lake. And then his 
good old buddy the Premier of this province gave him a 
$300,000 golden parachute. 
 
Mr. Premier, will you do the right thing, will you cancel Jack 
Messer’s severance package? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, this is laughable, this 
question, coming from that — and I’m glad that they recognize 
it — coming, Mr. Speaker, from the masters of patronage, that 
Tory member. Do you recall the man by the name of George 
Hill? George Hill, running the Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation, $1.2 million severance package, which they made 
two weeks before the election of November of 1991 and they 
transferred it to a law account up in Saskatoon. Tories, George 
Hill, a severance package for his own pocket — you did that, 
you’re a part of that — and you’ve got the audacity to get up in 
this House and say that we run a government of patronage. 
Shame on you; stick to the facts. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Health Care Funding in Saskatoon 
 

Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
government’s failure to properly fund health care in Regina has 
failed the people of southern Saskatchewan. The NDP have 
slashed 400 hospital beds, and patients now find there are no 
extra beds. If this government has its way, the Plains hospital 
will be closed on October 31, 1998, making the situation even 
worse. 
 
It now appears the same funding crisis which hit Regina is 
about to blow into Saskatoon, just as yesterday’s winter storm 
did. The Saskatoon Health District is expected to record a $5 
million deficit this year and as much as $13 million deficit next 
year. 
 
Mr. Premier, what are you prepared to do to ensure that health 
care services don’t deteriorate any further in Saskatoon because 
of this funding crisis? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to respond to the 
member from Melville today, because yesterday his colleague, 
the member from Thunder Creek, stood up and said that in this 
Assembly . . . or to this Assembly that we had a crisis in Regina 



190 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 1998 

and southern Saskatchewan yesterday. And the crisis that he 
said we have in Saskatchewan and Regina yesterday, and I want 
to quote the news release where he says, and this is his news 
release: 
 

That the Plains Hospital is reporting that there was not a 
single hospital bed available in the entire city of Regina on 
at least two occasions in the past 10 days. 

 
Well our office took it upon itself to see whether or not there 
was any accuracy to this statement, and we did. And when we 
spoke to Mr. Bartlett, who is a CEO (chief executive officer) of 
the Regina District, Mr. Bartlett said to us at no time, at no time 
in the last 10 days has there been a . . . where there have been 
no beds available in Regina Health District, is what Mr. Bartlett 
has said. And I say to the member from Thunder Creek and I 
say to the member from Melville, what you are doing is that 
you’re fearmongering with Saskatchewan health and criticising 
the health care system today with no accuracy and no 
prominence. 
 
And I say you need to withdraw that statement. You need to 
withdraw that statement and apologize to the people of Regina 
and southern Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, to the Premier. The funding crisis 
which did hit Regina, Regina Health District, sparked plans by 
your government to close one of this city’s three hospitals — 
the Plains Health Centre. Will the Premier explain if the people 
of Saskatoon should also brace themselves for this government 
to follow the same plan in that city as they have in Regina? 
 
Do you plan on closing one of Saskatoon’s three hospitals? And 
which hospital will it be, Mr. Premier? Are you simply going to 
spill . . . spin your wheel of misfortune to decide? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to, want to advise the 
House and the member opposite for Melville that over the last 
two years in particular in this province and last year and 
through the budget cycle, have provided many initiatives to the 
people of Saskatchewan to ensure that we have a quality and 
stable health care system. 
 
And I can review for you one more time what those were. 
Greater stability for hospitals and nursing homes, and we 
provided last year $38.7 million to achieve that. We also 
improved emergency health services across the province last 
year by adding an additional $3 million; and secured access to 
health services for rural communities — $8.5 million; and 
enhanced home care by $6.3 million. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, and to the member for Melville, we did this 
on our own — on our own. Saskatchewan did this on its own at 
the same time when federal cuts were being made to this 
province. And as I talk to my colleagues across the nation they 
say the same thing. The federal Liberal government has not 
assisted health care delivery services at all. And in this province 
we back-filled every penny that the federal Liberal government 
removed, and will ensure that we will have into the future the 
best quality health care system that people of Saskatchewan can 
expect. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
decisions to close the Plains Health Centre and shut down 52 
rural hospitals were made prior to the federal government 
cutting one dime in transfer payments to this province. 
 
Mr. Premier, many people have suggested there is one simple 
reason to explain why you targeted Regina before Saskatoon. 
Simply put, the Regina contingent on this side of the House is 
made up of a bunch of NDP lightweights, and they’ve certainly 
proved it, not saying anything about the closure of the Plains. 
On the other hand, the government made up of Saskatoon 
consists of the Premier and most of his cabinet. 
 
Unless this government provides appropriate funding in 
tomorrow’s budget, the Saskatoon District Health Board’s 
hands may be tied. 
 
Mr. Premier, will you tell the people of Saskatoon that you will 
be providing appropriate funding in tomorrow’s budget for 
health care? Will you promise them you do not have plans to 
close a Saskatoon hospital. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, to the member from 
Melville, I want to assure him that as long as this administration 
is responsible for the administration of health care services 
across the province, that they will have the best quality health 
care services that we’ve ever had. And so the member from 
Melville does not have to worry about the fact that tomorrow 
there will be any kind of an announcement about the closure of 
a hospital in Saskatoon. He does not have to concern himself 
about that. 
 
And what the member from Melville should do is prepare 
himself for this year’s budget in the same way that he prepared 
himself for last year’s budget. Where last year after the budget 
he said, after the federal government had cut all of its cost to the 
provincial governments across the province and to 
Saskatchewan, he says it is a positive budget. 
 
The expected fundings were expected, funding stability to the 
year 2000 and beyond to assist, in his case, the North Valley 
Health District, defining process, managing the changes 
necessary to ensure . . . And we know that we will have a stable 
health care system that will meet the districts’ needs across the 
province — from the member from Melville — which ensures 
and reaffirms in his mind the wonderful health care services 
that we have in the province today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Channel Lake Inquiry 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said, I want the Public 
Accounts Committee to work. I want the inquiry to work, and I 
believe, I’m confident, I can ask the questions that need to be 
asked. However, if Public Accounts is going to work, the 
government will have to finally, totally, and irrevocably give up 
all thought of stonewalling. 
 



March 18, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 191 

In 1995 Ernst &Young, the auditors of SaskPower, prepared a 
report and a letter to management flagging their concerns over 
this rogue company. They told SaskPower at the time there 
were problems. We need that report if we are going to get to the 
bottom of Channel Lake. If that report is suppressed, if we’re 
going to have to rely on second-hand, watered-down versions of 
the report, the committee will not work. Will you release that 
report? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Thank you to the member for the 
question. And I wonder if you could use your considerable 
influence with your former colleague, the member from 
Melfort, to see if you can get him to come to the meeting on 
March 31, because that would be the first step in having a very 
open process. 
 
But I say to you . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well I hear the 
Leader of the Saskatchewan Party saying that they will be there, 
and I am encouraged by that because that’s the first positive 
indication we’ve had from you, sir. 
 
I say to you, we will be as open as open can be, coming to the 
committee. You be there on March 31. We’ve invited all of the 
members of the committee and we will answer all and any 
questions put. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — 1995, Mr. Speaker, that’s the date, not 
December 1997. 1995 was when this government was first 
warned there are problems over in SaskPower and Channel 
Lake. 1996 was when the board of SaskPower tried to fulfil 
their responsibilities in dealing with the situation. Yet this 
government chose to ignore until December of ’97, chose to try 
and cover up as late as February of ’98. Why didn’t you deal 
with this situation when it was first brought to your attention in 
1995 and save us at least $15 million? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, in contrast to what the 
assistant public auditor, the auditor in Saskatchewan says about 
the $2 million gain on the project, you’ve now got it up to a $15 
million loss. And why we want to have this committee meeting 
soon is so we can get to the bottom of the twisted facts that you 
keep perpetuating to the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I say to you, in the Deloitte Touche report which we tabled in 
the House, I made it very clear when we called for the review 
following on the report of the auditor late in 1997. And I say to 
you that when this . . . became aware it was an issue, we 
commissioned the report, we’ve tabled it in the House. We also 
have said that we will establish extra rules for the Public 
Accounts Committee for you to be able to come there and ask 
questions beyond the normal circumstance that would be 
occurring in Public Accounts. So I say to you, let’s get your 
partners in crime over there involved, your former colleague 
from Melfort. Get him to come to the committee and we’ll see 
where the discussion goes. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, if the provincial government used 
the same screwy accounting on the Husky Bi-Provincial 
upgrader they’re using on Channel Lake, they would have had 
to report $140 million loss instead of a $3 million surplus. 
 
However, last spring the Minister of Energy went ballistic when 
the Provincial Auditor was asking questions about SaskPower. 
We didn’t understand why he was so emotional, why he was so 
het up about it. We didn’t understand why he was so irrational 
about the auditor looking into SaskPower. 
 
My question for the minister: did your emotional reaction 
against the Provincial Auditor have anything to do with your 
concern as to what might come out from the Provincial Auditor 
over Channel Lake? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
member opposite that the total file as it has been reviewed by 
this legislature — the Deloitte Touche report, the CIC review, 
all of the relevant documents that we tabled here in the 
Assembly — have been handed over to the Provincial Auditor. 
The auditor will be involved in this process. You too, sir, as a 
member of the Public Accounts Committee, will be very much 
involved on March 31 when we will invite the press, everyone, 
to come, 9 o’clock, and we’ll answer all of the questions that 
you’ve put. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskPower President’s Severance Package 
 

Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my question is for the 
Premier. Mr. Premier, for seven years your NDP government 
has abused the taxpayers of this province while rewarding your 
friends time and time again. This time you’ve gone too far. It’s 
time for the Saskatchewan taxpayers and the Saskatchewan 
Party to stand up and say, we’ve had enough, and you’re not 
going to get away with it any longer. 
 
Today, Mr. Premier, today, Mr. Premier, we’re drawing a line 
in the sand. You will cancel Jack Messer’s severance package, 
you will hold a public inquiry, you will turn over the legal 
documents, or we will grind this legislature to a halt. And if you 
don’t think we will, just watch us, Mr. Premier. Just watch us. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Premier, what’s it going to be? Will you 
cancel Jack Messer’s severance package or do we grind this 
place to a halt? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, far be it for me to 
characterize that “you will see us grind this legislature to a halt” 
as being arrogant. Far be it for me to characterize it. I will tell 
you that I’m not surprised, because the height of arrogance and 
the height of lack of democracy is when these people got 
together in the dead of night and formed the brand-new Tory 
Party. And they talk about abuse of taxpayers — that member 
and each and every one of those eight guys over there and 
women involved, racked up a debt of $15 billion; drove us to 
the edge of bankruptcy; $770 million in interest payments. And 



192 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 1998 

they say that we’re abusing the taxpayers’ money when we 
finally have balanced the budget, are producing now surpluses 
. . . (inaudible) . . . invested in the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Well I’ll tell the member opposite, tomorrow there will be a 
budget. Tomorrow we are going to tell the people of 
Saskatchewan about what they’re going to get with respect to 
taxes; what the situation is with respect to health care, hospitals, 
and roads. And those people can play hijack highway robbers of 
this House if they want. We’re none of that part of this — none 
of that. They can play that game; we’re not going to do it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 235 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act 
(Village of Abbey) 

 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
move first reading of Bill No. 235, The Channel Lake 
Indemnification Act (Village of Abbey). 
 
The division bells rang from 2:28 p.m. until 2:38 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 7 
 
Krawetz Bjornerud Toth 
D’Autremont Draude Gantefoer 
Heppner   
 

Nays — 34 
 
Romanow Flavel Van Mulligen 
Wiens MacKinnon  
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order, order. Order. Order. I’ll 
ask all hon. members to come to order so that the vote can be 
heard. 
 
Shillington Mitchell Tchorzewski 
Johnson Whitmore Upshall 
Kowalsky Calvert Teichrob 
Trew Renaud Lorje 
Bradley Scott Nilson 
Sonntag Wall Kasperski 
Ward Murray Jess 
Langford Murrell Thomson 
Osika McPherson Aldridge 
Belanger McLane  
 

Bill No. 236 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act 
(Town of Aberdeen) 

 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move first 
reading of a Bill, No. 236, The Channel Lake Indemnification 
Act (Town of Aberdeen). 
 

The division bells rang from 2:41 p.m. until 2:51 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 6 
 
Bjornerud Toth Boyd 
Draude Gantefoer Heppner 
 

Nays — 29 
 
Flavel Van Mulligen Wiens 
Lingenfelter Shillington Mitchell 
Tchorzewski Johnson Whitmore 
Goulet Kowalsky Crofford 
Calvert Teichrob Renaud 
Scott Nilson Serby 
Sonntag Wall Kasperski 
Murray Jess Langford 
Murrell Thomson Hillson 
Aldridge Belanger  
 

Bill No. 255 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act 
(Village of Arelee) 

 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of the Bill No. 
255, The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Village of Arran). 
 
The division bells rang from 2:55 p.m. until 3:05 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 8 
 
Krawetz Bjornerud Toth 
D’Autremont Boyd Draude 
Gantefoer Heppner  
 

Nays — 26 
 
Flavel Van Mulligen Wiens 
MacKinnon Lingenfelter Shillington 
Johnson Whitmore Goulet 
Upshall Kowalsky Crofford 
Teichrob Renaud Scott 
Nilson Serby Sonntag 
Wall Kasperski Murray 
Jess Langford Thomson 
Hillson Belanger  
 

Bill No. 256 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act 
(Village of Arran) 

 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker I move first reading of Bill No. 256, 
The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Village of Arran) be 
now read the first time. 
 
The division bells rang from 3:08 p.m. until 3:18 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 
 
 



March 18, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 193 

Yeas — 8 
 
Krawetz Bjornerud Toth 
D’Autremont Boyd Draude 
Gantefoer Heppner  
 

Nays — 24 
 
Flavel Van Mulligen Wiens 
Lingenfelter Shillington Mitchell 
Johnson Whitmore Goulet 
Upshall Crofford Calvert 
Teichrob Renaud Bradley 
Nilson Serby Sonntag 
Wall Kasperski Murray 
Jess Langford Thomson 
 
 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I would like leave to make something 
of a personal statement, if I could. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
During question period I used the phrase “brown shirt” in 
referring to the opposition. I think that was purely 
inappropriate. I apologize, and I withdraw it unconditionally. 
 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 257 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act 
(Town of Asquith) 

 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I move 
first reading of Bill No. 257, The Channel Lake Indemnification 
Act (Town of Asquith) be now introduced and read the first 
time. 
 
The division bells rang from 3:21 p.m. until 3:31 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 8 
 
Krawetz Bjornerud Toth 
D’Autremont Boyd Draude 
Gantefoer Heppner  
 

Nays — 27 
 
Flavel Van Mulligen Lingenfelter 
Shillington Mitchell Tchorzewski 
Johnson Whitmore Goulet 
Upshall Kowalsky Crofford 
Calvert Teichrob Renaud 
Bradley Scott Nilson 
Serby Sonntag Wall 
Kasperski Ward Murray 
Jess Langford Thomson 
 

Bill No. 258 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act 
(Town of Assiniboia) 

 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of Bill No. 258, 
The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Town of Assiniboia) 
be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
The division bells rang from 3:34 p.m. until 3:44 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 5 
 
Bjornerud Toth Draude 
Gantefoer Heppner  
 

Nays — 24 
 
MacKinnon Shillington Mitchell 
Atkinson Johnson Whitmore 
Goulet Upshall Kowalsky 
Calvert Teichrob Renaud 
Lorje Bradley Scott 
Nilson Serby Sonntag 
Wall Kasperski Ward 
Murray Jess Langford 
 
 

Bill No. 259 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act 
(Village of Atwater) 

 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I move 
first reading of the Bill No. 259, The Channel Lake 
Indemnification Act (Village of Atwater) be now introduced 
and read the first time. 
 
The division bells rang from 3:45 p.m. until 3:55 p.m. 
 
The motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 8 
 
Krawetz Bjornerud Toth 
D'Autremont Boyd Draude 
Gantefoer Heppner  
 

Nays — 26 
 
MacKinnon Shillington Mitchell 
Atkinson Tchorzewski Whitmore 
Goulet Upshall Kowalsky 
Crofford Calvert Teichrob 
Renaud Lorje Bradley 
Scott Nilson Serby 
Stanger Sonntag Wall 
Kasperski Ward Murray 
Jess Langford  
 

Bill No. 260 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act 
(Village of Avonlea) 

 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move first reading of 
Bill No. 260, The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Village 



194 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 1998 

of Avonlea) be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
The division bells rang from 3:58 p.m. until 4:08 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 7 
 
Bjornerud Toth D’Autremont 
Boyd Draude Gantefoer 
Heppner   
 

Nays — 24 
 
Shillington Mitchell Tchorzewski 
Whitmore Goulet Kowalsky 
Crofford Calvert Teichrob 
Renaud Lorje Bradley 
Scott Nilson Serby 
Stanger Sonntag Wall 
Kasperski Ward Murray 
Jess Langford Hillson 
 

Bill No. 261 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act 
(Village of Aylesbury) 

 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I move 
first reading of Bill No. 261, The Channel Lake Indemnification 
Act (Village of Aylesbury) be now introduced and read the first 
time. 
 
The division bells rang from 4:10 p.m. until 4:20 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 8 
 
Krawetz Bjornerud Toth 
D’Autremont Boyd Draude 
Gantefoer Heppner  
 

Nays — 21 
 
Shillington Mitchell Tchorzewski 
Whitmore Goulet Crofford 
Calvert Teichrob Renaud 
Lorje Bradley Scott 
Nilson Serby Hamilton 
Stanger Sonntag Kasperski 
Murray Jess Langford 
 
 

Bill No. 262 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act 
(Village of Aylsham) 

 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of Bill No. 262, 
The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Village of Aylsham) be 
now introduced and read the first time. 
 
The division bells rang from 4:23 p.m. until 4:33 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 8 
 
Krawetz Bjornerud Toth 
D’Autremont Boyd Draude 
Gantefoer Heppner  
 

Nays — 23 
 
Shillington Mitchell Tchorzewski 
Johnson Whitmore Goulet 
Kowalsky Crofford Calvert 
Teichrob Renaud Lorje 
Bradley Scott Nilson 
Serby Hamilton Stanger 
Sonntag Kasperski Murray 
Jess Langford  
 

Bill No. 263 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act 
(Resort Village of B-Say-Tah) 

 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I move first 
reading of Bill 263, The Channel Lake Indemnification Act 
(Resort Village of B-Say-Tah) be now introduced and read the 
first time. 
 
The division bells range from 4:35 p.m. until 4:45 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 7 
 
Krawetz Bjornerud Toth 
D’Autremont Boyd Gantefoer 
Heppner   
 

Nays — 22 
 
Van Mulligen Shillington Mitchell 
Atkinson Tchorzewski Johnson 
Whitmore Goulet Kowalsky 
Crofford Calvert Teichrob 
Renaud Bradley Scott 
Nilson Serby Hamilton 
Kasperski Murray Jess 
Langford   
 

Bill No. 264 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act 
(Town of Balcarres) 

 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I move 
first reading of Bill No. 264, The Channel Lake Indemnification 
Act (Town of Balcarres) be now introduced and read the first 
time. 
 
The division bells rang from 4:46 p.m. until 4:56 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 8 
 
Krawetz Bjornerud Toth 
D’Autremont Boyd Draude 
Gantefoer Heppner  



March 18, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 195 

Nays — 25 
 
Van Mulligen MacKinnon Shillington 
Mitchell Atkinson Tchorzewski 
Johnson Whitmore Goulet 
Kowalsky Crofford Calvert 
Teichrob Trew Renaud 
Bradley Scott Serby 
Hamilton Sonntag Wall 
Kasperski Murray Jess 
Langford   
 

Bill No. 265 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act 
(Town of Balgonie) 

 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
move first reading of a Bill, No. 265, The Channel Lake 
Indemnification Act (Town of Balgonie) be now introduced and 
read the first time. 
 
The division bells rang from 4:58 p.m. until 5:08 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 8 
 
Krawetz Bjornerud Toth 
D’Autremont Boyd Draude 
Gantefoer Heppner  
 

Nays — 25 
 
Flavel MacKinnon Shillington 
Mitchell Atkinson Tchorzewski 
Johnson Whitmore Goulet 
Kowalsky Crofford Calvert 
Teichrob Trew Renaud 
Bradley Scott Nilson 
Hamilton Sonntag Wall 
Kasperski Murray Jess 
Langford   
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:10 p.m. 





   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................183 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................183 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................183 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................183 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................183 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................183 
  Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................183 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................183 
  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................183 
  McPherson.................................................................................................................................................................................184 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................184 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................184 
  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................184 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................184 
  Goohsen .....................................................................................................................................................................................184 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ..........................................................................................................................................................................................184 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................184 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Murray.......................................................................................................................................................................................185 
  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................185 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................185 
  Crofford .....................................................................................................................................................................................185 
  Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................185 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Davidson Health Centre 
  Trew ...........................................................................................................................................................................................185 
 Video Robbery Victim 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................186 
 Big Bid Barn 
  Jess .............................................................................................................................................................................................186 
 Need to Twin Trans-Canada 
  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................186 
 Agreement between Saskatoon Health Board and Area School Divisions 
  Whitmore...................................................................................................................................................................................186 
 Saskatchewan Party Dinner 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................187 
 Saskatchewan Agriculture and Food Week 
  Langford ....................................................................................................................................................................................187 
 Outstanding Achievement for Saskatchewan Citizen 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................187 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Examination of Channel Lake 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................187 
  Romanow ...................................................................................................................................................................................187 
 SaskPower President’s Severance Package 
  Boyd ...................................................................................................................................................................................188, 191 
  Romanow ...........................................................................................................................................................................189, 191 
 Health Care Funding in Saskatoon 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................189 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................189 
 Channel Lake Inquiry 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................190 
  Lingenfelter ...............................................................................................................................................................................191 
STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
  Shillington..................................................................................................................................................................................193 
 
 
 
 



 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 235 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Village of Abbey) 
  D’Autremont (Recorded division) ...........................................................................................................................................192 
 Bill No. 236 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Town of Aberdeen) 
  D’Autremont (Recorded division) ...........................................................................................................................................192 
 Bill No. 255 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Village of Arelee) 
  Toth (Recorded division)..........................................................................................................................................................192 
 Bill No. 256 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Village of Arran) 
  Toth (Recorded division)..........................................................................................................................................................192 
 Bill No. 257 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Town of Asquith) 
  Toth (Recorded division)..........................................................................................................................................................193 
 Bill No. 258 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Town of Assiniboia) 
  Toth (Recorded division)..........................................................................................................................................................193 
 Bill No. 259 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Village of Atwater) 
  Toth (Recorded division)..........................................................................................................................................................193 
 Bill No. 260 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Village of Avonlea) 
  Toth (Recorded division)..........................................................................................................................................................193 
 Bill No. 261 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Village of Aylesbury) 
  Toth (Recorded division)..........................................................................................................................................................194 
 Bill No. 262 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Village of Aylsham) 
  Toth (Recorded division)..........................................................................................................................................................194 
 Bill No. 263 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Resort Village of B-Say-Tah) 
  Toth (Recorded division)..........................................................................................................................................................194 
 Bill No. 264 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Town of Balcarres) 
  Toth (Recorded division)..........................................................................................................................................................194 
 Bill No. 265 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Town of Balgonie) 
  Bjornerud (Recorded division) ................................................................................................................................................195 
 
 


