





























































Hansard: March 16, 1998


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 123 
 March 16, 1998 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a new 
petition to present today: 
 

To the Hon. Assembly of Saskatchewan in legislature 
assembled, the petition of the undersigned citizens of the 
province of Saskatchewan humbly showeth that the 
residents of the province of Saskatchewan are entitled to 
all the facts surrounding SaskPower’s $10 million loss in 
the Channel Lake fiasco; and Jack Messer was the 
president of SaskPower at the time of the Channel Lake 
fiasco; and was subsequently terminated from his position 
because of Channel Lake’s; and Jack Messer has been 
given 300,000 in severance by the Government of 
Saskatchewan without all the facts surrounding the 
Channel Lake fiasco being known to the people of 
Saskatchewan; and the only method to discover all the 
facts around the Channel Lake fiasco is a fully independent 
public inquiry. 

 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions come from the Carnduff, Alameda, Weyburn, 
Oxbow, Rocanville, Alida, Kenosee Lake areas, Mr. Speaker. I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — Before proceeding with petitions I would like 
to remind all hon. members that the only portion of the petition 
that’s appropriate to present when reading petitions into the 
record in the House is the prayer itself. This is sometimes 
difficult for the Chair to know without seeing the petition, but it 
may very well have been that the hon. member was in error. 
And I’m sure that if that’s the case he’ll guide himself 
accordingly in future. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present on behalf of Saskatchewan residents. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

The communities involved, Mr. Speaker, are Oxbow and 
Redvers. 
 

Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
a petition, and I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reach necessary agreements with other levels of 
government to fund the twinning of the Trans-Canada 
Highway in Saskatchewan so work can begin in 1998, and 
to set out a time frame for the ultimate completion on the 
project. 
 

And these are signed from people from Eastend, Ravenscrag, 
and that area of Saskatchewan. I so present. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition on behalf of Saskatchewan residents. The prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 

 
The people that have signed this, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Parkside, Shellbrook, Canwood, and Redvers, in that area. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I also have a petition to present 
today. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

The people that have signed this petition are from Regina and 
Melfort. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have a 
petition as well this afternoon to present. The prayer is as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reach necessary agreements with other levels of 
government to fund the twinning of the Trans-Canada 
Highway in Saskatchewan so work can begin in 1998, and 
to set out a time frame for the ultimate completion of the 
project. 

 
I am pleased to present the petition on their behalf, these people 
coming from Eastend and Shaunavon areas of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also present a petition 
on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan, and the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 



124 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 1998 

Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains hospital by 
enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 

 
The people on this petition are primarily from southern 
Saskatchewan in the Assiniboia district. I so present. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present a petition 
which has been signed by my constituents in North Battleford: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to enact legislation to ban the 
practice of night hunting in Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I so present. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
petitions on behalf of citizens concerned with the Plains 
hospital closure. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. I so 
present. 

 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also present a 
petition: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the people that signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Alida, they’re from Marlene, they’re from Carnduff, they’re 
from Redvers, they’re also from Glen Ewen, Saskatchewan; and 
Fertile, Saskatchewan, and I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a petition 
today to present on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to enact legislation to 
completely ban the practice of night hunting in 
Saskatchewan. And as in duty bound, your petitioners will 
ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition has been signed by the good folks in 
Watrous and Simpson and Young, which of course is in the 
Minister of Agriculture’s constituency, and also in Imperial, 

which is in mine. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — Before recognizing the next hon. member 
presenting petitions, I’ll want to remind the hon. member who 
just presented petitions that petitions are to be presented in the 
way that is not involving presentation of debate but in a 
straightforward manner. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise today 
to present petitions from a number of people in the province 
that would like the reinstatement of the underground 
electrification program and natural gas program, and the 
petition reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
recognize that all people in Saskatchewan expect to be 
treated equally, and that the Government of Saskatchewan 
should equalize services to all people and provide for 
underground power lines and natural gas for all rural 
people at the original rate. 
 

The presenters, Mr. Speaker, are from the Humboldt, Muenster, 
and St. Gregor area of the province. I so present. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to 
present several thousand more names received over the 
weekend. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reach necessary agreements with other levels of 
government to fund the twinning of the Trans-Canada 
Highway in Saskatchewan so work can begin in 1998, and 
to set out a time frame for the ultimate completion of the 
project, with or without federal assistance. 
 

Now most of these come from the Hazlet and Swift Current 
area, Mr. Speaker, and I’m happy to present them today. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 

Of citizens petitioning the Assembly to fund the twinning 
of the Trans-Canada Highway; and 
 
Petitions to deal with the problem of youth crime; 
 
Petitions to save the Plains Health Centre; and 
 
Petitions to completely ban the practice of night hunting. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, M. le president, cette 
semaine est la semaine nationale de francophonie. Je suis 
heureux de vous présenter ainsi qu'aux membres de l’assemblé, 
huit invités distingués. 
 
Cette personnes nous honorons par leur présence. Louis Èmond, 



March 16, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 125 

directeur génèral de l'ACFC (Association culturelle 
franco-canadienne); France Roussel, agente de recherche de 
l'ACFC; Etienne Alary, agent de liaison de l'ACFC; Gracia 
Bellerose, adjointe adminstrative de l'ACFC; Nicole Rioux, la 
secretaire de l'ACFC; Jean Liboiron, directeur général de la 
commission culturelle fransaskoise; Robert Therrien, directeur 
général du conseil de la coopération de la Saskatchewan; Claire 
Belanger-Parker, agent de développement de l'ACFR. 
 
Mesdames and Messieurs, veuillez vouz tout lever pour saluer 
l’assemblée. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 
and through you I’d like to introduce to you two very special 
people in the gallery, Carole Gantefoer and my grandson, Terill. 
I might be a little prejudiced but I happen to think he’s the 
cutest little guy in the room. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you, I want to introduce guests in our gallery as well, all the 
way from Ile-a-la-Crosse, Saskatchewan. I’d like to welcome 
Jason Gardiner, who completed grade 12 last year and he also is 
working part time in a gas station back home. 
 
And today he was in Regina here doing an interview with the 
Canadian Armed Forces, because that certainly is his long-term 
objective. And I would like to ask the members of the 
Assembly to welcome him on his very long trip to Regina, and 
we hope he comes here often. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
join the Provincial Secretary in welcoming our guests with the 
ACFC and to the Assembly, and I hope they enjoy the 
proceedings today. And again I ask the members to welcome 
them here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Education Week 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is with great 
pleasure that I rise in the Assembly to recognize the beginning 
of Education Week. This is an important week, Mr. Speaker, 
because a quality education is the bedrock of a progressive 
society. An investment in education is an investment in our 
children; it is an investment in our future doctors, mechanics, 
politicians, artists, mothers and fathers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is my fear that we see our quality education 
system slipping away from us. For the last seven years this 
government has done nothing to reverse the downward spiral of 
provincial education funding. My Saskatchewan Party 
colleagues and I meet with school boards and town councils on 
a regular basis. They are telling us that their local tax base is 
quickly drying up. 

The Minister of Education speaks about the importance of 
cooperation between education partners. I could not agree with 
the minister more. But, Mr. Speaker, this will not happen until 
the Minister of Education begins leading by example. When the 
minister terminated the protocol agreement in December, she 
set back cooperative efforts between education partners 10 
years. I would challenge the minister to do two things during 
this legislative session: (1) put the power of education decisions 
back in the hands of local representatives; and (2) commit to 
funding 60 rather 40 per cent of education funding. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As a former 
educator I’m very pleased to rise in the House today to mark the 
beginning of Education Week in Saskatchewan. The theme for 
this year is, Education — Sharing the Joy of Learning. 
 
Our education system in Saskatchewan is committed to 
ensuring that all children, wherever they live or whatever 
challenges they face, have the opportunity to learn the basic 
skills and knowledge that are required to live happy and 
productive lives. Former premier and former Education 
minister, Woodrow Lloyd, once said that the function of 
education was to equip youth to be the kind of people who “can 
make the best of the present and who have the intelligence and 
the will to plan a better future.” 
 
Our Made in Saskatchewan core curriculum provides 
Saskatchewan children with the opportunity to learn both the 
basic, fundamental knowledge and the critical thinking skills 
they will need for success in the new millennium. I want to 
acknowledge our Education Week partners, the Saskatchewan 
Teachers’ Federation, the Saskatchewan School Trustees 
Association, the League of Educational Administrators, 
Directors and Superintendents, the Saskatchewan Association 
of School Councils, and the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 
Nations. 
 
The vital business of education is — and must always be — a 
partnership among government, teachers, trustees, 
administrators, support staff, parents, and communities. I want 
to thank our partners for their dedication and their hard work. 
Because only with their support that we have been able to build 
a world-class education system here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Letter of Apology 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today the president of 
the Saskatchewan Liberal Association, Mr. Rod MacDonald, 
announced that he delivered a letter of unconditional and 
sincere apology to Lynda Haverstock in consideration of the 
handling of the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. The hon. member will 
recognize, of course, that in the course of discussion or debate 
in the House that the use of proper names is not permitted, and 
to be referring to members only by their position held within the 
Assembly. And I’ll ask the hon. member to correct his error and 
proceed with his statement. 
 



126 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 1998 

Mr. Osika: — I apologize, Mr. Speaker. A letter of 
unconditional and sincere apology to the member from 
Saskatoon Greystone in consideration of the handling of the 
cancellation of her membership and in consideration of the 
handling of the reinstatement of her membership in 1996. 
 
This apology to the member was on behalf of all Liberals in 
Saskatchewan and was fully endorsed by the leader, the caucus, 
and executive of the Saskatchewan Liberal Party. There were no 
dissenters. Repairing a damaged relationship, Mr. Speaker, can 
be difficult to accomplish in private and even more so in public. 
It takes wisdom and courage from all involved to publicly 
acknowledge past mistakes. 
 
The member from Saskatoon Greystone has graciously accepted 
this apology from the president on behalf of all Liberals. It is 
important for all to recognize that these past mistakes were not 
supported by the principles of Liberalism and Liberal values of 
tolerance, acceptance, and inclusion. The principles of 
Liberalism clearly state that Saskatchewan Liberals shall 
respect and support the dignity of each individual, and 
Saskatchewan Liberals shall encourage and protect the 
individual rights and well-being of all men, women, and 
children. 
 
This is a great day for all Liberals in Saskatchewan who 
strongly believe and support the values that have always been a 
core component of this great party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

National Francophone Week 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
announce that the Premier has officially designated the week of 
March 15 to 21, National Francophone Week in Saskatchewan, 
and Friday, March 20, National Francophone Day. 
 
Monsieur le président, je voudrais exprimer à la communauté 
francophone de la Saskatchewan nos plus sincères félicitations 
á l’occasion de la Semaine nationale de la francophonie. 
 
Durant cette Semaine, les francophones, tout comme les 
francophiles, profitent de l’occasion pour célébrer ensemble la 
richesse de la langue et de la culture françaises. 
 
Les célébrations de cette année se déroulent sous le thème; 
“Une francophonie internationale pleine de jeunesse!” 
 
Ce thème s’adresse en partie aux élèves et aux professeurs. On a 
été bien avisé de reconnaître l’importance de la jeunesse et de 
l’éducation comme clés de l’avenir. 
 
C’est par les liens personnels que nous créons et les expériences 
sociales et culturelles que nous vivons durant notre jeunesse, 
que nous développons notre identité d’adulte. Encourager les 
élèves et les professeurs á découvrir davantage la diversité 
qu’offre la francophonie canadienne et internationale se révèle 
un moyen très fructueux d’enrichir ces expériences. 
 
On behalf of all my colleagues in the Assembly, au nom de tous 
mes collègues dans l’Assembleé, une bonne semaine aux tous 
les fransaskois et fransaskoises. Merci. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

The Liberal Party of Saskatchewan 
 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, if it 
wasn’t clear to us before that the Liberal Party of Saskatchewan 
was going nowhere it certainly is today. Not only have the 
people of Saskatchewan written off the third party so has the 
Deputy Prime Minister of Canada, Sheila Copps. 
 
On Friday, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party caucus office 
received a phone call from Sheila Copps’s executive assistant 
asking for information on this NDP (New Democratic Party) 
government’s cuts to health care. With the closure of 52 rural 
hospitals and the imminent closure of the Plains and long 
waiting-lists, this was certainly not a difficult thing to do. 
 
But what we found funny, Mr. Speaker, was that they didn’t 
think to call the Liberal caucus office. Then again, I guess they 
know just as well as everyone else that the Liberal caucus has 
no interest in criticizing the NDP government. They are far too 
busy serving as an opposition to the official opposition, the 
Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Z99 Fund-raiser 
 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. For two consecutive 
years I’ve stood in this Assembly and urged all members and all 
people to take part in the annual Z99 radiothon, and I’ve said 
C.C. and Lori are at it again, raising money for a community 
cause by staying on the air for many, many consecutive hours. 
 
I’m embarrassed to admit that due to the flu last week I missed 
one of the best community-spirited acts of the year and I missed 
the opportunity to boost the cause in a more timely way. 
 
So after the fact, I’m happy to announce that they were at it 
again last Thursday and Friday at the Cornwall Centre. Actually 
it wasn’t they, it was just C.C. this year. Lori is on maternity 
leave with her new baby son. C.C. was on the air for 35 
consecutive hours, raising money for a life-saver package for 
the neonatal intensive care unit at the General Hospital. He 
raised $47,797, which just proves again how effective the 
radiothon is and how generous the people of Regina and 
Saskatchewan are. 
 
To the Z, C.C., and every person and company that donated, 
thank you. To Lori, congratulations on the greatest of life’s 
miracles, your new son. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Jean Charest and the Liberal Party 
 

Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
regardless whether they want to be Tories or Tories in disguise, 
finally one of them has it right. Yes, Jean Charest is finally 
doing the sensible thing and thinking of coming to work for the 
Liberals. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



March 16, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 127 

Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, back in 1991 when the NDP 
took power, the Premier quipped that he would give us the best 
Liberal government we’ve ever had. Clearly, unlike Charest, 
it’s been a long personal dream of this Premier to be a Liberal 
Premier. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, his chance has finally come to get it right. 
Despite my criticisms, I think the Premier would make a fine 
Quebec Liberal premier. His uncanny abilities to blame 
everything on the feds would undoubtedly attract some votes. 
Aside from saving Canada, the Premier’s departure would 
create a leadership race that would be more entertaining than 
the phone booth mail room affair the Tories are now holding. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier need only say the word and I’ll get 
him a plane ticket to Quebec City — one way, of course. 
Maybe some of his colleagues would chip in and maybe write 
him a letter of recommendation or perhaps upgrade his plane 
ticket to first class.  
 
Thank you. Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

SaskPower President’s Severance Package 
 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr, Speaker, my 
question is for the Premier. Mr. Premier, it’s been 72 hours 
since you paid off your old buddy, Jack Messer, with a 300,000 
good-bye gift. Mr. Premier, it is clear that the only people in 
Saskatchewan who support paying Jack Messer 300,000 in 
severance for messing up are you and Jack Messer. It’s time to 
stop playing games with Saskatchewan taxpayers. It’s time to 
admit what everybody knows — you fired Jack Messer because 
he was incompetent; you fired Jack Messer because he lost $5 
million by signing a contract he didn’t read. 
 
Mr. Premier, will you come clean today and admit that you 
fired Jack Messer because he was incompetent and will you 
immediately cancel Jack Messer’s obscene $300,000 severance 
package? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, to the member 
opposite, I want to repeat the comments that I made last week 
on several occasions to exactly the same question — that the 
issue here is a legal one, not a political one; and I understand 
why he continues along the political lines that he is trying to 
wrap this issue up. But I thought the editorial in Saturday’s 
Leader-Post was telling where it said, Mr. Premier, “Little 
choice on severance.” And I would urge the member to read the 
paragraph at the end of the editorial which says: 
 

Dismissal for cause is a ticklish situation and lawyers will 
tell you that an argument over competence is extremely 
difficult to win. 

 
And I say to the member opposite that at the end of the day, 
when Mr. Milt Fair, along with legal counsel, went through the 
files, they believed this was in the best interest of the 

corporation to pay the severance package that was awarded. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, your 
own lawyers are telling you that Jack Messer was terminated — 
terminated. That means he was fired. To suggest otherwise is an 
insult to the intelligence of every person in this province. There 
was no mutual agreement between you and your buddy, Jack 
Messer. You fired him plain and simple because he was 
incompetent and you had more than enough cause to. 
 
Then you paid him $300,000 in hush money to go away and 
shut up so he wouldn’t start pointing fingers at other members 
of your government. Mr. Minister, will you do the right thing 
and call off Jack Messer’s $300,000 goodbye party? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I want to say the member opposite 
that the issue here is an arrangement made between . . . is an 
agreement reached between the vice-president of the Power 
Corporation, the Vice-Chair of the Power Corporation, with 
legal counsel, between SPC (Saskatchewan Power Corporation) 
and the individual you mentioned, Mr. Messer, dealing with the 
severance package that you talk about. 
 
I want to say to you, sir, that this is in fact a legal issue. And if 
you would just get your mind around that. And I understand 
why you want to make it a political issue. But the fact of the 
matter is that in this case, in this case as it relates to the 
agreement reached between Power and Mr. Messer, it’s fair and 
equitable. And I say to you, try to understand that he has rights 
as well, and the agreement reached is one that was done in 
consultation between Mr. Milt Fair and the legal counsel. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would ask the minister to get his mind around the fact that 
taxpayers in Saskatchewan have rights too, and they’re outraged 
by this kind of action on behalf of your government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Jack Messer risked a hundred million 
dollars of taxpayers’ money gambling in the natural gas options 
market without the authority or the permission of the 
SaskPower board. He lost $8 million of the taxpayers’ money 
on 104 unauthorized natural gas arbitrage deals. He lost $5 
million because he refused to read a contract. 
 
Will you pull your heads out of the sand and stop payment of 
Jack Messer’s $300,000 parting gift and fire the former minister 
responsible for SaskPower for letting this whole sorry mess 
occur? Will you do that today, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well I want to say to the member 
opposite, who is very much involved in a big-time leadership 
campaign, I would really urge you to read the documents — to 
read the documents and understand what is in the documents 



128 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 1998 

and the definition of some of the language included in the 
document as it relates to Channel Lake. 
 
I said last Tuesday, I said last Tuesday in a lengthy statement to 
the House, that we had problems with Channel Lake. We 
apologized for them and we said that they shouldn’t have 
happened. We tabled documents. 
 
And what I would like to say to you, sir, is what day, now that 
you have joined the new Conservative Party, are you going to 
accept your share of responsibility for the $15 billion that you 
and your new friends ran up over the last 10 years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Examination of Channel Lake 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The member 
from Melfort is indeed involved in a leadership race and his 
chances are going up correspondingly as the Deputy Premier’s 
are going down, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 
Premier. Mr. Premier, this whole Channel Lake fiasco is 
stinking out the place. The taxpayers of Saskatchewan are 
millions . . . are out millions of dollars, and the best they can do 
is pay off their buddy, Jack Messer, with $300,000 of hush 
money. 
 
Mr. Premier, get real. The people of Saskatchewan need to 
know exactly what happened with the Channel Lake disaster, 
and you haven’t even begun to tell the story. Passing the file off 
to the NDP’s-dominated Public Accounts Committee is nothing 
short of sweeping the whole mess under the rug. 
 
The only way to get to the bottom of the Channel Lake deal is a 
full public inquiry. Will you commit today to support the 
Saskatchewan Party’s call for a full public inquiry into the 
Channel Lake debacle? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I know that the member from 
Souris-Cannington is supporting our friend who is running for 
the leadership and that he is working very difficult . . . but I 
would urge you — after the results of the P.A. (Prince Albert) 
meeting where you had 30 people out for three ridings — you 
have to work a little bit harder if you’re going to get him elected 
leader. 
 
But I want to say to you as it relates to the auditor, if you would 
read my statement from last week you would find that on page 
9 I indicated that a copy of the material I tabled today has been 
provided to the Provincial Auditor. And the auditor will review 
the operations and sale of Channel Lake in the normal course of 
his duties. 
 
And fourthly, I indicated the auditor’s report on this issue will 
be considered in detail by the Public Accounts Committee. 
Officials from Crown Investments Corporation and SaskPower 
will make themselves available before the committee. 

Now I say to you, why don’t you avail yourself to the 
opportunity of reading the material that I gave you last week. 
I’m not sure you have. I’m not sure you have, because the 
misleading questions that you’re asking here would indicate 
something quite different. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I don’t 
understand why the Premier won’t rise to answer these 
questions; it’s his buddy that they’re defending. 
 
Mr. Premier, what are you hiding? If you are so confident that 
your government has no skeletons sunk in Channel Lake’s 
closet, then it’s time to come out. Hold a full public inquiry; 
let’s get to the bottom of what actually happened at Channel 
Lake. 
 
Who signed the final Channel Lake contract that lost the 
taxpayers an additional $5 million? What was Jack Messer’s 
role in the operation and sale of Channel Lake? Why was 
Lawrence Portigal fired from Channel Lake in December of 
1996 and then put back in charge of the sale of the company a 
couple of weeks later? Mr. Premier, will you get off your high 
political horse and answer some of the questions and support 
the Saskatchewan Party’s motion for a full public inquiry into 
Channel Lake? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I want to reiterate to the member 
opposite that when he talks about skeletons he would know a lot 
about them, coming from that particular caucus. I want to say as 
well, sir, that we have tabled in this House a document by 
Deloitte & Touche, which goes into excruciating detail the 
record of Channel Lake. And I say again, it was a difficult 
arrangement and one, I say again, that we were not proud of. 
 
Having said that, sir, I want you too to avail yourself to the 
opportunity — if you are on the Public Accounts Committee — 
to be there, to ask the tough questions. We’ll make people 
available and we’ll get to the bottom of all of the issues that you 
feel free to ask. And I say that my officials will be there, both 
from CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) 
and from Power, to answer any and all questions that you put. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, hopefully this time the 
Premier will answer. Again I direct my question to him because 
I’ve got a couple of dirty shirts and I was wondering if he could 
pick them up to take them up next time he gets taken to the 
cleaners. 
 
Mr. Premier, the whole Channel Lake thing has you and your 
NDP friends squirming like fish out of water, sucking air, and 
dying fast. If you’re so confident there’s nothing hidden at the 
bottom of Channel Lake, why don’t you support a full public 
inquiry? Why not let a judge and some truly independent 
commissioners decide? 
 
Mr. Premier, let’s drain Channel Lake and see if there are any 
bottom feeders besides Jack Messer left. Will you stop 



March 16, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 129 

protecting your old buddy Jack Messer and support a full public 
inquiry into the Channel Lake disaster? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know how 
many times they’re going to ask the question, but I’ll give you 
the same response. We did a review of the Channel Lake 
experience. We went into great detail in explaining it here in the 
House last week. We tabled the documents. We made it clear, 
as I said on page 9 of my statement, that we have referred it to 
the Provincial Auditor; that it would be dealt with by Public 
Accounts where you can come and answer any and all . . . ask 
any and all questions and expect answers. 
 
But to you, sir, I want to make it clear that if you’re sincere, 
come to the committee, ask the questions, and I’m sure you’ll 
be very pleased that the responses are in order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Health Information Network 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. An order in council 
confirmed today that the NDP have officially approved the 
spending of 38 million tax dollars on the development of 
Saskatchewan Health Information Network. But this 
government has not addressed a number of concerns. Among 
other things, they have yet to resolve key privacy issues. They 
have yet to explain that health districts which are already cut to 
the financial bone will be expected to pick up part of the tab. 
 
Saskatchewan Medical Association agrees, writing in its 
February newsletter: “A subcommittee urged the board to 
protest the undue haste with which this proposed legislation is 
being pursued.” 
 
Mr. Minister, please explain why you’re diving head first into 
this project without first providing the taxpayers, the health 
districts, our doctors, with answers to these very important 
questions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and to 
the member opposite, I appreciate the question because he’s 
correct in stating that in the province of Saskatchewan within 
the next 18 months, we’re going to have an information system 
that will provide a whole host of issues that will ensure that we 
have a higher and better quality care of service in the province. 
The member is correct about that. 
 
And as the member talks about a consultation process, we’re 
currently now on our second round of consultation, which will 
include a whole host of stakeholders: which are the 
Saskatchewan Medical Association, which are the 
Saskatchewan Union of Nurses in the province — and on our 
last process of consultations have received full support — and 
consult of each of these professional groups, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Mr. Speaker, a review of the master services 
agreement states quite clearly that the form SHIN 
(Saskatchewan Health Services Network) will take in its final 

form is not yet known and offers a serious note of caution. The 
document reads that: 
 

The district consultation process will not be completed 
until SHIN is significantly into the project and has spent a 
significant amount of money. Now by that time, SHIN will 
have made several irrevocable decisions regarding 
technology, software, etc. 
 

Mr. Minister, millions of valuable tax dollars are being spent on 
technology and software which in the end may not be suitable 
for the project. Doesn’t it make sense that you would design a 
system knowing what privacy considerations must be addressed 
before you start? Are we looking at another NST, another 
Channel Lake, another Guyana, or another Jack Messer? Are 
the people of Saskatchewan looking at their valuable tax dollars 
going down the tube once again with one of your ill-fated 
projects? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure how the 
member wants this. The member either wants this with the 
Government of Saskatchewan and the ministry developing the 
policy and the regulations as to how SHIN should run, or the 
member opposite wants the full consultation with the people of 
the province. 
 
The choice we’ve suggested and taken is that we’re going to 
have a full consultation with the people of the province. And 
we’ve taken — as I’ve said to you now — on our second series 
of opportunities to find out from people who are working within 
the system, from the Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ 
Association, and the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, from the 
college of surgeons and physicians, from the Saskatchewan 
Medical Association, from the Saskatchewan health association. 
We’re talking to each of those people and as we’re going to 
design the new, the new model in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 
it’s going to be patterned after what their interests are. And as 
we come into the Legislative Assembly over the next couple of 
months to talk about the privacy issue, the member can discuss 
with this House, and I can provide for him, the details of the 
consultations with all of those stakeholders. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Examination of Channel Lake 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Public Accounts Committee is the oldest committee in the 
parliamentary system. It is the ancient watchdog of the public 
purse. Yet the NDP used their majority to stonewall and prevent 
the committee from doing its job. 
 
I’m pleased to hear they are now prepared to let Public 
Accounts look into the Channel Lake fiasco but I still want to 
know when. Is it going to be years from now or next week? Are 
we going to be allowed to subpoena witnesses, specifically 
Messer and Portigal, and will it have a full, complete mandate 
or will we boxed in with a bunch of little rules to prevent a full 
airing of what went on? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I want to answer the 
question on behalf of the government and say to the member 
opposite that it is our view, as the Deputy Premier has said, that 



130 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 1998 

the Public Accounts Committee is the appropriate place in 
which to deal with this matter promptly and thoroughly — 
promptly and thoroughly — on top of all the documents which 
have been tabled. 
 
We think that this should start within about two weeks upon the 
completion of the budget debate. The Provincial Auditor’s 
report should be dealt with without delay. The ministers 
responsible is prepared to attend; CIC officials; Power officials 
are prepared to attend; and I’ve consulted with the Vice-Chair 
of Public Accounts, who informed me that it’s his view — and I 
agree — that both Mr. Messer and Mr. Portigal should be 
invited to appear before the committee. It’s appropriate that this 
be done; and that I understand that the Deputy Chair will be 
writing to the Tory or the Saskatchewan Party Chair of the 
Public Accounts Committee almost immediately to get on with 
the job. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, may I personal say thank you to 
the Premier. I think this is a positive response that will move 
this issue along and allow the committee to do its historic job. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1995, in 1995 SaskPower reported that Channel 
Lake was worth $31.6 million yet it was sold for 15 million. 
That’s about three times the cost of GigaText and half the 
reported value. 
 
How can the minister tell us that doesn’t represent a loss to the 
people of Saskatchewan? How can he say that selling 
something for less than half its book value — less than half its 
reported worth — is a good deal for the people of 
Saskatchewan? How can he say that the man who engineered 
that deal is deserving of a quarter-million-dollar golden 
handshake? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well I say again to the member 
opposite that, as you know, Channel Lake was purchased for 
$25 million. At the time of the sale there was an appraisal done 
that said the company was worth approximately $20 million. I 
say as well that there was $12 million repaid on the loan that 
was used to purchase Channel Lake. 
 
And as the assistant provincial auditor indicated, that even by 
his calculations, by our calculations — only the Saskatchewan 
Party is offbeat on this note — money was made on the deal; 
money was made on the deal when you look at the overall 
profits made and what the sale price and the purchase price was. 
 
So this is an important issue that you will want to raise when we 
take it to the Public Accounts Committee. All of the answers 
will be given, and I’m sure that you, sir, will find that this will 
be an experience that will be helpful in finding out the answers 
that you need. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Medical Research Funding 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 

question is to the Premier or his designate. Last week the 
Alberta government committed $26.7 million in new funding to 
support 47 researchers over the next three to five years in 
medical research. This is a 35 per cent increase over last year’s 
funding. 
 
Mr. Premier, your government provided less money in bridge 
funding for medical research than you are paying Jack Messer 
to lose taxpayers’ money. How can you justify your priorities to 
the people of this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, in this province this 
government takes a very serious . . . takes very seriously the 
importance of medical research. Over the last six years in this 
province we’ve increased medical research in the province of 
Saskatchewan by more than 46 per cent. Over that same period 
of time, Mr. Speaker, the federal government has reduced the 
medical research grants to this country by over $3 million. 
 
Just recently in this province, Mr. Speaker, there were 28 
projects that didn’t get approved. And the reason why they 
didn’t get approved is because the Medical Research Council 
had reduced its funding by better than $3 million. 
 
Our government decided that we would try to support that and 
just recently made an announcement, in fact on Friday, of an 
additional $200,000 to ensure that eight projects in this 
province would be able to have a future and will be able to 
benefit the health of Saskatchewan citizens, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Mr. Speaker, the very best comparison on 
the issue of health research funding is between Manitoba and 
Saskatchewan. Manitoba has 4 per cent of Canada’s population 
and receives 4 per cent of funding from the MRC (Medical 
Research Council). Saskatchewan has 3.4 per cent of Canada’s 
population and receives 1.3 per cent of MRC funding — for one 
reason, Mr. Speaker, and that is because the provincial 
government does not pull up its end in contributions. 
 
My question to the minister is, explain to the citizens of 
Saskatchewan why it is you think that the Manitoba government 
can do this; why it is that it has so much of a greater 
commitment to medical research funding than your 
government, sir. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
member opposite . . . and she has had a significant voice on this 
piece for some time now, and she and I have met and had a 
discussion with the Saskatoon folks regarding the need for us to 
increase the amount of medical research funding that we have in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The reality is, Mr. Speaker, is that the way in which the medical 
research funding is allocated in Canada, is that small 
universities like ours are in fact inhibited by it. What we need to 
see, Mr. Speaker, is that we need to see a change in the formula. 
We’re purporting that we see a change in the formula so that 
smaller universities like Saskatchewan’s in the future will have 
an opportunity to compete equally with the larger universities. 



March 16, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 131 

When the member asks specifically what the difference is 
between Manitoba and Saskatchewan, the real difference is in 
Manitoba they’ve got Lloyd Axworthy; in Saskatchewan we’ve 
got Mr. Goodale. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Mr. Speaker, let’s get down to real facts 
this afternoon. One hundred and seventy-three Alberta-based 
medical researchers and 245 scientists-in-training receive 
financial support from their province next door in Alberta. Now 
I’ve been wondering just how many Saskatchewan-based 
medical researchers and scientists-in-training receive provincial 
funding here. 
 
And I ask the minister to table those numbers, as well as how 
much they receive specifically from his government, and table 
them for the members of this Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I would be happy to 
table that information for the member opposite. I can provide 
for her some of that information off the top. 
 
In terms of medical research funding to the province, of which 
the province currently supports, Mr. Speaker, of the $4.4 
million, 2.1 of that million goes to support Health SURC 
(Health Services Utilization and Research Commission) itself, 
which is today doing a $1 million grant to carry out several 
pieces of research projects in the province; 1.2 million goes to 
the department of psychiatry, College of Medicine, to fund 
neuropsychiatry applied research projects which we’re 
announcing on Friday; 563,000 to Saskatchewan cancer 
association; 250,000 to the centre of agriculture and medicine; 
and 250,000 additional money to Health SURC to assist them 
with the research work that they do for MRC; and 126,000, Mr. 
Speaker, to the College of Medicine to provide bridge funding 
last year; this year providing another $200,000 to further 
enhance the amount of research work which we do in the 
province. 
 
That’s Saskatchewan’s portion, Mr. Speaker, today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — There is one real fact in all of Canada, and 
that is that there is only one province in all of this nation that 
does more poorly than the province of Saskatchewan in 
supporting medical research. That province, Mr. Speaker, has 
actually significantly proportionately increased its percentage of 
funding in medical research compared to the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I would like for the minister to stand in his place and defend — 
defend — the fact that we are 9 out of 10 in this country and 
that they should not be ashamed of that fact. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the real facts are is that 
in this province we have not cut health funding by one penny at 
the same time as the federal government has been reducing its 
funding. And part of the problem that we have with the Medical 
Research Council is that we’ve seen reduced funding by the 

federal government to the Medical Research Council. 
 
If we see additional funding into the future and to the . . . into 
the Medical Research Council, Mr. Speaker, we will see 
enhanced projects in this province and across the nation. This is 
the only province in Canada, Mr. Speaker, where we’ve 
back-filled every penny in health. Those are the real facts, Mr. 
Speaker. Those are the real facts. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would 
respectfully request leave to make a statement of a personal 
nature. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 

Resignation of MLA for Saskatoon Eastview 
 

Mr. Pringle: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and special thanks to 
Mr. Premier and leaders of the opposition parties and to all hon. 
members. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I rise today with mixed emotions and a real sense 
of sadness. This is my last opportunity to speak in the House 
but I also rise with great pride at being able to do so. And I’ve 
never taken the fact that we can speak here openly for granted, 
and so I might just take a few extra minutes to reflect some of 
those thoughts, if I could. 
 
Mr. Speaker . . . boy this is the toughest thing I’ve had to say 
since my first speech. Mr. Speaker, through you I’d like to 
advise that I’m announcing my resignation as the member for 
Saskatoon Eastview. I will be consulting with the Clerk in terms 
of winding down my office, so I don’t know the exact date yet, 
but it will be sure in the next few days. So this is my last day in 
the Assembly. 
 
I wanted to announce it here because I wanted to speak 
obviously to hon. members first, and speak directly to 
Saskatoon Eastview constituents. 
 
I’ve been honoured to have been elected three times in 
Saskatoon Eastview, and that is a great honour, Mr. Speaker. 
This wasn’t my achievement. It was the achievement of the 
team around me, and I know hon. members appreciate that none 
of us are here on our own. We’re here because of the team back 
home and we’re here because our constituents place faith in us. 
And so I’m very honoured to have been here 10 years. I’m very 
proud of it. 
 
It’s been a special privilege, Mr. Speaker, as all hon. members 
know, to represent your neighbours from all walks of life and 
with varying cultures, and this is the rich mix of Saskatchewan 
which we’re all proud of. 
 
I want to say thanks to Saskatoon Eastview residents for your 
confidence, for you support and kindness, and for the ideas and 
the advice and the frankness with which my constituents have 



132 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 1998 

come to me. To all residents of Saskatoon Eastview, I wish you 
happiness, a sense of peace, and may your families’ future be 
healthy in all respects. 
 
It’s very hard to put into words what being here representing 
you has meant for me. I hope and believe that the residents of 
Saskatoon Eastview will understand that I have not made this 
decision lightly, but for me personally, it’s time to move on. 
I’ve tried to serve with a sense of integrity, with sensitivity. I 
think I’ve tried to work hard, and hopefully I’ve listened and 
been helpful, and responded as I was able to. At least I like to 
believe that I’ve tried to do that anyway. 
 
I’m moving to a new challenge, Mr. Speaker, which is still in 
my social work capacity, the social work of my background. 
I’m proud of that. And this is a career move for me, and my 
new employer will be making the announcement tomorrow 
about this time or around noon, as to what that position will be. 
 
Mr. Speaker, thank you very much for the outreach and for your 
promotion of the importance of this democratic institution, as 
all members have commented on in their throne speeches. And 
you’ve made a tremendous contribution which we’re all proud 
of. 
 
Mr. Premier, thanks for your hard work, your friendship, and 
for the confidence and support that you’ve shown in me. And 
best wishes in your important role, which everyone recognizes 
in the Assembly. 
 
To my caucus colleagues here, my friends, we’ve been through 
some tough times together, some good times together, but they 
were united times together, which I’m very proud of. We’ve 
had some fun — some at my expense, some at yours. But we 
have lifelong friendships and memories. 
 
To all members, the members opposite, my thanks for your 
friendship. You’re valued colleagues. Both current members, 
and both past and present, that I’ve had the privilege of serving 
with, you’re all wonderful and dear friends. And I thank you for 
that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in my 10 years there has not been a member 
whom I did not like, and I hope that the feeling has been 
mutual. All colleagues, I’d like to say to all colleagues, through 
you, Mr. Speaker, that I respect how hard each and every 
individual in here works and everyone’s passion for their 
beliefs, and for their active participation in this important 
process. 
 
Isn’t it marvellous, Mr. Speaker, that we can have passionate 
debates; we can disagree, but we can still be good, personal 
friends? And this is very special to me. This isn’t possible in 
much of the world today — where friendships transcend 
partisanship. Yet for all of us, politics is profoundly serious. 
The stakes are high. And we all feel that’s because the issues 
are important — we have something to say about the issues — 
and because we believe in what we are doing. 
 
Since I am leaving, let me confess that I don’t have all the 
answers. I know that the member from Arm River will be 
surprised that I say this, because last week I was telling him that 
I did. But I don’t even know half the questions if truth be 

known. 
 
But I believe I have some of the answers and I believe everyone 
here has some of the answers; and I have some partial answers. 
And importantly, I do know some of the important questions. 
 
But together, collectively, because we are a reflection of 
Saskatchewan people, we put it together in a way that they do 
anywhere else in Canada, or perhaps the world. And I’m very 
proud of that because much of what we do is by agreement and 
consensus. In my 10 years here, Mr. Speaker, I would say that 
85 or more per cent of what we do in this Assembly is done by 
agreement. And I try and say that whenever I am out around the 
province because that’s very important. 
 
I know we need to focus on the areas of difference. But when I 
was the minister of Social Services, just my own personal 
experience as minister, minister for Seniors issues, every single 
piece of legislation, every new Bill, and every amendment, was 
done by all-party support — 16 or 17 of those opportunities. 
And I think that is the experience of many of the ministers, past 
and present governments. 
 
(1430) 
 
And I know the child advocate Bill that I had the pleasure of 
taking through the Assembly had all-party support from start to 
finish. And I think that the process . . . that included the 
process, and we all endorsed the selection, which was very, 
very impartial. So we worked together and I say that’s the 
Saskatchewan way. Mr. Speaker, I believe it is our 
responsibility — and I know all members agree — to continue 
to promote this outstanding Saskatchewan tradition. 
 
I want to say thank you to many individuals in communities 
from across the province who worked closely with me, 
especially when I was minister, because there were more 
opportunities in that position. And all of us know, because we 
travel the province, that every member here has family 
members in a larger family who care about us and what we’re 
doing in our respective movements across the province. 
 
So it’s been a great experience to know that you can go to 
Assiniboia or Meadow Lake or Outlook or anywhere you want 
and you’ll find a place to stay. And we can all say that, and I 
think that again is a reflection of the kindness of Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
To each member and your families, to your executives, to your 
teams and everybody around you, I want to say thanks for their 
contributions and their dedication to your efforts. Through you, 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say to each member that my life is richer 
because of you and I’ve learned from every member here. I’ve 
learned something from every member in this Assembly, and I 
appreciate that. 
 
To our Clerk, Gwenn Ronyk, Greg Putz, and Meta Woods, 
thanks for the great job that you do; our Sergeant-at-Arms and 
all of your staff. And, Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to start naming 
departments because I’ll miss some, but I want to say thank you 
to all staff in the Legislative Assembly. I have friends in every 
part, every single part of this institution, and I know that every 
other member does as well — dear friends, dear staff members 



March 16, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 133 

who do so much. 
 
All legislative staff are our family down here. When you’re 
away from home for four or five months a year, you get very 
lonely, people here become part of your family. This is our 
home away from home, and the important thing is that they are 
all professionals. No matter where they are here, they do an 
excellent job. 
 
I’d like to say thanks to all caucus staffs in the buildings, to all 
the ministers’ offices and their staffs, to the public service of 
Saskatchewan. I’ve been there for 10 years myself before this 
10 years, so it was a real privilege to serve in the public service, 
and it was a real privilege to work with the public service from 
this position. 
 
I’d like to as well say thank you very much to my constituency 
assistant, Janine Rafoss, and to previous constituency assistants. 
They were always there. Janine keeps me somewhat organized. 
Not easy, but all the assistants make a very critical contribution 
to the public service — not only mine, but certainly mine — 
everyone else’s as well. And Janine is a wonderful friend and I 
appreciate the work that she’s done. 
 
Last but not least I want to say thanks to my darling wife, 
Gwen, and to our sons, Dean, Darren, and Joanne, and to all of 
our families. 
 
And, Mr. Premier, you’ll know this because you’re a good 
country music fan. Sammy Kershaw has a number one hit, or he 
has maybe four or five by now — but Light of My Life, and 
that’s a pretty song. It’s a great message. And Gwen, Darren, 
Dean, Joanne, you’re the light of my life. 
 
For over eleven and a half years, since I started down this path, 
you’ve always been there. And I’d like to say that I’m sorry 
about the special occasions and the milestones that I’ve missed 
along the way — important school functions. But most of all, 
thanks for your understanding and your love. And above all — 
and this is a family responsibility, and they always went above 
and beyond the call. So thank you hardly seems adequate, but 
thank you. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, best wishes to you and your loving 
family, and to all members of the Assembly and your loving 
families. 
 
This institution is very important. I know that you hold it 
dearly, and what we have is very precious. We have political 
stability here. Let’s remind each other of this from time to time. 
We are the guardians of this tradition during the fleeting 
moments that we spend here. 
 
I’ve never gotten over the sense of awe, and I really feel it now, 
of being here, the privilege of being here and being able to 
speak. If this province is a bit better, Mr. Speaker, when . . . a 
bit better place to live when we move on from this Assembly, 
then I’ll be pretty happy. I think that is the best we can hope for. 
 
Mr. Speaker, hon. members, there’s a very famous 
Saskatchewan singer who is sort of on the horizon. He’s got a 
new album out. It’s called Stuff that Works. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Now the singer is not important in this story 
I’m going to tell. He needs a little help too, but he’s not 
important. But this title song is important, the title, Stuff that 
Works. 
 
And we chose the title Stuff that Works for a good reason, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s a wonderful song with a loving and a caring 
message. And what is stuff that works? Well stuff that works is 
stuff that has feeling; stuff that works are things that we reach 
for when we fall; stuff that works are special friends and loving 
partners; and stuff that works is stuff that holds up. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, and members, this institution is stuff that 
works. It endures. We throw words, not stones. Saskatchewan 
traditions of cooperation and companion is stuff that works. 
 
All of you hon. members as friends, and staff, the Assembly 
here, and my good friends back in Saskatoon Eastview, you’re 
stuff that works. And friends are always there when the chips 
are down and that’s what friendship is all about; and that’s what 
the song says. 
 
Our farms, our villages, our towns, our cities, our RMs (rural 
municipality) are stuff that works. Our great province and 
country is stuff that works. 
 
So I know that all members of the Assembly appreciate that and 
are grateful for that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to say again, thanks for this 
opportunity. Sorry to spend so much time, but I appreciate 
everyone listening. God bless each member and each 
constituent and all the staff here. And also, thanks to the media. 
They’re doing an important job in this important endeavour that 
we’re involved in. 
 
So God bless everyone and may the spirit be with you and your 
families. Thanks and goodbye. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, I would ask leave of the Assembly 
to take a short recess in view of the statement that’s just been 
made to allow all members to express their appreciation to the 
member from Saskatoon Eastview. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
The House recessed for a period of time. 
 
The Speaker: — The House will come to order. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With leave, just to 
briefly respond to the member’s statement. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and to all members. It’s 
at times like this that it is difficult to express one’s thoughts; 



134 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 1998 

when a colleague, a legislative member and a friend, decides to 
move on. This can be at times, as we all know, a pretty difficult 
and a pretty challenging job, and I think that you, Mr. Member, 
have served in a very honourable capacity and an hon. member 
for a long time. 
 
I think you have served with great integrity and you’ve always, 
what I’ve enjoyed is, respected everyone’s thoughts and 
everyone’s opinions in the House. I’ve enjoyed over the years 
your great wit, and you’re a fun guy to be around. I have to 
admit that, Bob. 
 
You’ve served, I think, our province in a great capacity; and 
he’s not that bad of a country singer when it comes right down 
it, Mr. Speaker. Stuff that Works, I think, is a great tribute to 
yourself and to Saskatchewan and I think it expresses your love 
for this great province that we all love so much. I think you’ve 
always put Saskatchewan first, your constituents first, and that’s 
something that is difficult to do at some times. 
 
Bob, we on this side of the House want to wish you very well in 
your future endeavours. We will indeed, as all members will, 
miss you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would also like to ask 
leave to address in response to the member’s statement. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you, my 
colleagues. I haven’t known the member from Saskatoon 
Eastview all that long . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Well he’s a good guy. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Well I’ll have to take the member’s word for it, 
but I’ve discovered for myself that here is a member . . . And 
today we saw a great deal of sincerity in what the member has 
told us and I’m sure everyone has recognized whom he’s 
represented. Eleven years, Mr. Speaker, to now, I can only think 
about how difficult it must be to say farewell to that portion of a 
lifetime that one dedicates to represent, to have the honour to 
represent, people of a constituency. And the people have given 
you that honour, Mr. Member, on three different occasions. You 
have a great deal to be proud of. 
 
You have served — and I’ve seen you here in the legislature — 
with pride, with dignity, tempered with humility that each and 
every one of us should recognize the need for entertaining in 
our debates when we discuss our philosophical differences and 
offer opinions. But again, with the mutual respect that’s so 
necessary for us to be able to address all the issues on behalf of 
people we represent in this democratic process. 
 
I want to also congratulate you, wish you the sincere best of 
luck in your future endeavours. I was thinking for a moment 
you might have been announcing that you were taking leave to 
go on a world tour with your new-found friends in the singing 
business. But, Mr. Speaker, I would like to say that the title of 
the album that the member has put out reflects what the member 
himself . . . Stuff That Works. It’s the type of integrity, sincerity, 

dignity and humility, that that member has displayed in this 
legislature, that he’s stuff that works as well. I want to 
congratulate him in his future endeavours. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
With leave, to make just a few closing comments. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think this is a 
difficult day for all of us, particularly on the government side. 
What we’re losing today is one of our most decent, honest, and 
hard-working MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly). 
Also he’s the person who as a minister, achieved a lot for our 
province. 
 
He was minister of Social Services, which I know, because I’m 
within that post, is a very difficult post. And he was one of the 
people who helped push along the Child Benefit, which of 
course is this very important national program to ensure that all 
children in this province have an equal opportunity. 
 
He was also to us on the government side, a great friend. He 
was always organizing hockey tournaments or singing groups 
or in every act that he displayed over the last 11 years, he was a 
team player. And I think finally, as Bob said himself, he’s a 
family man, who has been dedicated to his family, to his wife 
and his two sons. And politics is not always easy to combine 
that, but he did combine that. 
 
So he’s made a tremendous contribution to this province, to this 
legislature, to our party, and we’re going to miss him but we 
wish him all the very best in his new career. Thanks, Bob. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Hon. members will recognize that this 
afternoon has represented some small deviation from normal 
procedure. 
 
We recognize that the Chair hasn’t intervened when referred to 
the hon. member for Eastview by his proper name, and I hope 
you do not take that as a precedent to be repeated, but to simply 
— on behalf of all members here to the hon. member for 
Saskatoon-Eastview — acknowledge that the words that have 
been said here by others are words of commendation, not words 
of eulogy, and that we wish you well and thank you for your 
service to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Ms Hamilton, seconded by Mr. 
Ward, and the proposed amendment thereto moved by Mr. 
Krawetz. 



March 16, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 135 

Mr. Johnson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to take, first 
of all, this opportunity to say to the member from Saskatoon 
Eastview that I’m sorry to see him leave. But to his new 
employer, I believe that the Assembly’s loss will certainly be 
their gain and I’m sure that he will perform the task that he has 
set out to do in a very able manner. And with that, Mr. Speaker, 
I’d like to say it’s been great to know you for the six years, six 
and a half years, as a fellow caucus member. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the constituency of Shellbrook-Spiritwood has, in 
the last year, had the opportunity of having two of the 
communities, both Shellbrook and Spiritwood, come on line for 
the carrying of the House. So both of the people in both of these 
communities can now view what is taking place in the House. 
And I’d like to welcome them as new members to the TV 
audience for the Legislative Assembly in Saskatchewan. 
 
An Hon. Member: — You’re going to have to . . . (inaudible) 
. . . now. 
 
Mr. Johnson: — Yes, that’s one of the things that’s going to 
have to happen. I will have to spend more time speaking. That 
will save you some time. 
 
The one . . . the situation, Mr. Speaker, regarding the motion for 
the throne speech, I am in full support of. And if that were not 
the case, when the member from Regina Wascana Plains moved 
the motion, her remarks most certainly would have brought me 
onside. And just to make certain of that, I have to indicate that 
the seconder did an excellent job as well in bringing the items 
of the debate to my attention and convincing me to support it. 
 
The members of the Assembly, I’d just like to point out to them 
that this winter in the area along the boreal fringe has been 
rather a mild winter. There’s been rather a light snowfall. And 
that, I was going to say, has the potential of — although it’s 
been a very beautiful winter and a nice place to live in under 
that thing — it has the potential of bringing about problems in 
the seasons to follow. Because one of the things that it does is it 
leaves less snow and less moisture in the forest. And if we 
happen to have a dry spring then we’re into a fire season like 
we’ve had before — 1995 was one of the years where there was 
some fairly extensive fires and it started out somewhat in the 
same manner as this. 
 
I had thought of this, and no sooner had this came to my 
attention then I received a news release that indicated where the 
people in the province of Saskatchewan could expect flooding 
to occur. And in looking at the map, the area that I’m talking 
about, the expectation of flooding is a way below normal for 
that particular area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the budget speech indicated that we were in the 
process of expanding the job market, and that employment in 
the province of Saskatchewan was increasing, and that we were 
working to continue that increase. I have here some statistics 
from the labour force statistics, and I’d like to just bring the 
House’s attention to them. 
 
There were 468,000 persons employed in Saskatchewan during 
February ’98, and this is an increase of some 14,000 over the 
same number of people that were employed in the province of 
Saskatchewan during the year in 1997, in February 1997. And 

this, Mr. Speaker, is a very large increase, year over year, and 
shouldn’t be expected to occur in every year. But it is an 
indication that some of the programs and policies that this 
government has implemented over the last six and a half years 
are beginning to bear fruit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the throne speech also indicated that we were 
moving along with the implementation of our new health 
system. And I’d like to read just a little bit from the speech. 
 

With most of the hard work of reform behind us, my 
government will work with its many partners to move 
health care forward. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, governance was one of the main things that 
was changed in the health delivery system. 
 
And I know that we have been successful in establishing a new 
governing structure in health care. The reason that I know that 
we’re successful in doing that is that one of the constituencies 
that borders the Shellbrook-Spiritwood constituency — and 
there are nine — the member for the constituency of Rosthern 
indicated in a report to the Valley News what I think he didn’t 
realize, but I take as recognizing that we have been successful 
in implementing the new governing structure. And I’d like to 
just read a few of his comments. 
 

We have been under Saskatchewan’s new health system 
for only a few short years. These new health district boards 
are working fairly well in some areas and are a disaster in 
others. 
 

Well we have to give him some leeway; as a member of the 
opposition, he couldn’t be all support. 
 
(1500) 
 
A little further on he says: 
 

As users of the system, we find it hard to know where to 
bring our beefs or bouquets. The process of having some 
elected representatives on the board and some government 
appointees makes the boards feel partially responsible to 
their appointers and partially responsible to us, the electors. 
Because a slim majority are elected, we need to treat this 
board just as we do other boards we elect. If we are happy 
with snow clearing, we call our RM or the town elected 
person. If we are unhappy with what happens at school, we 
call our school board person. We need to do the same with 
the new health boards. 

 
Mr. Speaker, in writing this and putting it forward in an article 
that he does, I say he is saying to the Government of 
Saskatchewan that the health care program has been 
implemented, it is effective, and it is the right way to go. And 
now we have the support of the opposition on doing that, 
because he says that that’s the way to use it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the other issues affecting the constituency 
of Shellbrook-Spiritwood is rail line abandonment and 
transportation problems that relate from that. And I’d like to 
point out that in the area of rail line abandonment, the Minister 
of Highways and Transportation has asked the Ottawa 



136 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 1998 

government . . . or is calling on Ottawa to ensure that branch 
line rationalization plans are halted until the Estey review 
establishes new rules that provide a fair opportunity for 
short-line development. It makes no sense to be reviewing a 
system that is being dismantled while the review is taking place. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that is actually the case. In the 
Shellbrook-Spiritwood constituency the line between 
Shellbrook and P.A. (Prince Albert) disappeared so fast that 
people in the area didn’t even realize that it had been . . . that it 
was gone until after the tracks were lifted. And that left them no 
opportunity to put into place any consultation or decision to 
maintain that line. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in health we brought about a change. And I see in 
this budget speech and in the years to come that we’re going to 
implement a major, significant change in social services. And 
this change will bring about things that I think are very . . . that 
are needed in a number of ways. 
 
The main thing that we have . . . the main problem that we have 
today in providing social service and in maintaining the 
working ethic in the economy is that we have a very wide 
valley between social recipients and those that are working. But 
if you end up on one side of the valley or the other, it is a long 
fall when you go from being an employee with an income to 
social assistance, and it is an awful long jump to make it back 
the other way.  
 
And it is this valley that we must look at and change so that 
people can move away from social assistance into providing 
themselves with their own income with ease, and not having to 
make that gigantic leap. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before I end I’d just like to say a few words on the 
environment and how it impacts on us as a society. We as a 
society, I believe are on a destructive course with our present 
environmental views, policies, and programs. Whether these 
activities are being performed by a non-government or a 
government agency, the end result is that we’re not achieving 
what we need to achieve. 
 
I believe this because the operating concept is one of protection 
— protect this or protect that — rather than a policy and an 
operating concept that is to manage and thereby achieve 
benefits, not only for the people that are living here but benefits 
for the environment as well. 
 
If you study and follow the protection circuit you will find out 
that in more cases than not, it is based on some moral issue 
rather than an environmental reason, and you can look at 
different things in different papers as the articles come out. 
 
And I’d like to just take and give a little . . . In The Globe and 
Mail on Saturday, March 7 there’s a little article on the 
prospects looming for the tiny burrowing owl. And this is the 
case of an owl that was spotted in Texas and had a band from 
Saskatchewan. The owl had lived, apparently, on mice and 
beetles in a culvert among sorghum and corn fields. Forty other 
burrowing owls are in the area. Ironically, the grass at a nearby 
wildlife refuge was too long for this owl, the size of a robin. 
 
Three or four of the owls lived in pastures, as they do in 

Canada, but pastures are few in south Texas. The indication that 
I bring to the Assembly here today is the fact that in protecting 
the wildlife area in the States from all activity on it, in essence 
set it up so that it was no longer an environmentally beneficial 
place for animals or birds, in this case the burrowing owl. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that the throne speech and the direction 
that we’re heading is one that will be beneficial to all in this 
province, and I will be supporting the motion and not the 
amendment when the vote comes. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Murrell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Let me begin by 
saying what a pleasure it is to see all my colleagues on both 
sides of the House and to have this opportunity to support the 
throne speech but not the amendment. 
 
I would also like to take this moment to wish my colleague 
from Saskatoon Eastview all the best. I will miss his insight, his 
compassion, and his humour. And I have enjoyed sitting on 
committees with him and have learned much from his wisdom. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as this Assembly knows, I have the good fortune 
to represent the people of Battleford-Cut Knife constituency — 
people who, like their forefathers, are true pioneers, striving to 
build and invest in their families, their communities, and in 
their province. This is an opportune time for me to highlight 
and acknowledge the initiatives of people from my area —
people like those from the Neilburg community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the midst of this scenic town was an unsightly 
gully. But the good people of Neilburg, through hard work and 
determination and with community spirit, worked to build a 
park with trees, a playground, a gazebo, and a walking path. 
This park today is enjoyed by all ages and it’s certainly a 
worthwhile contribution to their community. 
 
Individuals like Sid Palmer of Marsden recognized the 
opportunity of processing low-grade canola into pellets and 
opened the doors of the EXL in Lloydminster. This plant will 
benefit farmers throughout the province and North America. 
Companies such as CCS recognized an important 
environmental issue. The storage and handling of oil 
by-products and solids is an environmental concern for all 
partners involved. Canadian Crude Separators found the 
solution with an initiative that follows the four R’s: reduce, 
reuse, recycle, and recover. By using the Unity Sifto salt plant’s 
abandoned caverns, waste products from petroleum will be 
blended with the brine water from the caverns to slurry this 
solid waste. Once the mixture is blended, it will then be injected 
into the caverns and stored. 
 
The town of Macklin, located one-half mile from the Alberta 
border, has become the fastest growing town in Saskatchewan. 
And with the determination of Jimmy Pollard, economic 
development officer for Border REDA (regional economic 
development authority), saw 17 new businesses open in the area 
in 1997. 
 
In my remarks today I will be focusing on the achievements of 
our government, our communities, our people, and our 
province. When we began our second term we outlined a 



March 16, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 137 

six-point agenda, investing in people, and we are doing just 
that, Mr. Speaker. In Saskatchewan we have our priorities right. 
We are investing in jobs. Our unemployment rate is consistently 
one of the lowest in Canada at 6.1 per cent, well below the 
national level of 9.3 per cent. 
 
Our population is now about 1.025 million, showing constant 
growth since 1991. We are investing in education and training. 
In the 1997 budget 131 million was put towards the 
Saskatchewan training strategy, Bridges to Employment, a 
training strategy created to repair the federal government’s 
abandonment of training programs — 47 million withdrawn 
from Saskatchewan over three years. That’s our federal 
government. That’s their abandonment of the training program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are expanding the JobStart, Future Skills 
training program so that we create a skilled workforce. A pilot 
project in the city of P.A., or Prince Albert, has registered about 
300 young people for the new, community-based Future Skills 
training program. From January of ’97 to November of ’97, 
1,544 people were trained in 260 projects around the province. 
Jobs, Mr. Speaker, we’re creating jobs. 
 
In the community of Meadow Lake, Clearwater Forest Products 
is providing recognized training for 48 people as forklift, 
loader, feeder, scanner operators — long-term jobs, 
good-paying jobs. And, Mr. Speaker, we implemented the 
provincial training allowance, which provides income support 
for low-income adults to further their basic education. 
Educating and training people to fulfil meaningful jobs while 
maintaining health care and child benefit programs, thus 
encouraging independence. Projects which target those in need 
— low income women; young people; the chronically 
unemployed — and involved partnerships with community 
businesses, working together. Community-based initiatives at 
work. 
 
Someone, when asked why is farming so tough today, 
responded: it all started back in ’66 when they changed from 
pounds to dollars. That doubled my overdraft. Then they 
brought in kilograms instead of pounds. My cows’ milk 
production dropped in half. After that they changed rain to 
millimetres and we haven’t had an inch of rain since. If that 
wasn’t enough, they brought in Celsius and we got frost in 
August. No wonder my wheat won’t grow. Then they changed 
the acres to hectares and I ended up with only half the land I 
had. By this time I’d had enough and was ready to sell out. I put 
the property on the market and then they changed from miles to 
kilometres. Now I’m too far out of town for anyone to buy the 
place. 
 
Rural areas are indeed facing changes, changes that are 
uncontrollable: globalization; deregulation; depopulation; the 
loss of the Crow; elevator closures; rail-line abandonment. But 
instead of being defeatist, the people of rural Saskatchewan are 
creative and innovative, diversifying the family farm and 
promoting area developments to keep rural Saskatchewan alive 
and well. 
 
Last year I spoke of the north-west and Saskatchewan Wheat 
Pool terminals in Unity. Now the town of Wilkie, with 
community investment, is going to benefit from the spin-off of 
these two businesses with the opening of a pellet plant on May 

1 of this year. Three people will be in management, with 
another three or four people in production. 
 
Saskwest Pork Production in Evesham is a farrow-to-finish 
operation which opened last fall and is expecting its nearly 600 
sows to start farrowing this week. The Manitou hog project in 
Neilburg started farrowing of its 2,600 sows and have had over 
166 litters to date. 
 
Entrepreneurs 2000 REDA Inc. from Rosetown provides 
research and consulting services to clients from the processing, 
manufacturing, retail, health care, service, hospitality, tourism, 
and public sectors. 
 
Golden Grains Farm Co. Ltd. in the Dinsmore area was 
established by four farmers to add value to their barley. Jensun 
is a birdseed processor in the Milden area. Community 
ventures, community driven, community based. 
 
(1515) 
 
As you can see, Mr. Speaker, business is growing in 
Saskatchewan. And growth in business means growth in the 
employment sector. With the announcement in November ’97 
by Saskatchewan’s Agriculture minister of the 13.4 million 
Canada-Saskatchewan agri-food innovation fund, farmers will 
continue their creative trend in business. And as we all know, 
when the agriculture sector is growing, the rest of the 
province’s economic sector grows too. 
 
So we continue the upward trend in employment around the 
province — a trend that in May 1997 saw the number of people 
working in Saskatchewan surge to 476,000, an all-time high for 
the province. 
 
Even more encouraging is the fact that full-time jobs are 
increasing. On a year-to-year . . . year-to-date basis, full-time 
employment is up 3.1 per cent, while part-time employment is 
down 2.6 per cent. In fact 94 per cent of all jobs created last 
year, Mr. Speaker, were full-time jobs. 
 
We are investing in social policy reform, targeting funding to 
fight child poverty, and improving the Family Income Plan. 
Saskatchewan’s action plan for children is a key part of the 
government’s social policy and involves partnerships with the 
Justice department, Municipal Government, Health, Education, 
Intergovernmental and Aboriginal Affairs, the Women’s 
Secretariat, and Social Services. 
 
In the Battlefords, we have the Battlefords partnership, 
promoting violence-free communities, a continuation of the 
position of family violence services coordinator working in 
partnership with The Battlefords Sexual Assault Centre, 
Battleford’s Tribal Council Human Services Corporation, 
Catholic Family Services, Battlefords Health District, Interval 
House, the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police), 
Saskatchewan Justice, and Saskatchewan Social Services. 
 
We provided 1.3 million to help community-based projects such 
as wellness in Manitou; Neilburg and their wellness for children 
project; the Unity Kidsport with youth in action; Wilkie and 
District parks and recreation with the community summer 
activity centre; and the Battlefords Concern for Youth with 



138 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 1998 

summer outings. 
 
We increased basic care rates to foster parents. Sometimes 
families have needs that make it necessary for a child to go into 
foster care. Foster parents have a special role as part of that 
team that supports families and their children through difficult 
times. Through difficult times, they work with and support the 
child’s family until they are ready to have the child returned 
home. 
 
We have set tougher penalties, including the authority to 
suspend drivers’ licences, for people who refuse to meet child 
support payments, so that those who are most vulnerable will be 
protected. 
 
The people of this province have indicated that health care is 
still a priority for them. And it remains a priority for this 
government. Today we spend $128 more per person on 
medicare than our neighbour to the west, Alberta. And we do it 
without user fees or premiums. 
 
We have forged a new partnership with the doctors of the 
province this year and believe that this will help achieve a more 
stable, secure, and accessible system. We are committed to 
working with all other health care workers to reach similar 
partnerships. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has the best health care system in 
Canada. We have the best health care workers. We will move 
into the 21st century with the best health care facilities and 
continuing developments of the new Saskatchewan Health 
Information Network, thus providing the latest in online 
information. 
 
Thursday the member from North Battleford was bent out of 
shape over a press release with a typo error. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
it’s clear that he is more concerned about his ego than with the 
contents of the press release. 
 
The issue is the importance of twinning not only the 
Trans-Canada Highway but also the well-travelled Yellowhead. 
The Romanow government made its position on twinning very 
clear when it released its transportation strategy last spring. At 
that time the province committed to twin the Trans-Canada. The 
province’s decision to twin our major highways within 15 years 
was made in balance with provincial needs in health care, 
education, social services, and the $2 million a day we must pay 
in interest on the debt left to us. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Where did that debt come from, I 
wonder? 
 
Ms. Murrell: — It came to us by the former Conservative 
government. 
 
The question in the mouths of many people: is Saskatchewan 
ready for all of this growth? Are we ready for the 21st century? 
So we asked a blue ribbon panel of business leaders these 
questions. The response — a loud, clear, and simple yes. We 
are ready. We are ready for the 21st century and we are ready 
for all this growth. 
 
Due to the fiscal responsibility of this government, 

Saskatchewan now has an A credit rating across the board. This 
credit rating provides greater opportunities for Saskatchewan 
people to market Saskatchewan products. And with the 
globalization of trade, we must have that opportunity. We have 
no choice. We must compete with markets beyond our own 
borders if we are to survive. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is with great pleasure that I stand in support of 
the throne speech for the third session of the twenty-third 
legislature and against the amendment. I am proud of the way in 
which this government works with the people of Saskatchewan. 
I am proud of the people of Saskatchewan, who recognize the 
need for growth, the need to change, to meet challenges for 
today and tomorrow. I am proud to represent the people of 
Battleford-Cut Knife, truly examples of the spirit of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
There is still much to be done, but we as leaders can work in a 
cooperative and encouraging manner to ensure a secure future 
for all. Let us continue to invest in people so that people 
continue to invest in Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Stanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is really 
a pleasure to be back for the third session of the twenty-third 
legislature, and I want to welcome all my colleagues on all 
sides of the House. And I look forward in working with 
everyone as we proceed to represent the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to welcome the Clerk and all the people that work for us 
and to thank them for the work they do. And I’m happy to be 
here with you, Mr. Speaker. I have had the great pleasure of 
having you in my constituency two years in a row. You’ve done 
wonderful work. People have really appreciated you coming 
and presenting a non-partisan view of what we do in our 
legislature. It has made it easier for me to go on follow-up trips 
and talk to people in the schools. I think you’re doing great 
work. 
 
I want to praise you for this because you’re one of the first 
Speakers in a provincial House to go out and speak to people 
and to tell them about our system which you and I . . . That’s 
one thing we hold in common — we respect our parliamentary 
democracy and will do things to work for it. And I want to 
thank you for doing that, for you doing that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’m so proud to represent the people of Lloydminster. The 
constituency that I represent is on the proper side of the border, 
not on the right side of the border, Mr. Speaker. And I want to 
tell you that it’s because of the good policies of our government 
that my constituency is doing as well as it is, and I will speak 
further to that. 
 
But I just want to tell you something about the people that I 
represent, and I will be eternally grateful for the people of the 
Lloydminster constituency for giving me the opportunity to 
stand here and speak for them and represent them every day of 
the year. I have a constituency that is made up of very small “c” 
conservative people, but very progressive people. 
 
In my constituency we are . . . we have people that are cattle 



March 16, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 139 

ranchers. We make up about 28 per cent of the cattle that is 
produced. We have a very fledgling but progressive game 
farming industry. People are doing very well. We have the 
traditional farming and the traditional crops. And farmers in my 
area are extremely industrious. 
 
We have many small businesses. Also, because of the oil 
industry we have many service industries and small oil 
companies that have originated — and are owned right by 
Saskatchewan people — and originated right in the town that I 
live on . . . live in. 
 
And I want to say that just two Saturdays ago, opened a 
beautiful facility of J&P Trucking in Maidstone, and this young 
entrepreneur and his wife have a fleet of 15 oil trucks and water 
trucks. They’ve purchased the old Maidstone hospital and have 
converted an old building into five beautiful suites and also 
have a fleet of offices that serves their company. This office 
was closed when our brand-new hospital was opened on the 
other side of town — a gorgeous new hospital that serves all of 
us in our town. 
 
So my constituency is . . . I suppose I know all members feel 
this way about their constituencies, but it is an area that is . . . 
that I’m tremendously proud of. And when I travel across the 
province, I realize all the rest of you are proud of your areas. 
But you can’t match the people from my area for 
progressiveness and for getting to it and doing the job, Mr. 
Member from Rosetown-Elrose. You may have — 
Rosetown-Biggar — you may have good people but mine are 
better. I’m sorry to say this. 
 
I want to say that, that I’m very proud of the upgrader deal. I 
can remember when the federal government and the . . . and the 
Alberta government were selling their shares in the Husky 
Bi-Provincial upgrader, 7 cents on the dollar, and we bought. 
And we had enough foresight to put in $43 million more into 
the deal. It wasn’t a deal, with some people, was that popular. 
The Alberta government and federal government lost many 
millions of dollars. 
 
We put some faith into the area. It gave us 1,200 spin-off jobs. 
The people of Lloydminster . . . of the city of Lloydminster 
have told me time and time again how grateful they were to the 
Saskatchewan government for having that faith. I mean, it was a 
mothball stage at that time. 
 
But we had that faith in the industry and we put the money in. 
And this year we were able to sell our shares to our private 
partner, Husky, and they are going to continue some of the good 
work. They’re going to actually increase the size of the 
upgrader — double its capacity — we heard the president 
speaking at a news conference. And that is working really well. 
 
That upgrader was a deal . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I will 
try to continue, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. Order, order, 
order, All hon. members will, I know, with great enthusiasm 
want to put their records . . . remarks on the record. But right 
now the hon. member for Lloydminster is the one who has the 
floor. And I’ll ask all hon. members to allow her to continue 
unabated in the debate. 

Ms. Stanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have some 
good news that we have cogeneration . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Not more good news? 
 
Ms. Stanger: — Yes, more good news. A cogeneration project 
that we will have with the Husky upgrader. SaskPower will be 
getting 210 megawatts of power from this deal. It uses, it uses 
waste from the upgrader so it’s good for the environment. It 
provides us with a steady source of power, which is excellent 
also. 
 
And I just want to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . or Mr. Chair of 
Committees, I want to say that I’m proud to follow the member 
from Wascana Plains and the seconder from Estevan in this 
debate. They were excellent speeches. I was very proud to sit 
with people like this and the speeches that they gave were 
tremendous. 
 
The throne speech charts a course for Saskatchewan’s journey 
into a new year and beyond that into a new century and a new 
millennium. The throne speech announces that we will continue 
to build and prosper the Saskatchewan way by working together 
as a community by building on the values of our people, 
community, and by going along with the philosophy of equality, 
cooperation, compassion, and common sense — and the most 
important thing — by investing in people. People have always 
been the most important aspect of Saskatchewan. It is the 
people and their ingenuity that has built this province and made 
it great like it is. 
 
(1530) 
 
I just want to give you some economic snapshots because it 
gives an indication of what investing in people has done in this 
province. For the first 11 months last year, crude oil production 
was up by 12 per cent, gold sales climbed by 40 per cent, potash 
was up by 18 per cent, and forestry exports grew by 54.4 per 
cent. The provincial government’s move to reduce royalties on 
oil and potash will help support further growth in 1998. 
 
And I have to say, Mr. Speaker, I was to an oilman’s banquet 
on Friday night with my seat mate, the member from Meadow 
Lake, and there were 800 people present and they gave us a 
warm welcome because the folks are very pleased with royalty 
adjustments. And I want to thank my colleague, the Minister of 
Energy and Mines, who has worked very hard on this file. 
 
I also want to say when I’m talking about . . . And as I’m 
talking and giving accolades, I have to say that I have to thank 
my colleague, the Minister of Finance, who has worked with 
the Minister of Energy and Mines on this file. 
 
Okay. Now when we look at another aspect of economic 
snapshots — processing, food processing has led the way. Food 
processing showed the strongest growth of all the 
manufacturing sectors last year with an increase of 26.6 per cent 
in 1997 compared to 1996. And manufacturing shipments rose 
by 15.4 per cent overall during the same period. 
 
Now statistics are great, but they don’t really give people a 
feeling of what it is out there. So our food processing increased. 
What does that mean? So I decided to go the Department of 



140 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 1998 

Agriculture and get some projects, some examples of projects, 
because it just tells you how innovative the people are and how 
we have been able to facilitate some of this growth. 
 
Popowich Milling from Yorkton — it produces oat flour, 
granola, oat bran, oatmeal cereal, and rolled oats. Delsa Food 
Processors from Delisle — it produces mayonnaise, salads, 
prepared vegetables. Last Mountain Berry Farms, another 
example of food processing, is from Southey, Saskatchewan. 
And its products are jam and jellies and wholesale syrups. And 
the Riese’s Canadian Lake Wild Rice, this is a food processing 
in La Ronge. And the products are wild rice and wild rice 
cereal, pancake mix and snacks. 
 
Another example is right here in Regina, Western Pre-Bake Ltd. 
And the products are bakery products — bread, buns, 
doughnuts, cookies, muffins, and pastry. 
 
And I want to say that I’m proud of these projects that we have 
been able to facilitate. But let’s put it bluntly: the people 
themselves have been innovative, entrepreneurial, and they’ve 
gone ahead and taken the risk. And I want to congratulate them. 
 
It’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, to take the real throne speech by a 
real government, performed by a real political party 
representing real people, to take that document and compare it 
to the phoney platform hinted at by the punitive leader of the 
non-elected party. And you know who I’m talking about, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The throne speech will never be delivered . . . their throne 
speech will never be delivered in this Assembly. The platform 
outlined by the Leader of the Tory opposition the other day, 
well let’s put it this way, Mr. Chair of Committee, his speech 
was very interesting but was full of holes. 
 
He said his party looks beyond political labels, and then he 
labels his party as being from the right. As if that was a surprise 
to me or anybody else in this House. His party is so far to the 
right that it’s fallen off the edge and had to go around and climb 
back on again. 
 
Then he said that the Tory Party is built on principles. He didn’t 
say what the principles were, but as the member from Wascana 
Plains said, their actions provide their own rhetoric. 
 
What about the principle of loyalty? Let me say to you, Mr. 
Chair of Committee, that loyalty is one of the most important 
aspects to my personal and public life. Loyalty is a thing that I 
stand by. The Leader of the Opposition didn’t bother to offer a 
definition of the principle of loyalty. 
 
How about the principle of honesty? Does crossing your fingers 
behind your back when you sign an oath cancel the oath? 
According to the member from Melfort-Tisdale, it does. 
 
One of you, the current Liberal leader said to his previous 
caucus, one of you will betray me before the ink is dry. Is it I, 
leader? said the member from Kelvington-Wadena. Well the 
Liberal leader was wrong, but one — not one but four — of his 
followers used the same knives that they previously used on the 
previous leader. 
 

A party built on principle? Give me a break, give me a break, 
Mr. Chair of Committees. And the platform. What is the 
platform? Let’s just put it this way: our throne speech charts a 
path towards elimination of child poverty, a workable plan on 
which I will say more in a moment. 
 
I just want to read some quotes from the throne speech because 
it was written so well. I thought that this throne speech was one 
of the best written throne speeches since I’ve been here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Stanger: — And I just want to quote these because I think 
they bear repeating: 

 
My Government will introduce amendments to The 
Saskatchewan Assistance Act to implement the Building 
Independence - Investing in Families strategy. Through 
this fundamental reform of welfare, we will be creating: 

 
A new Child Benefit, starting July 1998, that will have 
both provincial and national components. This Child 
Benefit will be the first new national social program in 
30 years; 

 
And what it does is assist working families that don’t have the 
income to do all of the things that they need. It will give them a 
hand up. I think it’s a great program. 
 

A new Saskatchewan Employment Supplement; 
 

new supplementary Family Health Benefits; 
 
and training programs that create bridges to 
employment for Saskatchewan people. 

 
And as the throne speech says: 
 

Our province will continue to act on our compassion for 
those who are genuinely in need. That is what friends and 
neighbours do in a community. We will also continue to 
work to ensure that no ones takes undue advantage of 
friends and neighbours who have sincerely offered a 
helping hand. 

 
And that’s the balance always in Saskatchewan. 
 
Investing in families and people is also about safe communities, 
Mr. Chair of Committees, and that is what we want — safe 
communities to live in. In fact, I have many constituents that 
have moved back and have said to me one of the things that 
they appreciate is that they still, in our town, can leave their 
door open when they go uptown. And that’s the thing people 
really value is safe communities. 
 
And the throne speech said, my government will continue to 
implement a provincial 911 system. 
 

My government will implement a number of other 
important initiatives this session at the provincial level, in 
partnership with police officers and prosecutors, to help 
protect citizens from serious and violent offenders; 

 



March 16, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 141 

And some of these other initiatives are, for instance, an example 
of it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the victims services program. I 
think this is just a wonderful program. We have initiated it in 17 
communities in Saskatchewan now, working with the RCMP, 
and the newest one was in Lloydminster, in our area. And it will 
service Lloydminster and Maidstone and Turtleford and many 
volunteers were involved. The Minister of Justice came down 
and he made a commitment of a yearly budget for these folks 
and they are very pleased with that. And let me tell you that we 
are working hand in hand with the RCMP in this province to 
create many good partnerships. 
 
I was at a banquet Saturday night — 125th year of the RCMP 
— and we had distinguished visitors, Inspector Rebayka from 
Saskatoon and Inspector McIlrick from Regina. Both of these 
men have been in the RCMP 32 years and 25 years, and they 
both said that they started their careers in Saskatchewan. They 
are ending their careers in Saskatchewan and they said, of all 
the provinces that they have served in, and both the gentlemen 
at the table have served in nine provinces and two territories, 
they said that the people of Saskatchewan are the most 
supportive to the RCMP of any province. I was very surprised 
at that, but . . . I shouldn’t say surprised, but it just added 
another thing to my list of what we are good at. And both of 
these gentlemen said that they were very happy to come back to 
Saskatchewan and serve here. They said it was a pleasure. 
 
And the other thing that we have promised in the throne speech 
is to reform the young offenders system. And I want to say a 
few words about that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I want to say a few 
words about reforming the young offender system which is 
mentioned in the throne speech. 
 
First, I want to remind all of us that writing criminal law is a 
federal responsibility. Provincial justice systems function within 
that law and have only the force of persuasion at hand to change 
the law. Given that restriction, I believe it is responsible and 
necessary, if regrettable, that we are pressing at a national level 
for reform of the law concerning young offenders. It is a 
responsibility of all us to set . . . that people are safe in their 
communities and on their streets and in their homes. And we 
would be naïve to suggest that there are not dangerous 
offenders who happen to be young for whom the current law is 
inadequate. We are attempting to change that. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to emphasize and underline what 
other speakers on this side, including the Premier, have said. 
The change we are urging is not an assault on all children — 
99.5 per cent of our kids are good kids, as the member from 
Wascana Plains said. They are our present joy and our future 
comfort. 
 
According to the opposition, the way to handle the minuscule 
number of dangerous offenders would be to take all children in 
infancy and thrown them in jail. We do not believe in vendetta 
against youth. As His Honour said, “Our watchword, in this 
area as in all others, is balance.” The people of Saskatchewan 
expect us to maintain our common sense and our compassion. 
We intend to listen to them. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in England in the 18th century, a hungry 
12-year-old boy was hung because he stole a loaf of bread. We 
don’t promise . . . we don’t propose to return to those days. 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, let me just say this: if we treat our young 
people today with the attitude favoured by members of the 
opposition, God help us when they . . . when we turn things 
over to them because no governments last for ever. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am a grandmother, a mother, and a former 
teacher. My children and most of my former students are out in 
the workforce. My grand kids will be there before I know it. So 
for fairly selfish reasons, I’m delighted to . . . with the focus of 
the throne speech and that is investing in education and the 
direction that the speech focuses on families and their needs and 
their concerns and their future. 
 
I want to say here unequivocally, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I 
support the public education system. I believe in my heart that I 
would not be standing here today if it wasn’t for the public 
education system. And I can tell you that I came from a family 
that was not well off. They were hard-working people and I 
don’t apologize for that, but they were not well off. There was 
no way that my parents could have afforded to send me to 
private schools or to a private university or to have paid that 
tuition fee. 
 
(1545) 
 
When I went to teachers’ college, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we had 
that time . . . the government of that time had just begun with 
student loans. And I was able to borrow $900, paid for my 
tuition fee and my room and board and I went to teachers’ 
college. Then I was able — because with one year training in 
those days you could get a job — and I was able to . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . No, the government of that day was 
a CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) government. 
But I was able to, at that time, go back and teach for a year, 
save some money, and go back to university. 
 
Let me say again, I can’t emphasize enough how important a 
very strong public education is. When I think of some of my 
friends in the United States . . . And let me be frank here. Some 
of the schools are very good there but most of them are private 
schools, and if you do not have the $5,000 tuition fee, the child 
cannot attend. And their public schools are crowded. The 
children are in classes of up to 45, and it is very scandalous. 
 
I can tell you right now that if we do not, if we do not reaffirm 
our support for public education, some of the things will be 
happening in this province that are happening in Alberta. Again, 
I have many friends and relatives and colleagues in Alberta. 
And in the city of Calgary, it is scandalous some of the things 
that are happening. Because that government does have a lot 
more money than we do and they are cutting education to the 
point where a number of friends, who are by the way, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, supporters of our party, but they are sending 
their kids to public schools, scrimping and saving because the 
schools in their area have gotten down to such a level that they 
cannot in all conscience send their children there. 
 
The government in that province has allowed a deterioration of 
the public school system. And I can tell you I hope I never see 
the day that that will happen here. 
 
When I think of what the post-secondary situation is where we 
were cut 100 million and more to the post-secondary education 



142 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 1998 

system, and we back-filled that 100 percent, and that then put a 
strain on our budget for the K to 12 system. 
 
But we are determined and my children and my grandchildren, 
my children, all, all two of them — I only have two daughters, 
but both of them went to university, public school, elementary 
school, then high school, finished their university, one with two 
degrees, one with one. My sons-in-law also the same, and I 
hope to see my grandchildren do that. 
 
My young . . . one of my grandchildren is in French immersion 
in this . . . in Regina. And I have to tell you, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, she won a contest, an oratory contest the other day and 
I’m very proud of Sonia because I think she’s the chip off the 
old block. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Stanger: — So education is very important to me, and 
post-secondary education is important. And this government 
will support a public education system. 
 
I want to talk about the twinning of the highways — Highway 1 
and 16. What really infuriates me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the 
fact that Alberta, when they twinned their highways, 50 cents 
on every mile was paid by the federal government. Where was 
this province in the ’80s when we could have at least twinned 
those highways on 50 cent dollars? Now we are having to do it 
on dollar for dollar. 
 
The Alberta government, at least I have to say one thing for 
them: they might not be great advocates of education and 
health, but on infrastructure they’ve done very well over there. 
And at least they took advantage of the time when the federal 
government was giving 50 cent dollars. 
 
What were we doing? What were we doing with our millions of 
. . . where were our millions of dollars going? I’d just like to 
know. At least if we have a highway — at least if we had two 
highways. 
 
And now I hear these members going on and on and on. Well 
where were they in the ’80s? Alberta was twinning their roads 
on 50 cent dollars. They don’t have to . . . they don’t have to put 
a dollar up for every dollar now. And here we are, not only left 
billions of dollars in debt, now we have to come up with a 
dollar for dollar to twin those highways. I can tell you that that 
is one of my priorities for my constituency. 
 
We need two schools in Lloydminster, we need a new health 
centre in Turtleford, we need to have our highway twinned, and 
we need 306 rebuilt. And I will work very hard. I promise the 
people of Lloydminster that I have done and will do all I can to 
have that achieved even though there were a great deal of 
advantages that were passed by during the ’80s, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I really do believe that I’ve almost come to the end of my 
remarks, Mr. Speaker. And let me just say that again it’s been a 
privilege to stand here to speak on the throne speech. I will be 
supporting the throne speech. I will not be supporting the 
amendment. And I look forward to hearing the rest of my 
colleagues. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Mr. Chairman, it’s indeed my pleasure to rise today on behalf of 
the people of my constituency in Arm River and certainly the 
people of the province of Saskatchewan to enter the debate over 
the Speech from the Throne. A smoke and mirrors speech, Mr. 
Speaker, from the Premier of Saskatchewan to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Premier quotes Shakespeare when he 
says the past is no guarantee of the future. And this is so true 
when it comes to health care in this province. The NDP pat 
themselves on the back, Mr. Speaker, when they say they 
created medicare in the past. But that is no guarantee for the 
future. And of course the NDP have proved that point with their 
irresponsible handling, Mr. Chair, of health reform in this 
province. 
 
I’d like to point out a few examples of the outcomes of health 
care reform in this province, Mr. Chairman, and to use the 
member of Lloydminster’s own words, some snapshots of the 
outcomes of some of the health care reform initiatives in this 
province. 
 
Of course one of the huge issues that we have today of course, 
Mr. Chairman, is the closure of the Plains hospital dispute 
where over a hundred thousand people have let it be known that 
they’re against the closure of that institution, Mr. Chairman. 
And what has the Premier done? Continued on the path. 
 
Another result of an outcome, or a snapshot of health reform 
results is the lay-off of some 600 nurses in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Chairman — 600 nurses. Now those are the folks that provide 
front-line care to people in this province that most need it, the 
sick. 
 
Another outcome, another snapshot, Mr. Chairman, is the 
creation of a two-tier system where we now have those who can 
afford to pay or those that belong to a private care plan and can 
get the service, and those that can’t afford it and therefore do 
without. 
 
We can talk about, Mr. Chairman, if you want to talk about 
Betaseron, for example, those drugs for the MS (multiple 
sclerosis) sufferers. Some people are now on the plan; some 
people were on the plan, were receiving it through a private 
plan through their business or place of work. There were some 
people that could afford it, but there’s so many that can’t afford 
it and were not able to get it. 
 
Mr. Chairman, we’ve seen another outcome, another snapshot 
of the results of health reform, and that’s the gutting of our drug 
plan. I can stand here for 15 minutes talking about numbers as 
to what has happened since 1991, since this government came 
to power, with our drug plan. We see today where we have 
many of our elderly people that are on fixed incomes rationing 
the drugs that the doctors are telling them that they need to use 
because they simply can’t afford it. They go and get their dose 
which should last for a month and they make it last for two 
months, Mr. Chairman. Another example. 
 
We’ve seen the creation of huge waiting-lists for people that 



March 16, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 143 

need life-and-death surgery, Mr. Chairman. We can only hope 
and pray that it doesn’t happen to our family where we have a 
loved one that is seriously ill and can’t get into the surgery they 
need. Can you imagine having a close relative, a close friend, 
loved one, waiting three or four months for cancer surgery or 
something along that line and the waiting-list won’t allow it? 
 
Another snapshot, as the member from Lloydminster talks 
about, Mr. Chairman, is the rationing of procedures to the 
doctors, that the doctors need to perform. And that has, of 
course, driven away many of our highly skilled specialists in 
this province because they are trained to practice, and when 
they are rationed, they’ll not stay here. 
 
Another snapshot, Mr. Chairman. We’ve seen the closure of 
dozens of facilities, hundreds and hundreds of beds across this 
province being closed. And certainly that has attributed to, in 
great measure, the massive waiting-lists that we have today. 
People have nowhere to go any more to recuperate, recover 
from surgery, respite, all those things, Mr. Chairman. The beds 
aren’t there. 
 
Another snapshot, Mr. Chairman, is the creation of an 
administrative nightmare in lieu of our front-line services. I 
talked about the 600-plus nurses that were laid off. And in its 
place we have three or four administrative assistants now 
talking about what should be done while the service is not being 
provided. 
 
We have another snapshot, Mr. Chairman. We have a two-tier 
system between rural and urban. We see the people in rural 
Saskatchewan in a lot of cases not receiving the services that 
they need because they’re not readily available. Our seniors, our 
elderly folks cannot travel to get them — 50, 60, 100 miles. 
And so we see a difference there. 
 
We see the two-tier system of ambulances where the people in 
rural Saskatchewan that need the transporter paying for their 
ambulance. 
 
Another snapshot, Mr. Chairman, is of course the piecemeal 
approach that this government has taken to attracting and 
maintaining our doctors in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I could go on and on with this list, but I think that 
it speaks for itself and it does nothing more than give some 
credibility to the quote that the Premier used in his speech from 
Shakespeare in that the past is no guarantee of the future. If it’s 
true, we keep hearing about it, Mr. Speaker, that the savers of 
medicare, the Tommy Douglas’s of the past, that we’re part of 
bringing in medicare. That was then, this is now. That was the 
CCF, this is the NDP. The past is no guarantee of the future. 
Just smoke and mirrors, Mr. Speaker, just smoke and mirrors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to talk for a minute about our 911 system, 
or should I say the lack of a 911 system. One of the selling 
features that the Premier and the NDP used since the inception 
of health reform, was the fact that we would have a 911 system 
which would allow for emergency services particularly in rural 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Well talk about is all we’ve got. 
 
In rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, we can talk about the 
piecemeal approach to a 911 system. And I’d like to use my 

home town for example, Mr. Speaker, where in that town I live 
next to the ambulance hall. Now if this is progress, please tell 
me about it because if we need an ambulance, if I need an 
ambulance, I have to phone an 11-digit number in Regina to get 
the ambulance from next door to come and look after the 
problem that we have. Now tell me that’s progress, Mr. 
Speaker. I don’t think so. 
 
Now before the ink was dry last month when the Premier 
announced the 911 system would be coming in, before the ink 
was dry he was already telling the taxpayers of this province 
that they would have to pay a dollar a month, Mr. Speaker, a 
dollar a month on their telephone bill to fund the 911 system. 
Now talk about taxation to the hilt, now here it is, Mr. Speaker. 
Backdoor taxation, smoke and mirrors, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In his speech the Premier talked about investment in education 
and training, and I heard the member from Lloydminster talk 
about how proud she was of our system and about all that the 
government is doing. But empty words, Mr. Speaker, because 
the Premier’s government has weaselled down to the lowest per 
cent of government funding in history. There is no commitment 
to education by this government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Of course we all know that the taxpayers pay for 100 per cent of 
the funding for education as we do everything else. But the 
interesting part of this is that the government has the nerve — 
the nerve, Mr. Speaker — to go back to the taxpayers, through 
the property base, to fund the lion’s share of the costs. 
 
Why is this? Why is this, Mr. Speaker? It’s because of their 
mismanagement. Is it because of mismanagement? I think so. 
And deals like the NST. That was only $16 million. It doesn’t 
sound like much if you say it fast. Channel Lake, what’s that 
going to cost us, Mr. Speaker? — 10 million? 15? 20, 30, 40? 
Maybe 100 million. Who knows? Guyana — what did that 
cost? Another boondoggle, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Or maybe it has something to do with the patronage of Jack 
Messer. Maybe it has something to do with those costs and 
many more, Mr. Speaker. Add these up and I wonder what that 
money would do for our education system today. 
 
(1600) 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would like to talk for a minute about 
agriculture from rural Saskatchewan, and that will be about 55 
seconds longer than the Premier talked about it in his speech. 
Now can you imagine, Mr. Speaker, the backbone of our 
economy, the driving force of our economy in Saskatchewan is 
agriculture and the Premier can barely mention it. As the old 
saying goes, Mr. Speaker: so goes rural Saskatchewan, so goes 
urban Saskatchewan. 
 
The lack of commitment, Mr. Speaker, to our road system. The 
Premier can only pay lip-service to our rail lines. I think the 
only train the Premier really cares about is the health care train 
that he’s talked about in the past, that was leaving the station 
and anybody that wasn’t on it would be left behind, Mr. 
Chairman, Mr. Speaker. And one thing about it, the Premier has 
kept his word. He has left the sick and the elderly behind. 
 
Why is there no money for our roads and our railroads? Yes, the 



144 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 1998 

Premier is right when he said, we are still managing a bitter 
inheritance from the recent past. But it appears the Premier is 
giving the people of Saskatchewan his own bitter inheritance, 
and that of course is the NST fiasco, the Channel Lake fiasco, 
and the Guyana fiasco, and certainly the Jack Messer fiasco and 
his other patronage appointments. That will be his legacy and it 
certainly makes the GigaText, the Tory GigaText fiasco, look 
pretty small. 
 
Now to wind up his smoke and mirrors speech, the Premier 
talked about consulting with the people of Saskatchewan as to 
how they would spend their modest surplus that the government 
has put together. And he says, and I quote: “My government has 
listened carefully . . .” I’ll repeat that, Mr. Chairman, Mr. 
Speaker. He says, “My government has listened carefully . . .” 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think so. I don’t think he’s listened 
at all and I don’t think the people told him to do many of the 
things that he’s doing. 
 
I don’t think he was told by the people to cancel the GRIP 
(gross revenue insurance program) contract — a mutually 
binding, legally binding contract. I don’t think they told him to 
create havoc in the health care system and create huge 
waiting-lists. I don’t think they told him to buy a power plant in 
Guyana. I don’t think they told him to blow $16 million in a 
NST deal across the border. I don’t think they told him to invest 
money in New Zealand and lose 4 or $5 million a year for six or 
seven years. I don’t think they told him to raise utility rates. 
And I don’t think they told him to pay Jack Messer a $300,000 
severance package. 
 
So don’t let the Premier, Mr. Speaker, tell us that he’s listened 
to the people. I don’t think he has. I think that this is just a 
smoke and mirrors speech, Mr. Speaker. And I’m sure that the 
rest of this province will see it for what it is as well. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I thank you for 
this opportunity to rise in the House and address the House and 
the people that are watching over television on some of the 
concerns and ideas that we have about the Speech from the 
Throne that we recently heard. 
 
But before we get into that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank 
you for the work that you did in the constituency, with the tours 
that you did to meet with the students to explain to them what 
happens in the House and how the House operates and why it 
does, and why you are dressed in such a strange manner. And I 
think if, as time progresses and you at some time want to decide 
what exactly you want to hide . . . hang your hat on, as far as 
your work in the House is concerned, I would suggest that 
that’s probably one of the major achievements. 
 
Because as we went to the three different schools that we 
visited in my constituency — VCA (Valley Christian 
Academy), Hague, and Rosthern — and met with students from 
division 3 and division 4, I think as we listened to their 
questions, and they were very often totally different sorts of 
questions from different schools, but it showed a number of 
things. 
 
They knew something about the House; they didn’t understand 

it totally. And I think because of the visits, they have a new 
appreciation of what happens in the House, and a new interest 
and I also believe a new respect, that people would actually 
come out from the legislature, talk to them, visit with them, let 
them wear their hat, and all those sorts of things. I would like to 
commend you on that move and I enjoyed that opportunity of 
working with you at that particular time. 
 
Okay. Back to the throne speech. I’d like to take some time to 
express my concern not only with the priorities laid out by the 
members opposite in their throne speech. And I think as we 
look at what was in that speech, it had some vague rumblings of 
the nothings that were in it last year. 
 
There was a bit of sound and fury, but I think as the saying 
continues, signifying nothing. And as we listen to the sound and 
the fury, as I think everyone’s realized, we’ve even listened to 
the people opposite, members of the government side talking 
about it, didn’t have very much to say about the specific 
content. And I think that indicates that it really signified 
nothing, so as we deal about the priorities and the leadership 
that are being demonstrated through these particular actions. 
 
I do believe, Mr. Speaker, there was probably, as we’ve debated 
the Speech from the Throne, I think there’s one thing that’s 
come through that and it may not have had anything specifically 
to do with the Speech from the Throne, but I think the direction 
that we see that the House has sort of gone in and the quality of 
debate and the direction of debate. 
 
I’m reminded, Mr. Speaker, of a sport that most of us I think 
through our lives have engaged in, and some of us enjoyed very 
much, and that’s fast ball. It used to be called softball back, you 
know, a decade or four ago. 
 
But there’s a bit of an analogy, I think, we can draw from that 
particular sport to what we’ve seen in the House, and I think it’s 
a very important one to draw in view of many of the comments 
that have been made in the past two or three days. And because 
all of us have been involved in that sport, I think we can all 
appreciate this bit of an analogy. 
 
We’re all very well aware of how the situation is . . . and the 
times when we’ve gone up to bat and as we’ve crouched over 
the plate with great hopes for what the event would bring and 
maybe a beautiful hit and a lot of cheers, as we observe what’s 
going on, we heard that the catcher is having a conversation 
with the umpire. And the pitcher out there is very carefully 
looking to see if his girlfriend is watching. The fellows out in 
the field are talking about the cars that are driving by, and the 
shortstop is chewing on a blade of grass. 
 
And as each one of us stood there in that situation, something 
started to dawn on us. What starts to dawn on us is that actually 
we’re very ineffective, and we’re no threat. Because we also 
recall the situations on different teams or different leagues and 
with some more experience, where we’ve gone up to bat and the 
very first thing that happened is the catcher starts to talk to you 
and try to get your attention. The pitcher leans over and gets his 
resin bag and gets ready for the pitch. The infield moves in and 
gets poised. And there’s no one chewing on a blade of grass. 
And the coach for the opposite team is hollering for all the 
people in the outfield where they’re supposed to stand. 



March 16, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 145 

And suddenly when all of that attention is focused on you, Mr. 
Speaker, you realize that actually you’re a threat and you’re 
doing something well. And, Mr. Speaker, as we’ve listened to 
what’s gone on in the House in the last while, and from the 
members opposite on the government’s side, there’s been a 
feeble attempt, as I already mentioned, to try and deal with it, 
with the content of the speech. And when there isn’t much 
content, a feeble attempt doesn’t get you very far at all. 
 
But we also recall that most of their activities have been aimed 
over at this side at the Saskatchewan Party. And I suggest to 
you, Mr. Speaker, there’s the analogy. That suddenly they’re 
waking up and finding out that what’s happening here is not the 
Premier and the Speech from the Throne, Mr. Speaker, it’s the 
opposition — the Saskatchewan Party opposition. And they’re 
very aware of what’s going on. And as we start to hear the 
chirping even right now, Mr. Speaker, we realize that they 
understand that there is a party here that is doing something that 
is out there and we have the voice of the people and the concern 
of the people. 
 
And I think every one of us, Mr. Speaker, every one of us in 
this House as we’ve been home throughout the last little while, 
particularly the last two, three days, as we’ve walked up and 
down the streets we know, Mr. Speaker, that I haven’t seen one 
person in my constituency this last weekend admit that he was 
from the government side of the House. Because someone 
would have asked him, and what are you going to do about Jack 
Messer? And they would have said, tell Jack we want it back, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so I suggest that people out in the constituencies have no 
idea if their MLAs from the government side of the House were 
at home, because they probably weren’t. And if they were, I’m 
sure they weren’t telling anyone what was happening. And I’m 
sure they weren’t out there for a time with coffee, because they 
would have been told that we want it back, Jack. 
 
Okay, and as I just finished saying, before I brought that 
important analogy to your attention, Mr. Speaker, that actions 
speak much louder than words — much louder than words. In 
fact on that same note, the member from Lloydminster I believe 
it is — which is correctly pronounced, Mr. Speaker, 
Lloydminster not Lloydminister — but the questions have been 
raised time and again in question period, about what’s happened 
with Channel Lake. I have yet to see the person representing 
Lloydminster applauding a single answer in response to the 
questions on Channel Lake and Jack Messer. And as I said 
earlier on, actions speak much louder than words — much 
louder than words. 
 
It was quite clear by last week’s occurrences that government 
priorities are not health care or education or highways as the 
throne speech would have us believe. As you recall, there 
wasn’t much in there on that. 
 
No, Mr. Speaker, this government is more concerned about 
giving patronage appointments to their political hacks and then 
rewarding them with taxpayers’ dollars when they mess up 
beyond belief. 
 
An Hon. Member: — How many dollars was that? 
 

Mr. Heppner: — That was millions. It would have been most 
people’s pay cheque with about six or eight zeros added after 
that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In the last week I have had the privilege of talking to people in 
Saskatoon, Regina, Swift Current, Prince Albert, my own 
constituency, and travelling down the Yellowhead Highway all 
the way to Russell, Manitoba to visit my kids on the weekend. I 
tried to talk to a few other people on the way there as well. 
 
And the Channel Lake situation keeps coming up again and 
again. And they’re asking, what’s happening with my tax 
dollars? Did I actually pay for that fiasco? Did I pay for that $5 
million? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the good news probably is they have already 
paid for it, which is probably a whole lot better than having to 
tell them that they’re going to get a bill in the mail saying, 
would you please pay for it. 
 
Because, Mr. Speaker, as they’ve listened to the goings on in 
Channel Lake, SaskEnergy, SaskPower, and all those sorts of 
things, the questions that come to mind is, how is this going to 
be addressed through the throne speech? How will it be 
addressed when the budget comes along a little later on? And 
they haven’t heard an answer. They listened to the throne 
speech and there was nothing in there that gave them a feeling 
of confidence, Mr. Speaker, that actually Channel Lake was 
going to be dealt with. 
 
And yet the thing is so simple. There’s a contract there and the 
person selling doesn’t even read the contract, which in itself is 
highly unusual, Mr. Speaker. Because you and I have bought 
cars. All of us have bought cars and trucks and vehicles and 
houses and land, and it seems to be that usually it’s the seller 
that draws up the contract and the buyer reads it and decides to 
sign it or not to sign it. 
 
In this case, Mr. Speaker, it happened to be the other way 
around. The buyer got to decide what he was going to pay. The 
buyer changed it and someone — oops! — didn’t even make a 
mistake. They didn’t even read it. 
 
(1615) 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s always a chance that all of us make 
mistakes and we’ve all made a few. However, Mr. Speaker, 
when you don’t even read it, is much more of a mistake and a 
disaster than when you read it and you maybe don’t understand 
it. Five million dollars. That’s the same outfit, Mr. Speaker, that 
I believe is interested in investing throughout the world — 
places where they speak Spanish. What in the world would 
these people do, Mr. Speaker, if they were reading a contract in 
Spanish? I dread to think how many dollars we would throw 
away, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And maybe that’s where this whole thing comes from, Mr. 
Speaker, in the dealings they’ve had in other countries where 
they couldn’t read it; they’ve learned just to sign and not read, 
and they’re doing the same thing now. It is a disaster. It will be 
paid for. Most of it has been paid for, and hopefully as the 
statement goes, we would like to get it back. 
 



146 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 1998 

Mr. Speaker, I could and probably will go on at length about the 
shameful acts of Jack Messer and the NDP government as it 
relates to Channel Lake. Interesting question — speaking of 
contracts. We just can’t seem to find out exactly what the price 
was that Channel Lake charged for the gas. So maybe the 
reason they made this money that they said they made, which 
covered up the costs, is actually because as utility users in 
Saskatchewan we paid a padded bill. And so as we often say, 
our utility rates are often a form of taxation. I think they were 
this time, Mr. Speaker, just to pay for that. 
 
But first I would like to illustrate how this government’s 
actions, as I spoke earlier on, speak louder than words in 
another area. In their throne speech, Mr. Speaker, the members 
opposite say they’re dedicated to fighting youth crime and 
lobbying the federal government to bring about changes to the 
Young Offenders Act. 
 
Well that’s a hard statement to really believe when you follow 
up with the actions. Because the Young Offenders Act, Mr. 
Speaker, has needed changes for decades. We’ve known that. 
And yet, Mr. Speaker, when I spent some time in North 
Battleford because of the thing that happened with North 
Battleford that has hurt so many people there — the murder of a 
lady that was taking care of two young offenders — at that 
point, Mr. Speaker, our Justice minister said there really isn’t a 
problem. There really isn’t a problem. 
 
That’s the same Young Offenders Act, Mr. Speaker, that we 
have had for years. And now he’s sort of halfway onside — 
halfway onside. Probably as onside as the Justice critic for the 
Liberal Party was, Mr. Speaker, when he was on a talk show, 
and he gets one phone call that wasn’t too, you know, 
supportive of his position. He gets another one and suddenly he 
wasn’t there any more. Reception just faded right out. 
 
And they looked on their radios, the people wanted to hear what 
the Justice critic from North Battleford had to say and two little 
. . . one little word appeared up on the little dial, it was gone. 
And they looked for that radio station “GONE”, it was gone. 
What a shame. There were people in Saskatchewan who wanted 
answers from all three parties on this issue and the government 
side said, no problem. The Liberal Justice critic was gone, 
couldn’t find him on the radio, couldn’t find him anywhere’s 
else. He’s shown up later on and he has some views on it and 
I’m glad at least that he has some. 
 
But I think that the Young Offenders Act has to be looked at. 
Looked at not with the idea of throwing people in jail with 
adults and becoming hardened, ugly criminals. Because there’s 
a number of things we have put into our background on the 
Young Offenders Act, Mr. Speaker. First of all, the great 
majority of young people in this province are honest. Everyone 
of us would trust them with our cars. We would trust them with 
our jobs. We would trust them with our kids, and we do, Mr. 
Speaker, when we let them babysit our families. I think it shows 
some of the trust that we have in them. 
 
But there is unfortunately a small group of our youth that are 
young offenders and, Mr. Speaker, the fact that the young 
people themselves are upset about this was shown about a year 
ago when Miller High School students collected over 14,000 
signatures. These were students, Mr. Speaker, who felt that 

there were other young people out there that needed the Young 
Offenders Act changed so that these people’s good reputation 
would not be besmirched; to make their society that they were 
moving into and going to be taken control of in a couple of 
years . . . would be a better society. 
 
So the concern over the Young Offenders Act does not just 
come from old, grey-haired men like myself. It comes from 
people in Miller High School, and I believe virtually every 
single high school in this province. And we need to listen to 
them. We now have, as I said . . . the Liberal critic is listening. 
The Justice minister has said that yes, there’s going to be . . . 
taking some action on that. But I think there’s a few things that 
we need to outline on the Young Offenders Act, that we have to 
look at. 
 
A good Young Offenders Act has to accomplish two or three 
things. One thing it has to accomplish is we have to have 
something in there for rehabilitation. Because, Mr. Speaker, it is 
my firm belief that everyone of us in this House has made a 
mistake somewhere’s in their life, and we were given all a 
second chance. And I believe we’ve all taken it, with maybe a 
few exceptions, and we’ve turned out lives around and I think 
our young people need that same kind of a chance. And that is 
the purpose, Mr. Speaker, of any program that has a 
rehabilitation component in it. It is to give these people the 
skills, the opportunity, to turn their lives around and be the 
contributing people to society that they can actually be. 
 
I was very comforted when I think of what’s going to happen in 
the future in Saskatchewan when we had, at the opening of this 
session, we had three schools represented here where students 
had written those three essays, dealing basically with 
government things and those kinds of ideals. I felt that was very 
positive for a number of reasons. 
 
First of all, that these young people were interested enough to 
have written on that particular topic and have done that well on 
it. The other thing that I personally took a certain amount of 
pride in, is that out of those three teachers that brought those 
three groups here, one I’d had as an intern in a previous life. 
And he’d been an excellent intern and now he’s teaching in a 
Regina school and doing very well. 
 
The other one was a young fellow that sat in my grade 10 social 
studies/history class decades ago when he was in grade 10. And 
he’s now the principal at Herbert and he was here with a group 
of kids. And I said, there’s another young person that has done 
very well for himself and now contributes to society. 
 
So I think we need to have that rehabilitation in there. If we 
don’t do that and don’t do it well, Mr. Speaker, the costs to our 
society are going to be great. The costs will be there in a lack of 
security for people. The costs will be there that we will be 
forced to fund them in some sort of institution of some type. 
And so we need to make sure they’re rehabilitated. 
 
Young Offenders Act also needs to have a certain component to 
it, Mr. Speaker, that gives the public a feeling of safety in their 
communities. And, Mr. Speaker, as you’re very well aware, 
Regina is now the number one capital of break-ins in Canada, 
Saskatoon not far behind at number three. Not a very 
comforting thought. 



March 16, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 147 

Last year I believe, we had a whole situation with stolen cars, 
where we came in probably first in the country as well. That 
shouldn’t happen, because when people realize they live in a 
city that is first or third in Canada for break-ins, it doesn’t give 
you very comforting thoughts when you go to bed to know that 
every other city in Canada there is less of a chance that you will 
be broken into that night than in your own home, in your own 
bed, in Regina or in Saskatoon. 
 
And I think our Young Offenders Act needs to have the kind of 
teeth in there that people just don’t keep reoffending. I’d like to 
give you an example, Mr. Speaker, just to underline this, from a 
community in my constituency, thankfully is not a 
crime-riddled constituency. And yet it is there. But here’s an 
example to indicate what actually happens out there . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . And the members from Saskatoon 
are trying to underline the fact that their city is not crime ridden. 
And I love Saskatoon but I would like to say, Mr. Speaker, that 
if you check the records, my community and my constituency is 
a safer place to be. 
 
But here’s what happened in one community in my 
constituency, and it happened, Mr. Speaker, within the last two 
months. A couple of young fellows were working on a car. 
When they were done — and they worked fairly late at night on 
these cars, as young fellows do — they walked out of the shop 
where they were working, on the yard, and they climbed back 
into his car to find out that his car had been broken into and his 
radio had been taken and his telephone and a few other odds 
and ends. 
 
As chance would have it, Mr. Speaker, there was a skip of snow 
that had fallen that night, and so he followed the tracks. And 
they took him downtown and around town a little ways, back 
out of town near the town shop. And there he came across three 
young fellows who were the very people that had broken into 
his vehicle. Well he managed to capture two of them. The third 
one ran off — unfortunately that was the one that had the 
telephone. But being the kind, considerate sort that he was, he 
decided rather than to deal with it himself he called the police 
officers. The RCMP came and said, oh these are the three. We 
just had them earlier on in the evening for the same sort of 
thing. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, here you had a situation where the young 
offenders committed a crime earlier on in the evening, they 
were caught, the police met with them, dealt with them as best 
they could — and how they can is part of the Young Offenders 
Act — and within hours on the same evening in the same 
community, Mr. Speaker, they perpetrated another act of theft 
and vandalism, and the RCMP couldn’t do much more with 
that. 
 
That shouldn’t be happening. That kind of insecurity that it 
creates in the hearts and minds of the citizens of this province 
shouldn’t be the fact. And so the Young Offenders Act has to 
have a component in it that ensures safety for each one of us. 
 
The Young Offenders Act has to have a third component. The 
first one is rehabilitation; the second one is the safety that it has 
to provide for the community; but the third one is that there 
need to be some consequences. And as I’ve gone around the 
province — some people use the word punishment and some 

use the word consequences — there’s no difference between 
those two. 
 
What has to be there is that when the young offender 
perpetrates a crime he knows something is going to happen to 
him. And you can call it a punishment, you can call it a 
consequence; but he knows there’s going to be an event that’s 
going to take place because he’s perpetrated that crime. And 
that event should be such that it makes him say, I would prefer 
not to do this again. 
 
And if we like the word consequences, we’ll stay with that. If 
you like to sound a little more hard over like punishment, it’s 
the same sort of thing. We need to have that. Our Young 
Offenders’ Act is weak on all three of those areas. 
 
And I would like, Mr. Speaker, to have all three people from the 
three parties, the critics and the Justice minister together, to go 
down to Ottawa and to sit down. We’re not coming down here 
with diverse, different opinions. We know that there’s a 
problem; we have some idea for solutions. Let’s all sit down 
together and work through a solution we can all live with, we 
can all support, because it will help all of our communities. And 
that ultimately, Mr. Speaker, is why we’re here, is we represent 
communities — we represent communities. We need to work 
with those. 
 
It’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, that as we talk about the justice, 
there’s another interesting little sideline that has nothing to do 
with the young offenders. But it’s the matter of the people that 
have insufficient funds to hire expensive legal aid. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I’ve had a number of phone calls on this issue. 
 
I had a phone call this morning from a person who cannot 
afford an expensive lawyer and he says, I have the feeling that 
the people that I get in Legal Aid aren’t the same quality that if 
I had hundreds of thousands of dollars at my disposal, have the 
kind of money at their disposal that maybe government has. 
And they feel that they’re disadvantaged in that particular area. 
And I think we need to look at that as well. 
 
As I said earlier, when we’re talking about the young offenders, 
most of our kids are good kids. But in the discussion — and this 
came up in Swift Current and I think it needs to be brought to 
our attention here as well, Mr. Speaker — is that when we’re 
talking about . . . the question came up, why all these young 
offenders? 
 
And I said, well some kids make bad choices. Some kids have 
no hope. They live in a situation where, when they get up in the 
morning and they look at their immediate environment, there is 
nothing there to give them the feeling that, I can rise above this. 
If I do this and this I’ll be able to achieve something in life. 
They have no hope, and if they have no hope, then what are 
they losing by perpetrating a crime on society. So we have to 
work on that component. 
 
There is one other one, and I think it’s one that we need to 
address but it comes through from a little different angle, and 
that is that many of these young offenders are there because of 
fetal alcohol syndrome, Mr. Speaker. And that is one where 
even though we have to work with these young people, and we 
have to make sure that we protect society, we know that the 



148 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 1998 

chance of success is very slim. 
 
These young people, Mr. Speaker, do not have the sense of 
conscience and right and wrong and the ability to make rational 
decisions that some of the other young people have that stay out 
of trouble. 
 
And the question came from a person when I had that meeting 
in Swift Current — that was probably one of the most critical 
questions there, is what can we do to stop that pipeline of 
critical kids coming through on that young offenders situation, 
and maybe especially the ones with fetal alcohol syndrome. 
And that one is outside the realm, Mr. Speaker, of the Young 
Offenders Act. 
 
(1630) 
 
And I think we have to deal with that with legislation that 
affects that whole area of pregnant mothers and the children that 
they are bearing. Last year, Mr. Speaker, it was brought up in 
this House, some of the tentative legislation that we put on 
some of the information that was received at liquor board 
stores, saying that this substance could be dangerous to 
pregnant mothers and their offspring. 
 
And I think we have to go further down that road, Mr. Speaker, 
to ensure that we don’t keep that pipeline full of fetal alcohol 
syndrome kids, because they cannot be held responsible for 
what they’re doing, and yet society has to keep on dealing with 
them. That is a serious problem, Mr. Speaker. It’s not part of 
the Young Offenders Act but we have to keep working with 
that. 
 
Next, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to say a little bit about education, a 
little bit about education. There’ve been a couple of things that 
have sort of reared their unfortunate, ugly heads in the last 
month or two. One was the results that students in university 
made on a test dug out of, I think it was 1934, grade 10 
geometry, I believe what it was. And the results were very poor. 
 
I’ve been looking for a 1934 geometry grade 10 exam, Mr. 
Speaker, because I have a funny feeling I’d like to challenge it. 
I think everyone in this House would like to challenge it. 
They’d probably like to do it quietly on their own with the 
answer book beside them to see how well they could actually 
do, but I think we’d like to know what happened there and why 
that happened. 
 
But something more recent on the same vein, Mr. Speaker. 
There were some tests made of students in our public school 
system dealing with math scores. And we didn’t do that well, 
Mr. Speaker. When I found out that Saskatchewan students had 
taken that test I said, I hope we come first because having been 
in the education system, I know there are good kids, good 
boards, good teachers. Surely out of that, there would be some 
good marks, and I think there probably were. And I thought we 
would rank fairly high. Number one, it’s a little tough to get, 
but I would have been happy with two or three or four or five 
— it would have been the top half, and the top half is not bad. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we came last. We came dead last. Dead last, 
Mr. Speaker, is not good enough. Now I’m not sure where else 
they gave that exam where people might have done better than 

that, but we came last. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, our Education minister took this to heart. 
Our Education minister took this to heart, and so she should 
have. And I was duly proud of her, Mr. Speaker, that she said 
we’re going to deal with this problem and we’re going to fix it. 
Immediate, I thought, we were going to have answers and our 
students will rise to the top, where Saskatchewan students 
should always be. 
 
And so what did she do, Mr. Speaker? Well she’s going to 
spend a quantity of money, somewhat similar to the amount that 
Jack Messer is getting and — a little less, but it’s in the same 
number of figures on the left-hand side of the decimal place — 
and they’re going to analyse, Mr. Speaker, our Saskatchewan 
curriculum. Well offhand that doesn’t sound like as bad idea 
because maybe these students . . . there’s something wrong with 
the curriculum, and in the math class they’re actually doing 
something different. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I went ahead and asked some of the people 
that I’ve spoken to in the last while about that solution. And you 
know, Mr. Speaker, it was amazing how almost every one of 
those people, when I gave them the problem, I could see by the 
glint in their eye they had the solution. I said, if in fact the 
minister is right that it has to be the curriculum that’s going to 
be tampered with or fixed or something of that sort — or 
something of that sort — if it’s our curriculum that puts us in 
last place, then what would be the solution, Mr. Speaker, to get 
us into first place? 
 
And there would be about a two-three second blank look and 
then the eyes would light up. Because the answer, Mr. Speaker, 
that came from everyone out there is: well then let’s go to the 
province that did the best and take their curriculum. We could 
just dial up, that should cost not more than a dollar or two, and 
a minute or five, and say: could we have a look at your 
curriculum. We’d get it faxed down and there we’d have it. 
 
We might even have to pay them for it, but I can assure you, 
Mr. Speaker, it would have been a lot less money and wouldn’t 
be on a long, drawn out thing like this one probably will. 
Because, Mr. Speaker, personally I’ve been involved with 
curriculum development and it takes months and years and 
years and months to get it done. 
 
And I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that by the time that thing 
has worked its way through this maze called the curriculum 
maze, most people would have forgotten that our students in 
Saskatchewan ever wrote that test. And we really won’t know 
that it’s a problem any more till it rears its head again and we’ll 
go through the same process. 
 
But we don’t even know, Mr. Speaker, that it happens to be a 
problem and they do another set of tests. But there has been a 
problem in ongoing years. Because I’m not sure how old, Mr. 
Speaker, Jack Messer actually is, but there’s a good example of 
a person who went through our system and didn’t learn the 
math at all. 
 
And in fact, it is even more than the math, it happened to be the 
English course. As a matter of fact, it was probably even the 
history course, or he would have known better than to go to 



March 16, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 149 

Guyana and try and accomplish things over there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Okay. So the solutions in education aren’t always complicated. 
The people out there could find them. But I’d like to also 
mention, Mr. Speaker, as you talk to the people out in taxpayer 
land, the 40/60 split that we now have as far as the funding of 
education tax, and the minister has said it’s not good. 
 
But we need a time line. Even though it may not happen this 
year — and it didn’t happen last year — but we need to start 
working and people out there need to know where they go and 
when they’re going to get there, because at the rate this 
government’s going they don’t know where they’re going or 
when they’re going to get there which means when they’re 
somewheres they don’t know if they’re supposed to be there, or 
what day it is, or where they are. 
 
And I think if you listen to the Speech from the Throne, Mr. 
Speaker . . . if that statement sounded somewhat fuzzy, that’s 
exactly what the Speech from the Throne was all about — it 
was a lot of fuzz. 
 
If, Mr. Speaker, we look at the taxation thing . . . There was a 
meeting of SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities) last week, Mr. Speaker, and members of cabinet 
were there with one notable exception, and SARM takes note of 
that. And I believe that exception probably won’t be returned to 
the House after the next election because they didn’t take kindly 
to not having the cabinet there — I mean that one individual. A 
credit to all the rest of the ones that came. 
 
But the one thing that came up, Mr. Speaker, is the amount of 
tax on property. And with reassessment, that has skyrocketed. 
The agriculture community knows that, and we know that, Mr. 
Speaker. The people on the government side of the House know 
that, very definitely, that these situations just aren’t acceptable. 
 
In fact, the member from Saskatoon Northwest was probably 
one of the few people who could answer that question with a 
split second without even having to think about it, to say yes, 
rural taxes are just too high. The amount of tax that’s been put 
on because of the reassessment is too high. And I’ll say more 
about that, Mr. Speaker, when I get into my chapter on 
agriculture. How this has affected the farming community 
because it happened to be, especially in farming communities, 
they understand the concept of the straw that can break a back. 
And I think that tax is one of those. 
 
Because, Mr. Speaker, things in agriculture change. Almost 
everyone in this House, Mr. Speaker, has some rural roots and 
we know how things change. Partly because we’re . . . as a 
result of what happens with the weather. Weather is a key thing. 
It affects all of that. But here we have something, Mr. Minister, 
that looks like it won’t go away. A hailstorm, Mr. Speaker, 
comes and goes. High fertilizer prices come and we hope they’ll 
go. Our railways, Mr. Speaker, came and went. But there’s one 
thing that’s come and it looks like it’s not going to go, and 
that’s that high tax component that is put on rural Saskatchewan 
and the farm lands. That needs to be changed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, again . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Now all hon. members 

will recognize that it is the hon. member from Rosthern who 
has the floor. And I know that there are other hon. members 
here trying to put their remarks on the record, including some of 
his own colleagues, and I urge them to save them until they 
enter into debate and can be attributed to them personally. 
 
In the meantime, if we could allow the hon. member from 
Rosthern to speak unimpeded. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So when we get 
into that part in agriculture we will reiterate this part on taxes, 
that it is one of those things that farmers have been hit with and 
there is no hope on that, Mr. Speaker, because apparently it’s 
not going to change; it may just get worse. Weather will come 
and go, everything else seems to come and go in rural 
Saskatchewan, but that will stay. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have to say a word about roads. And in this 
discussion, Mr. Speaker, I know we’re not allowed to bring 
props into the House, but I should have probably brought some 
highway maps so that the question that was asked, and it was a 
very . . . a question with a lot of depth to it is, what roads? I 
could have given a highway map to people so that they would 
be able to differentiate highways from the rest of Saskatchewan. 
And I think that is one of the reasons, Mr. Speaker, why we 
need to ensure that the cost on highway maps is kept as low as 
possible, so people know where the highways actually are. 
 
Anyway, as I mentioned earlier on, Mr. Speaker, I spent this 
weekend, or part of it, in Russell, Manitoba visiting some of my 
kids and my grandkids. And, Mr. Speaker, I’ll say more about 
that later on, why when I want to visit my children, my 
grandchildren, I have to leave the province to visit any one of 
them. That’s not as it should be but that’s for another part of 
what I have to say about the throne speech, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Anyway, I’m coming back from Russell, Manitoba, and so 
there’s about five minutes or so and I’m into Saskatchewan, and 
so then I came through Melville and then I’ll work my way 
down across the highway, such as it was. Mr. Speaker, it was 
scary. There were parts of the highway that had a sign up that 
says, we’re moving from paved to gravel, and you couldn’t tell 
the difference. There were parts where you moved from one to 
the other and you couldn’t tell the difference. 
 
In fact as very often, Mr. Speaker, you couldn’t tell whether 
you were on a gravel road, a grid road, a paved road, or what 
you were on. It was a real disaster. It was in fact unsafe at spots 
because of the ruts in the roads that were in there. Part of those 
happen to be on Highway No. 10 that were out there and 
working their way down through here. Those highways are not 
good enough. They were unsafe. 
 
If I think of a tourist coming down that highway to look at some 
of the places, whether it happens to be the Rose Bush place near 
Watson or it happens to be the Motherwell farm or it happens to 
be a Seager Wheeler farm or at Fishing Lake up North, to go 
visit all these interesting places we have in Saskatchewan . . . or 
Rafferty-Alameda to see there’s actually water in it. And there 
will be more water in it, and it’s just working just fine. 
 
As people drive around the province, they shouldn’t have to put 
up with that. The member from Lloydminster — Lloydminster, 



150 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 1998 

I repeat — made statements about Alberta and their roads that 
two or three decades ago they had some federal help. Well we 
all know, Mr. Speaker, that a highway does not last for two to 
three decades. So even though they may have been built and 
graded at that time and a culvert put in and the ditches had grass 
sowed in them and signs put up, that does not give you a good 
highway for the rest of time. If those highways are still better, 
there must be a reason for it. 
 
I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that if we look at the amount of money 
taken off the tax on gas, percentage-wise, that we spend on our 
highways and compare that with the amount that Alberta or 
Manitoba spends, I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that explains 
when I go to Russell, Manitoba, and as soon as I’m across the 
highway, I’m on a beautiful stretch of roadway. 
 
It also explains when I go down to . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order, order. It’s 
obviously not necessary for all members to be shouting across 
the floor. There is protocol that I know all hon. members will 
want to respect in permitting each member to put their remarks 
on the record in the debate in response to the Speech from the 
Throne. I’ll ask all hon. members to allow the hon. member for 
Rosthern to continue his debate in an unimpeded manner. 
 
(1645) 
 
Mr. Heppner: — And as I was in the middle of saying that 
when I went down to Lethbridge, the minute I got across the 
border, the same thing happened. Maybe if we had more of 
those pennies off every litre of gasoline we buy in 
Saskatchewan going to roads, we wouldn’t have that big 
difference and people coming here sort of saying, oops, 
something must have happened. Nothing was being put into 
roads. 
 
Let me say a little bit about health. And I’ll come back to roads, 
Mr. Speaker, when I’m back into the section on agriculture 
because that has become a much more critical part in agriculture 
as well. 
 
As you may be aware, Mr. Speaker, I spent some time last week 
with a young lady in this community who needs a transplant. 
She was told approximately a half a year ago that sometime 
around the middle of this winter she would be able to get her 
transplant. There’s a donor who’s waiting — it’s a family 
member, it’s her sister. Now she’s been told it will be May or 
June. 
 
Meanwhile, Mr. Speaker, her physical condition is deteriorating 
and deteriorating rapidly, and yet, being put on hold. And so is 
the life of her sister who is going to be the donor because her 
sister has seasonal employment which takes place during the 
summer. So by that particular act, she’s now also been denied 
essentially employment for this summer because the donor, as 
you know, Mr. Speaker, has a very serious part in that 
operation. 
 
That’s not good. Those kinds of line-ups shouldn’t be there. 
And I know last winter, Mr. Speaker, the government side 
labelled one of the Liberals as a two-tier person about two-tier 
health, and they tried to make a lot of hay out of that, Mr. 

Speaker. But I suggest to you that two-tiers would be better 
than what we have now. 
 
We have one tier for those people that actually go down to the 
Mayo Clinic. They can go down to any place in the States or 
Alberta or Manitoba and just fork out the cash, Mr. Speaker, 
because they have it. That’s one tier. 
 
Then we have another tier for the people who are close to the 
hospitals. 
 
Then we have another tier for those people that live out in rural 
Saskatchewan. Places, Mr. Speaker, where they’re told, take 
this patient into Regina. So the patient is loaded into an 
ambulance, comes to Regina, is turned down at the Plains — no 
room. Sent down to another hospital in Regina, Mr. Speaker — 
we have three now so there should be lots of room — sent down 
to another hospital in Regina — no room. And they’re taken all 
the way back home by ambulance to come back another day 
and try again. That is not good enough, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s much like our game lottery for hunting where you try one 
year and another year and another year, and you keep putting in 
your name hoping to get a game licence if everything hasn’t 
been shot out by people who hunt without licences. But that’ll 
be for another chapter as well. 
 
So that kind of health care, Mr. Speaker, is not good enough. 
These line-ups are not good enough. The people who created 
medicare in Saskatchewan, if they saw these line-ups, would be 
spitting in their graves, Mr. Speaker. They set up a medicare 
with the wish that when people who are ill they would get 
service. 
 
I talked about the young lady that I was mentioning here in 
Regina who was waiting for the kidney transplant. You can just 
imagine the pain and suffering that these kinds of people go 
through — the frustration of waiting for an operation. And we 
say one of two things, we say well you have to check with the 
health boards. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the government created that system. They 
are responsible for that system. They appoint people to those 
boards. They need to take responsibility for the way the system 
works and for the people they appoint. They also are the ones 
who decide how much money goes into the system. And yet 
somehow they can sit back and say it’s not our responsibility. 
 
They stand some place between Ottawa and the elected health 
boards. And I think we’ll have to call people who are in 
government dealing with the health situation, we’ll have to call 
them gappers — gappers, Mr. Speaker. They’re in that gap 
between the federal government and the health boards where 
there seems to be nothing because they don’t seem to take any 
responsibility for anything. So I think from now on they will be 
the gappers in the twilight zone. 
 
It just isn’t good enough to have those kinds of line-ups in our 
health care system. 
 
Mr. Minister, I would like to take a little bit of time to look at 
some of the situations that are happening in my constituency 
and bring those to the attention of this House and to see if there 



March 16, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 151 

are things in the Speech from the Throne that are going to 
address some of the concerns and the needs from the 
communities in my constituency. 
 
My constituency — as I believe you’re aware, Mr. Speaker, 
having been in it this last summer dealing with the students — 
is probably one of the more exciting rural constituencies in 
Saskatchewan. Exciting because things are fairly positive there, 
as positive as they can be with this kind of a government. 
 
We have, for example, in my constituency, Mr. Speaker, a very 
large number of dairies who are responsible for supplying most 
of the milk products for this province. Dairies that are critical to 
this province. And yet I think, Mr. Speaker, often the people 
who operate those dairies aren’t given enough credit by those 
people who open a carton of milk in the morning and pour it on 
their cornflakes. 
 
Because those people are working there in those dairies and 
they’re at it at 4 or 5 in the morning, they start again at 2 in the 
afternoon, seven days a week, 365-and-a-little-more days in a 
year. It is a very difficult job. A job that has very few times 
where they can just say this is my time, I’ll just leave it alone. 
It’s something they can’t do. 
 
We have in my constituency, Mr. Speaker, poultry operations in 
the Hague and Osler area, poultry operations in the Dalmeny 
area. Good operations, large operations that are doing very well. 
And I would hope, Mr. Speaker, that as this government goes 
through their Speech from the Throne and the budget situations, 
that these people will find that their operations are such that 
they can keep those going and hand those down to their children 
and their grandchildren. Because the quality of facilities that 
exists in my constituency, Mr. Speaker, in those areas is a 
quality that can be handed down. These are not dilapidated 
farms that need to be abandoned. 
 
We have hog operations in my community, Mr. Speaker. Hog 
operations that are successful. Hog operations that are 
independent family units that are operating very well on their 
own who are taking care of their marketing in Saskatchewan, 
out of the province, their facilities, their materials, their 
equipment, bring it in from wherever they need to bring it in, 
Mr. Speaker, to make sure that the operations are a success. 
 
And probably it would be remiss not to mention the grain 
operations in my constituency. As you are well aware, we had 
the opening of CAN OAT recently. It’s already in need of an 
expansion. Some of the best oats in the province, Mr. Speaker, 
is grown in my constituency, and I must say some of the best 
oats is seeded in my constituency and is seeded with much 
delight. 
 
Also many other grains and many varieties of things are seeded 
and grown in my constituency. Some of the best seed farms that 
win yearly awards are there, and so the quality of farming in my 
constituency is next to none. 
 
And at this time, I’m going to have to just take a minute or two 
and give this government one compliment. It will be just one 
today. In another chapter, we may continue. But this 
government did see fit to do some twinning of highways in my 
constituency, areas of highways where people were being 

killed. It’s just too bad, Mr. Minister, that there are other areas 
in this province where people are still being literally slaughtered 
on the highways and the twinning isn’t happening. 
 
When we look at the personal cost, the individual cost, the 
family cost of those kinds of accidents that have been 
happening out there . . . I actually, Mr. Speaker, had an NDP 
come to me out of another constituency and tell me — this is 
about three weeks ago, at a service station, and he just came 
piling up to me and he says — Heppner, I get so mad when you 
talk to me about . . . Heppner, I get so mad . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The hon. member will recognize that in the 
House we are not to refer to other hon. members or ourselves by 
our proper names but only by the positions that we hold in the 
Assembly here, and I’m sure that the hon. member will want to 
rephrase that appropriately. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well this stranger 
came up to me and said to me, you make me so angry — and 
I’m leaving out the expletives — every time I hear you talk 
about that, expletive deleted again, divided highway in your 
constituency. You’ve said there’s more important things to do. 
 
And I said I know he’s an NDP because I happen to know his 
history. I also happen to know he’s an NDP because he has the 
same philosophy as government seems to have to have, because 
people are being slaughtered out there and that’s not good 
enough. Because the costs are not just in the people who die on 
our highways, Mr. Speaker. The costs are greater than that. 
Those people are being injured. 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, when I get to that section we’ll deal with 
again. And that’s the section on SGI (Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance) and the people who are injured on our 
highways, injured in traffic accidents. And the care and help 
they’re getting in some cases is: sign up with some spa and get 
some exercises, play in the pool. That’s not good enough, okay. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as I said, there are many things that we’re 
going to deal with. And we will continue to deal with that, but 
at this point, Mr. Speaker, I move that debate now adjourn. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:56 p.m. 





   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................123 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................123 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................123 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................123 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................123 
  Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................123 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................123 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................124 
  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................124 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................124 
  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................124 
  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................124 
  Goohsen .....................................................................................................................................................................................124 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ..........................................................................................................................................................................................124 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Shillington..................................................................................................................................................................................124 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................125 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................125 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................125 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Education Week 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................125 
  Kowalsky ...................................................................................................................................................................................125 
 Letter of Apology 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................125 
 National Francophone Week 
  Kasperski ...................................................................................................................................................................................126 
 The Liberal Party of Saskatchewan 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................126 
 Z99 Fund-raiser 
  Trew ...........................................................................................................................................................................................126 
 Jean Charest and the Liberal Party 
  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................126 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 SaskPower President’s Severance Package 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................127 
  Lingenfelter ...............................................................................................................................................................................127 
 Examination of Channel Lake 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................128 
  Lingenfelter .......................................................................................................................................................................128, 130 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................129 
  Romanow ...................................................................................................................................................................................129 
 Saskatchewan Health Information Network 
  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................129 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................129 
 Medical Research Funding 
  Haverstock.................................................................................................................................................................................130 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................130 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 Resignation of MLA for Saskatoon Eastview 
  Pringle........................................................................................................................................................................................131 
  Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................133 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................134 
  MacKinnon................................................................................................................................................................................134 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
ADDRESS IN REPLY 
  Johnson ......................................................................................................................................................................................135 
  Murrell.......................................................................................................................................................................................136 



 

  Stanger .......................................................................................................................................................................................138 
  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................142 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................144 
 


