





























































Hansard: May 11, 1998


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1063 
 May 11, 1998 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have 
a petition to present on behalf of residents of Saskatchewan. 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures to this petition come from the 
community of Wawota. I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present today. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions come from my constituency — the communities 
of Heward, Stoughton, Bienfait, and Corning, Mr. Speaker. I so 
present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 
 
And as is in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The communities involved, Mr. Speaker, are Arcola and 
Kenosee Lake. I so present. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
a petition from people that have signed it from across 
Saskatchewan, and I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

I so present. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well on 
behalf of citizens concerned about the impending closure of the 
Plains hospital. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 
 

Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from Regina, 
Stoughton, and Weyburn, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I also have a petition to present 
today: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
People that have signed this petition are all from Stoughton. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
present a petition of behalf of Saskatchewan people this 
afternoon concerning the Plains Health Centre and the 
moratorium. This petition comes from the Regina, Pense 
areas of Saskatchewan. I’m pleased to present on their behalf. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am proud to rise 
again today on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan to 
present a petition. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from the 
communities of Melville and Lemberg. I so present. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
petitions on behalf of citizens who are concerned about the 
closure of the Plains hospital. The prayer reads as follows. Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 



1064 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 1998 

Those who have signed these petitions, Mr. Speaker, are from 
communities of Gainsborough, Carievale and Estevan. I so 
present. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, it is my sad duty today to rise 
with petitions from citizens concerned about crumbling health 
care in this province under the NDP (New Democratic Party), 
particularly the issue of the impending closure of the Plains 
Health Centre. Your petitioners this afternoon all come from the 
town of Lemberg. I so present. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I join my colleagues in 
presenting a petition on behalf of people in the communities of 
Ituna, Melville, Kelliher, and Goodeve concerned about the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre and the health care system 
in this province. I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
again on behalf of citizens who are seeking justice for men and 
women who have lost spouses in work-related accidents. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to have the Workers’ 
Compensation Board Act amended for the disenfranchised 
widows and widowers of Saskatchewan whereby their 
pensions are reinstated and the revoked pensions 
reimbursed to them retroactively and with interest, as 
requested by the statement of entitlement presented to the 
Workers’ Compensation Board on October 27, 1997. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

The signatures today are from Saskatoon, from Kenaston, from 
Aberdeen, Wynyard, and Warman. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Good afternoon, Mr. Speaker. I continue 
today to present petitions on behalf of people concerned about 
the double-laning of No. 1 Highway. These petitions today 
come from the community of Cabri, Saskatchewan and I’m 
happy to present them on their behalf. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly on the 
following matters: to fund the twinning of the 
Trans-Canada Highway; to save the Plains Health Centre; 
and to put a moratorium on the closure of the Plains Health 
Centre. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on Wednesday next move first reading of a Bill, the child 
protection Act. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

The Speaker: — Hon. members, we are honoured today to 
have 17 special guests who are seated in the Speaker’s gallery. 

These guests are all Saskatchewan Olympians from the 1998 
Olympics in Nagano, Japan, the 1998 Para-Olympics in 
Nagano, and the 1997 Special Olympics in Toronto. We want to 
recognize them in the legislative chambers today. 
 
In just a moment I will invite the Premier, the Leader of the 
Opposition, and the Leader of the Third Party to make a few 
brief remarks. And following their remarks, the athletes will be 
each introduced individually by their own MLA (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly). 
 
I’ll now recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It 
is indeed my pleasure, as I’m sure it is for all of those 
participating today, to join with my colleagues in recognizing 
and paying tribute to a very special group of Saskatchewan and 
Canadian athletes and officials, a group that we proudly call the 
Olympians, the Saskatchewan Olympians. And after question 
period a further presentation and ceremony in the lobby, with 
tea in room 218, and tonight they’ll be honoured with a dinner 
at Government House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that some of those here with us today 
had the opportunity to stand on an Olympic medal podium, 
some more than once. And I know I speak for all of us when I 
say how proud I was to see those athletes, some of them 
carrying small Saskatchewan flags — for me that was 
particularly heart-warming — receiving the medals that they 
earned in the highest arena in the highest form of competition. 
 
But the proudest moment of all was to see the flag of Canada be 
raised and to hear “O Canada” played and to be sung, and to see 
these wonderful people, all of them representing this province, 
this nation, so well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do not believe that we are here today only to 
celebrate victories; those glorious but fleeting moments that 
dazzle us like a camera flash glinting off a gold medal or a 
silver medal or a bronze medal. Rather I believe our purpose 
here is to recognize and celebrate the greater values these 
athletes represent — commitment, dedication, perseverance, the 
pursuit of excellence. And it’s entirely right and proper that we 
do this. 
 
The writer Thackeray observed that the next best thing to 
achieving excellence is to recognize and to appreciate it. And to 
truly appreciate this excellence, we must appreciate the effort 
behind it. 
 
Of course it’s easy to appreciate when we see some of the 
tangibles — medals and records and the actual performances. 
But we must also appreciate the things that we didn’t see — the 
hours, the months, the years of practice and training, family 
sacrifice, and personal sacrifice. 
 
And we must appreciate not only the things we didn’t see, but 
the things that we can’t see, qualities like determination, 
commitment, and discipline. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one more quotation. Ovid said once: “There is no 
excellence without difficulty.” I think he’s right: no excellence 
without difficulty. That’s partly why we’re here today — to 



May 11, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1065 

recognize that difficulty, to honour it, and to thank those people 
for enduring it in the pursuit and in the ultimate achievement of 
excellence. Because the excellence we see in these very special 
Saskatchewan-Canadian citizens, reflects well on all of us. 
 
The excellence we see here today and honour here today, 
reminds all of us of what we can be, and indeed we have been. 
We see in them, refined and refocused, the Saskatchewan 
values of determination and commitment, perseverance and 
resolve — the same values which enabled us to build our great 
province, to build our great country, the best in the world, and 
values which will enable us to move forward into the next 
century with strength and confidence. 
 
And so on behalf of the people of the province of Saskatchewan 
and my colleagues in the government, I want to thank these 
people, these special citizens. I say to these Olympians, for their 
commitment to such a high, high purpose, thank you, and well 
done. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
great honour to add a few words of tribute of these great 
athletes and coaches today. I don’t think I’m the only one in this 
Assembly who suffered a severe case of sleep deprivation in 
February during the Nagano Olympics. More than a few nights 
I found myself up at 2 or 3 in the morning cheering on our great 
Canadian team. And I was filled with a sense of pride, as I 
know all Saskatchewan residents were, that so many of the 
Canadian team hailed from our own province. In fact I 
remember in particular a night earlier in the Nagano Games 
when after a Saskatchewan athlete had claimed gold, the 
commentator pointed out that the province of Saskatchewan 
now laid claim to more Olympic gold medals than did the 
United States. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they showed us, they showed the world, that this 
province of 1 million people can produce world-class athletes 
that stand second to no one. And even though many of our 
Saskatchewan athletes now live and train in other parts of 
Canada by necessity, they still represented Saskatchewan with 
great dignity and honour. And I would like to thank them for 
that in particular. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when you speak of dignity and honour, there 
is no better example than the athletes who competed in the 
Para-Olympics and the Special Olympics. The skill and courage 
these athletes showed the world is a testament to what all of us 
can achieve with dedication and determination no matter the 
obstacles that have been put in front of us by life. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of my caucus and all those people in 
Saskatchewan we represent in this Assembly, I congratulate all 
the athletes we honour today. And I know that all Saskatchewan 
residents will have plenty more to cheer about when our 
athletes take to the world stage once again, both in the 2000 
Summer Olympics in Sydney and the 2002 Winter Games in 
Salt Lake City. And I look forward to the day when we can 
gather to honour those athletes as well. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is also my privilege 
to extend congratulations not only to the Olympic athletes with 
us today but to all of the fine people from Saskatchewan who 
participated in Nagano and Toronto. Your hard work and your 
dedication and success have made the entire province very, very 
proud of you. 
 
Our caucus followed your games, your trials, and your triumphs 
very closely. You are following in the footsteps of so many 
great Saskatchewan and Canadian athletes who have also 
participated in the different Olympic ventures. They too had 
many trials and tribulations. 
 
At this time, I would just like to take us back a little bit in 
history to an earlier Winter Games. It was the year 1924, the 
very first official Winter Games. The Games were just outside 
Paris, France, at a town called Chamonix. I would like to share 
with you a few notes made by Harry Watson who played left 
wing for Canada’s ice hockey team. 
 
They had to travel eight days by ship to reach England. After 
the first full day on the ship, only five players made it to 
breakfast. One of the players, Duncan Munroe, was so ill he 
was afraid he was going to die. The next day he was so ill, he 
was afraid he was going to live. When they finally settled in 
France, they found out that there were no boards around the 
rink. Goalies were not allowed to fall down on their knees, and 
in the final game the team with the oldest captain got to choose 
the end they wanted. 
 
Those were different times and different trials. Nonetheless, 
Canadians persevered and brought home the Olympic gold. 
This is a tradition that has continued and is the reason we are 
gathered here today to celebrate the accomplishments of each 
and every one of our Olympians. 
 
I would like to share a quote from Walt Disney, Mr. Speaker: 
“If you can dream it, you can do it.” I think that quote, in many 
ways, epitomizes what each of you has accomplished. It takes 
years of perfecting your abilities to be able to represent Canada 
internationally, whether your sport is curling, skiing, speed 
skating, hockey, or snowshoeing. It has meant countless hours 
away from homes and families and it has meant hundreds and 
hundreds of hours devoted to practice. 
 
I would also like to quote the Special Olympics Athletes’ Oath: 
“Let me win. But if I cannot win (then) let me be brave in the 
attempt.” 
 
Every athlete here today is a champion in their own way. They 
strove to win the right to represent Saskatchewan and then 
Canada at the Olympics, and they were successful. They have 
followed their dreams to the top. I know that they are an 
example to many, many of our young people that they too can 
make their dreams come true. You are proof that hard work and 
determination is a way to achieve whatever you put your mind 
to. 
 
I’d like to again offer congratulations not only on behalf of our 
caucus and our constituents, but all the people of Saskatchewan. 
Saskatchewan residents have joined the Premier in doing that. 



1066 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 1998 

You have made every one of us very, very proud of you. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — We’ll now introduce each individual 
Saskatchewan Olympian. And I ask the Olympians to stand 
while being introduced by your own MLA, and then to remain 
standing for the applause that I know you’re going to receive. 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my privilege 
to introduce to the Assembly, Ms. Sandra Schmirler, skip of the 
gold medal women’s curling team at the Winter Olympics. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my privilege 
today to introduce to you, Ms. Jan Betker, who is the third on 
the gold medal-winning women’s curling team. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my privilege 
to introduce Joan McCusker, who is the second on the gold 
medal women’s curling team. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my privilege 
to introduce to the Assembly Ms. Marcia Gudereit, the lead of 
the gold medal women’s curling team. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you again, Mr. Speaker. It is my 
pleasure this time to introduce to you Ms. Atina Ford, who is 
the alternate on the gold medal women’s curling team. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Curling is obviously big in my riding and it 
is my pleasure to introduce to you Ms. Anita Ford, who is the 
coach of the team. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Stanger: — Mr. Speaker, it is a great privilege to introduce 
to the Assembly Ms. Fiona Smith, member of the silver medal 
women’s hockey team at the 1998 Winter Olympics. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my privilege to 
introduce to the Assembly Ms. Hayley Wickenheiser, member 
of the silver medal women’s hockey team. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my privilege to 
introduce to the Assembly Ms. Catriona LeMay Doan, gold 
medal winner in women’s speed skating for the 500 metre track, 
and bronze medal for the 1,000 metre track. 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Murray: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my privilege 
and my pleasure to introduce to the Assembly Mr. Mark Knoll, 
competitor in long track men’s speed skating. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my privilege to 
introduce to the Assembly Mr. Benoit Morin, member of the 
mission staff at the 1998 Winter Olympics. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Jess: — Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to introduce Ms. 
Marny Winder, alpine skier who won silver in super G and 
bronze in GS slalom at the Winter Para-Olympics at Nagano, 
Japan. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Jess: — Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to introduce to the 
Assembly Mr. Dale Winder, alpine skiing guide for the Winter 
Para-Olympics in Nagano, Japan. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is indeed my 
pleasure and great privilege to introduce to the Assembly Miss 
Kelly McRuvie, torch carrier and gold and silver medal winner 
in the 1,000 metre speed skating at the 1997 Special Winter 
Olympics in Toronto. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — It is my privilege to introduce to the 
Assembly Ms. Margaret Forgay, snowshoeing at the Special 
Olympics. She won the silver medal in the 4 x 100 metre relay, 
the bronze medal in the 100 metre; she was fourth in the 200 
metre, and fifth in the 400 metre. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
privilege to introduce to you and to members of the Assembly, 
Ms. Jo Anne Lautermilch, who competed in Alpine skiing at the 
Special Olympics and won the silver medal in Super G, the 
bronze medal in downhill skiing, and fifth in grand slalom. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if you don’t mind, I would just want to say to 
members of the House, she really is my special Olympian. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s also my pleasure to 
introduce Ms. Roxanne Arndt who competed in cross-country 
skiing at the Special Olympics, and she won the gold medal in 
the 500 metres and the silver medal in the 1 kilometre race. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today it’s an 
honour to introduce to you and through you to members of the 



May 11, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1067 

Assembly, some very close relatives of mine and good friends: 
my mother’s sister, Daisy, and her husband, Dave— aunt and 
uncle Dave and Daisy Harries. And they’re seated in your 
gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Not wanting to take up too much time but I 
know they are sitting close to proud parents. I had to squint a bit 
with these old eyes to see friends from United Church camp 
days, Mr. and Mrs. Arndt, who are also seated beside them in 
the Speaker’s gallery. 
 
And finally to ask members to join with me in welcoming the 
Olympic dancers from Grade 7, W.F. Ready School in the 
constituency of Regina Wascana Plains. I know they’ve been 
practising and want to pay special tribute to the athletes today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. This truly is a day for introductions and I would like to 
introduce some other very important men, special guests, who 
are here with us today to kick off Saskatchewan Mining Week. 
And I’d ask them to stand and perhaps we could welcome them 
after I’ve introduced them all. 
 
Mr. Phil Reeves, the Saskatchewan Mining Association; Mr. 
Harvey Haugen, of Big Quill Resources; Mr. Bruce Lambert 
from the Estevan Coal Corporation; Mr. Gordon Forbes from 
Agrium; Mr. Howie Stoughton from IMC Kalium in Colonsay; 
Mr. Kent Cahoon of PCS (Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 
Inc.) in Lanigan; Mr. Lou Coderre of Big Quill Resources; Mr. 
Moe Davyduke of PCS for Cory and Patience Lake division; 
Mr. Josef Spross of Cameco Corporation; Mr. Rick Kusmirski, 
also from Cameco; Mr. Doug Barnstable from the Estevan Coal 
Company; and finally, Mr. Norm Beug from IMC Kalium 
Canada. 
 
Please join with me in welcoming all these distinguished folks 
to the Assembly. They do some very good, positive work for us 
in the province and we wish them well in their future 
endeavours. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we are 
privileged to have with us today, seated in the east gallery, two 
very highly esteemed members of the aboriginal community, 
Mr. Ahab Spence and his wife Bette. Mr. Spence has taught 
senior Cree classes as well as humanities 250 at the 
Saskatchewan Indian Federated College for the past 18 years. 
And in 1982 Mr. Spence was a recipient of the Order of 
Canada, and in 1995 he received the Aboriginal Achievement 
Award. 
 
I happened to meet Mr. and Mrs. Spence at the 1997 Canadian 
parliamentary conference held here in Regina, and since then I 
have benefited greatly from their knowledge, their support, and 
their advice in conjunction with my efforts in fighting the 
exploitation of children through the child prostitution trade. 
 
As well and most importantly, I treasure the friendship of Ahab 

and Bette. I ask you, Ahab and Bette, to please stand and be 
recognized by the Assembly. And I ask all the members of the 
Assembly to acknowledge our guests with a warm round of 
applause. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I too would like to 
recognize Ahab and Bette Spence. Since recognition has been 
done already in English, Mr. Speaker, I’ll do it in the Cree 
language. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
people of North Battleford, I also want to welcome Fiona Smith 
here this afternoon. Although Fiona was raised in Edam, she 
graduated with my daughter from North Battleford 
Comprehensive High School and her parents are now residents 
of North Battleford, so we also claim a share of the Olympic 
glory. Welcome, Fiona. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to 
introduce to the Assembly two well-known business people 
from south-west Saskatchewan: Ivan Eng from the Four 
Seasons Resort in Cypress Hills — many of you will know Ivan 
— and also Gerry Pickel, a successful business person with the 
Massey corporation at one time, past council member of the 
town of Shaunavon council. 
 
I want to welcome them here today. I’m sure all members will 
join with me in greeting them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to 
introduce to the Assembly a number of members of the 
Saskatchewan Credit Union system who are seated in the west 
gallery and who are here to participate in the first reading of the 
new credit union Act. Welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Sitting in the east 
gallery, if my eyesight isn’t failing me, I’d like to introduce to 
you and through you to the Assembly, Maria and Henri Lepage 
from Gravelbourg I believe, if you wouldn’t mind standing. 
Henri Lepage is the mayor of the town of Gravelbourg. I’d just 
like everybody to welcome them here this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Saskatchewan Mining Week 1998 
 
Mr. Ward: — It is my pleasure to inform the Assembly that 
May 11 to 18 has been declared Saskatchewan Mining Week. 
We have many reasons to be proud of this industry. 



1068 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 1998 

Saskatchewan has a tremendous diversity of mineral wealth. No 
other province in Canada has such vast reserves of potash or 
uranium. We also have significant coal, base metals, gold, and 
industrial minerals. These resources and the people who mine 
them are integral to Saskatchewan’s continued economic 
well-being. 
 
Last year, the mining industry sold 2.2 billion worth of product 
and earned 219 million in resource royalty tax revenues for the 
people of Saskatchewan, which this government uses to fund 
essential services like education and health care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me commit to this House right now, that this 
government fully intends to grow the mineral industry even 
farther. Saskatchewan is the world’s number one supplier of 
potash and uranium and we intend to keep it that way. This 
government believes in the mining industry and the jobs and 
communities that can depend on it. And we will do what we can 
not only to preserve it, but to see it grow and prosper. 
 
Let me finish by congratulating the SMA (Saskatchewan 
Mining Association Inc.) for all the work they do in promoting 
this important Saskatchewan industry. And I ask all members to 
join with me in wishing the SMA a very successful 
Saskatchewan Mining Week. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Child Care Week 
 

Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today is the first day 
of Child Care Week in Saskatchewan. 
 
There are many issues that members of this Assembly disagree 
on, but clearly we can all agree that our children are our most 
precious and vulnerable members of our society. In his or her 
early years a child’s world is very small. It is made up of 
parents, brothers and sisters, and possibly a child care worker 
that parents entrust with the care of their child.  
 
Because the child’s circle is so small, these individuals play an 
important role in a child’s development, which in turn has a 
direct effect on the rest of their lives. That is why the role of the 
child care worker is without a doubt one of the most important 
jobs in our society. Yet unfortunately it is one that is not always 
recognized and valued. 
 
I think it is entirely appropriate that this week, the week 
following Mother’s Day, has been set aside to express our 
gratitude and appreciation to those individuals who devote their 
life to nurturing and caring for our children. 
 
In today’s world it is becoming increasingly difficult for 
mothers and fathers to stay at home with their children on a 
full-time basis and that is why they need to have quality child 
care programs to turn to. 
 
I would also like to take this opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to say 
that we need to do more as a society to assist families who 
choose to have either a mother or father stay at home with their 
children. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Women’s Groups Receive Grants 
 
Ms. Stanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I recently had the 
pleasure of presenting grants of $14,000 as part of the women’s 
organization on-line program to two women’s groups in 
Lloydminster, the Lloydminster Sexual Assault Centre and the 
Lloydminster Metis Women. 
 
The Lloydminster Sexual Assault and Information Centre 
provides counselling services for the victims of sexual abuse 
and it also delivers public education, training, and support 
programs as well as operating a small sexual assault crisis line. 
 
The Lloydminster Metis Women build a bridge between 
cultures to support Metis women and their families, to provide 
Metis women with the skills and the self-confidence necessary 
to succeed in a paid workforce, and to take their part in 
everyday life and in society. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these two organizations do important work in 
Lloydminster and I would like to take a moment to 
acknowledge the people who are working so hard to help others 
in unfortunate circumstances. In particular, I would like to 
thank Muriel Ralston, Elizabeth Huether, Ada Schell, Sharon 
Bielecki, Joanne Marlatt, Shauna Zellweger, Rhonda 
Whitstone. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

File Hills Agency Health Building Plans 
 

Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 
share with this Assembly and my colleagues that on Friday I 
attended a sod turning ceremony for a $1.4 million File Hills 
Agency health building. 
 
This facility at Okanese First Nations is scheduled to be 
completed in October and will house child and family services, 
home care, and a national native alcohol and drug addiction 
program. 
 
These services, created and offered in the spirit of care and 
cooperation, will be an asset for all those involved. I would like 
to take an opportunity to thank those people for their hospitality 
and commend the five bands that made this project a reality. 
They consist of Chief Irvin Starblanket of the Star Blanket 
Band; Chief Clarence Bellegarde of Little Black Bear; Chief 
Eugene Poitras of the Peepeekisis Band; Chief Marie Anne Day 
Walker of the Okanese Band; and Chief James O’Watch of the 
Carry the Kettle Band. 
 
I would also like to acknowledge the efforts of Art Walker, 
executive director of File Hills Agency, and everyone, all the 
people that worked behind the scenes, to bring this project to a 
fruition that will benefit not only people in the area presently 
but for future generations. And that is our most valuable 
resource — our young people. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



May 11, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1069 

Saskatchewan Elocution and Debate Association Model 
Historic Legislature 

 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also had the 
pleasure on the weekend of spending some time with some 
young people. This Assembly in fact was a host to the 
Saskatchewan Elocution and Debate Association model historic 
legislature. 
 
I was quite impressed by it. I have to tell you that the member 
for Cannington on Saturday — or the young member for 
Cannington — gave a passionate speech about the need to 
improve and strengthen labour unions. The member for Arm 
River had become a hippie and was speaking out against the 
Vietnam War. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I was very pleased that I got to be the 
Speaker. Things were going great. Then, unfortunately, they 
told me it was 1964 and I had to be a Liberal. Then the Liberals 
that were on this side of the bench did what Liberals do and 
brought in — yes — user fees, the first Bill. Mr. Speaker, it was 
all downhill from there, I’m afraid. 
 
But I want to say that the young people who did come out this 
weekend did just a fantastic job of debating the issues that were 
before them and I suspect that from them there is a very good 
crowd of future legislators. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Multiple Sclerosis-related Events 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Saskatoon residents rose to the occasion 
once again, Mr. Speaker, when 575 strong turned out for the 
MS (multiple sclerosis) walkathon. It was a special Mother’s 
Day for those of us who have children with multiple sclerosis. 
 
This year was the 50th anniversary of the MS Society. The goal 
was to have 500 people participate for the 50th anniversary and 
raise $50,000. Well I’m delighted to say that this goal was 
surpassed on every front. 
 
Yesterday was also the first anniversary of my oldest 
granddaughter being able to walk with grandma and grandpa for 
6 kilometres. We had a terrific time and any concerns I had 
about Carson being old enough to go the distance were quickly 
put aside as I watched her run most of the time; and quite 
frankly it was grandma who had a hard time getting over the 
finish line. 
 
Another important event occurred last week with the second 
anniversary of the MS neuro-science centre in Saskatoon. The 
occasion was marked by a very special announcement. Dr. 
Walter and Mary Hader, both of whom have spent years 
working in the field of multiple sclerosis, have established a 
bursary to encourage students to do research in neurology. 
 
I’d like to take this opportunity to encourage everyone to 
contribute to this important undertaking and to thank one and 
all for the support they provided me in my MS Walk for a Cure. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

National Nursing Week 
 
Ms. Murray: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. May 11 
to 16 is National Nursing Week. This year’s theme is, 
appropriately enough, “Guiding the future of a profession.” 
Eighty-one years ago this province passed legislation creating 
the Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ Association. Today there 
are 9,200 registered nurses in Saskatchewan. 
 
Nurses play a vital role in Saskatchewan health care. As their 
knowledge, education and duties have expanded, their 
profession has become integral to health care delivery. I am 
confident in our nurses’ ability to adapt and improve their 
profession as health care continues to evolve. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Mining Week 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
be able to rise today to comment on Saskatchewan Mining 
Week and to welcome the SMA representatives that are with us 
today. 
 
This morning we had an excellent opportunity to watch a video 
about mining in Saskatchewan plus the opportunity to see the 
demonstrations by Saskatchewan science students in dealing 
with mining. They were all excellent. 
 
In particular interest though, was a demonstration by the grade 
4 from Humboldt on the operation of a potash mill. This young 
lady understood the mill and exactly how it operated and was 
able to explain it all in detail. She will make an excellent CEO 
(chief executive officer) for a mining company in very short 
order. Chuck Childers had better watch out. 
 
Congratulations to the students from Leader, Swift Current, 
Moose Jaw, La Ronge, and from Humboldt on their 
demonstrations. I would also like to wish the Saskatchewan 
mining industry success and profits for many years to come. 
Yours is truly an integral part of the Saskatchewan way of life. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Challenges for Agriculture Industry 
 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My questions this 
afternoon are for the Minister of Agriculture or his designate. 
 
Mr. Minister, Saskatchewan is right in the middle of our most 
important economic development project, spring seeding. 
Despite the highest provincial income taxes in western Canada, 
NDP offloading that pushed those local property taxes higher 
every year, and the driest spring soil conditions in more than a 
decade, farmers across this province are putting in their crop. 
But this year there’s reasons to believe that things might not 
turn out as well as we hope. This year’s grain prices are down 
and there’s a threat of drought stealing the crop. 
 
What, Mr. Minister, are you doing to prepare for either a 



1070 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 1998 

drought-induced crop failure or significant decreases in farm 
income because of low commodity prices? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Speaker, we know that at this 
time of the year when we have had very little snow and in a 
large part of the province the spring rains haven’t come yet, that 
there’s a certain amount of anxiety in the farm community. 
 
I was out looking at my own alfalfa that was seeded last fall 
that’s peeking up like this this morning. But it’s only May 11 
and there’s ample time for rainfall to come that will salvage the 
situation yet. 
 
In the meantime, we’re carefully monitoring the situation and 
we will be giving all the support that we possibly can to the 
farmers in that very important industry in this province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Minister, have you indeed been talking to your 
colleagues in Ottawa about a contingency plan, either case of 
drought or low commodity prices if they persist? Madam 
Minister, have you had any discussions or has the Department 
of Agriculture to your knowledge had any discussions with the 
federal Minister of Agriculture, Mr. Vanclief? And have you 
talked to people within the PFRA (Prairie Farm Rehabilitation 
Administration) organization? Have you raised any concerns 
with Ralph Goodale about the very dry spring moisture 
conditions here in Saskatchewan? And have you taken any 
actions at all to prepare for what could potentially be a very 
disastrous farm season? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Speaker, of course there are at 
this time, as there always are and particularly this season of this 
year and at this juncture in the crop year, ongoing general 
discussions about the welfare and future of the farm economy 
with the federal government, with their counterparts across the 
country. 
 
But again I say that it is too early in the year to talk of doom 
and gloom and that there is optimism as well in the farm 
community about a good year, and it’s May 11, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Doctor Shortages 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
for the Minister of Health. Mr. Minister, a new study by the 
college of family physicians of Canada shows that Canada is 
facing a shortage of family doctors and Saskatchewan could be 
among the hardest provinces hit. Clearly more and more 
Saskatchewan doctors are choosing to leave to other provinces 
or to the U.S. (United States). 
 
Mr. Minister, Saskatchewan is already facing a health crisis. 
Ninety-one per cent of the Leader-Post readers think NDP 
health reforms are failing. And this survey suggests it’s only 

going to get worse as more hospitals close and more doctors 
leave. 
 
Mr. Minister, what specific plans do you have to deal with this 
problem and how are you going to keep Saskatchewan doctors 
here when your health care system is failing? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker. To 
the member opposite, as the member well knows that in this 
province we just completed signing an agreement with 
physicians. That agreement for the next three years is worth 
about $48 million. And as the member knows, the agreement 
also includes two very important aspects — one is the 
recruitment and the other is the retention of physicians in the 
province which the Saskatchewan Medical Association gave us 
their commitment that they would assist us in providing. 
 
Since the signing of the agreement at of January 1, I want to say 
to the member opposite that we have now seen a very slight 
increase in the number of specialists that are practising in 
Saskatchewan. And we’re also seeing a very small growth in 
the number of general practitioners that are practising in the 
province which is part of the initiatives of the programing that 
we put together over the last couple of years to add additional 
enrichments to Saskatchewan for physicians. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Minister, your agreement doesn’t seem to be helping a lot. Pull 
your head out of the sand. The NDP health reform is a complete 
disaster. The overwhelming majority of Saskatchewan people 
think the health care system is deteriorating. Hospitals are 
closing, waiting-lists are growing, and doctors continue to 
leave. 
 
This survey is just one more indictment of the NDP’s 
destruction of the health system. If the health system is working 
as well as you say it is, why are so many Saskatchewan doctors 
saying they’re going to leave? You are closing even more 
hospitals, including the Plains; patient waiting-lists are getting 
longer with over 6,600 people now waiting; doctors continue to 
leave. 
 
Mr. Minister, when are you going to admit your NDP health 
care is in crisis and what are you going to do to stop the exodus 
of doctors from Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I want to answer the 
question on behalf of the government to say that the notion 
which is propagated day in and day out by the opposition that 
the health system in Saskatchewan is in crisis, is inaccurate by 
every objective statement that is made. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not only is it inaccurate, but as the Minister of 
Health has just explained, we’ve initiated new programs with 
respect to rural physicians and the retention of rural physicians; 
and is not accurate to say, as he has said, that there’s a departure 
or mass exodus of doctors. 
 
But I tell you what is accurate to say. The national government 



May 11, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1071 

in Ottawa, the Liberals, cut $7 billion from health care 
nationally since 1995. He says we’re responsible — you’re 
right. We’ve back-filled every penny of that cut from Ottawa 
and we’ve added $19 million more to the base in the face of all 
of these cut-backs and we have the leading edge reforms in 
health care right now. 
 
What the hon. member ought to do is take it up with a few of 
his former Liberal colleagues, now members of the Tory Party 
here, and take it up with the Liberals and tell Ottawa to stop 
savaging medicare. That’s what we’re doing. We’re trying to 
prevent it, we’re trying to build it up, we’re going to make it the 
best in the 21st century. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Plains Health Centre Closure 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Premier. Mr. Premier, the Saskatchewan 
Party is continuing to call for a free vote on the future of the 
Plains hospital. Last Tuesday the NDP blocked this motion 
from even being debated, much less voted on. However, we will 
be moving this motion again tomorrow. This time there will be 
a debate. The only question is, will you allow a vote to take 
place? Will you allow a vote . . . that vote to be a free vote? 
 
Mr. Premier, the Saskatchewan people want MLAs to stand in 
their place and declare where they stand on the future of the 
Plains hospital. Will you allow a free vote to take place 
tomorrow? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, on private members’ 
day, private members speak their thoughts and they vote to the 
way they speak by their thoughts. But when the hon. member 
opposite talks about a free vote, it would be very, very 
interesting and important if he admitted that he would practice 
what he preaches. 
 
Because without giving his constituents a chance for their free 
vote, he jumped from the Liberals to the Conservatives. And all 
the Conservatives, without giving them a chance to give their 
voters a free vote, they jumped and they formed a 
dead-of-the-night Tories by any other name party, that sits over 
there. 
 
And you talk about a free vote on health care. Then I ask you to 
tell your policy consultant, the man who is making $24,000 a 
year off taxpayers, $24,000 a year, your policy consultant — 
Mr. Hermanson. If he wants a free vote, let him go out there to 
Saskatoon Eastview for a free vote. Do that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, if 
skating around the question were an Olympic performance, I 
think that would have been a gold medal performance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Premier, there was a free vote conducted 

by the Leader-Post over the weekend. Ninety-one per cent of 
the Leader-Post readers say NDP health reforms have made the 
health system worse — 91 per cent, Mr. Premier. No wonder 
you won’t allow a free vote on the future of the Plains hospital. 
 
You are clearly on the wrong side of this issue. Mr. Premier, all 
you have to do is take the muzzle off your members; allow 
them to vote freely; let them vote on behalf of their constituents 
and keep the Plains hospital open. 
 
Mr. Premier, will you allow a free vote on the future of the 
Plains hospital? And will you allow that vote to take place 
tomorrow? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I ask the Leader of the 
Opposition, will he allow a free vote, right now, to the people of 
Canora constituency for what he did when he betrayed them? 
Will you allow the people of Canora to have a free vote? I ask 
the hon. member there, will you allow the people to have a free 
vote? 
 
The hon. member . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. All hon. members 
. . . Order. Order, order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I know how 
it is when they get . . . they are so allergic to the truth here, they 
are so allergic that they get this reaction which is going on. 
 
I asked the hon. member here . . . He tells me about muzzling 
our members. Our members aren’t muzzled. He muzzles 10,000 
voters in the Canora constituency on this issue. 
 
Now look. If you want a free vote, then I ask you to ask your 
policy consultant, the man who is making $24,000 a year of 
taxpayers’ money. I see him in the gallery all the time over 
coffee break. Get Mr. Hermanson to come down from the 
gallery and get him to have a free vote in the Saskatoon 
Eastview by-election. And let him speak on where the $7 billion 
cut comes from, from the Liberal Party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Health District Deficits 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, it appears that at least one 
health district is preparing to dig in its heels and prevent this 
government from slashing any more local health care services. 
I’ve been advised that the Southwest Health District will be 
announcing in the coming days a $200,000 deficit. I’ve also 
been told that the board cannot cut services any further. They 
refuse to cross the line, and now plan on carrying this deficit 
into the next year. 
 
The board is now awaiting a response from the Health 
department. Mr. Minister, what immediate steps are you taking 
to resolve this issue and to ensure no cuts take place in the 
district? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To 
the member opposite, as the member knows that the district 
health boards across the province have just recently received 



1072 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 1998 

their allocations for 1989-90, are in the process now of 
determining what level of services — or ’98-99 — are in the 
midst of developing their strategies in terms of what level of 
services they’re going to be providing across the district. 
 
The department is working very closely with each of these 
district health boards across the province to ensure that the level 
of services that they’re going to be providing to people in each 
of their districts will be equitable and fair and fashionable, and 
to ensure that each of the people who live in each of those 
districts receive the quality of care that will be essential for the 
delivery of those services in each of the districts, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, the Liberal opposition revealed 
in this House last month that the Regina Health District faces a 
$5 million funding shortfall this year. We’ve now learned that 
the district’s operating deficit for the current fiscal year is $1.9 
million — $600,000 more than first projected. 
 
Health district CEO Glenn Bartlett says additional operating 
dollars are needed if the board hopes to reduce the workload of 
front-line staff. Mr. Minister, Bartlett says he’s been discussing 
this problem with your department and expects an answer by 
the end of this month. 
 
Mr. Minister, health services have already been slashed to 
unacceptable levels. What is your response going to be? How 
are you going to help the Regina Health District address its 
severe cash crunch without cutting further services? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know where the 
member is spending most of his time over the last six or seven 
months, but clearly it hasn’t been reading the budget for 
1998-99. Nor has he been paying any attention to the 
investment that we’ve made in health care in this province. 
 
I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that in Saskatchewan today we spend 
$1.72 billion on health care, which is the largest single 
expenditure in this province by a country mile ever, Mr. 
Speaker, ever. 
 
And I say to the member opposite: if he makes the argument 
today that $1.72 billion is not enough money for district health 
boards to function, then I say to the member opposite, get out 
your pen and pad, write to the people in Ottawa who have cut 
our health care funding — which are your Liberal cousins who 
have cut their funding to Saskatchewan and across the country 
by $7 billion over the last several years — and have them place 
another additional injection of funding for the people of 
Saskatchewan and the rest of Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if the Minister of Health 
won’t accept that I’m saying they need the extra funding, listen 
to your own health districts who are telling you that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many districts which are in a deficit 
situation — Southwest, Living Sky, The Battlefords, East 
Central, and of course Regina and Saskatoon. The minister 
provided $30 million in additional funding for districts in the 

provincial budget, but these funds will not improve health care; 
they’ll simply allow some districts to tread water. 
 
Mr. Minister, last fall the Liberal opposition urged the Minister 
of Health to develop a plan to help address the fact that this 
government is underfunding our districts. Mr. Minister, you’ve 
had months to develop such a plan. Will you table that plan in 
the House today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know whether 
the hon. member fully understands what’s happening in the 
legislative process here. But we introduced a budget about a 
month ago and the budget tabled a health care expenditure for 
this year alone of $1.7 billion, the highest health care 
expenditure in the history of Saskatchewan since 1905 — 
one-third of the yearly expenditure on health care. 
 
We not only back-filled every penny that your federal Liberal 
cousins withdrew from us, we added a hundred million dollars 
to boot to the health care system. And we’re getting the 
cooperation of people in order to reform the system to make it 
the best. 
 
You want to do something positive on the health care 
operation? Then you get your good friend Jim Melenchuk, the 
good doctor, and you to write a letter right now wanting the 
restoration of the $7 billion that the Liberals took away from 
health care. Write that letter today and give it to the Conrad 
Black press and they may just print it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Melville Child Protection Case 
 

Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
residents of Melville are still in a state of shock following the 
death of Corinne Walchuk and the fact that her estranged 
husband was charged with her murder. Last week the courts 
granted the accused access to the two children, in spite of the 
fact that he is charged with the murder of their mother. 
Fortunately, the children are now safely with their maternal 
grandparents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the father came within a few hours of gaining 
unsupervised access to the children. It’s been three days since 
the children were rescued by the maternal grandparents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to ask the Minister of Social Services: on 
Friday your ministry assured the grandfather things were going 
to be taken care of. Nothing has happened. Why is your 
ministry doing so little to help these children? What assurance 
can you give us today to the grandparents that you will protect 
the interest of these children? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1430) 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the member for 
raising the question. My understanding, following events on 
Friday and throughout the weekend, was that officials of my 
department were closely in touch with the circumstances; that 
we’re anticipating at least making an intervention to ensure the 



May 11, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1073 

protection of the children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if that has not been the case, I will seek to get that 
information to the member this afternoon. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This situation here 
clearly, clearly underlines the need for greater protection of our 
children. I’m told that the seven-year-old son is so frightened 
that he’s been hiding under his bed for most of the weekend. 
These two children fell through the cracks, Mr. Minister. 
 
The Liberal opposition supports the Office of the Children’s 
Advocate, and now it’s even more apparent that the office needs 
some real teeth when it comes to helping children when the 
system fails them. 
 
This case is a prime example. Lucky for these children they 
have grandparents that love them and a community that stood 
behind them. And I would just like to send over to the minister 
some of the documentation — in the very short period of time 
— that came to me from those concerned people. 
 
We need somebody to stand up for them when the system fails. 
The Liberals will introduce the child protection Act that will 
add teeth to the Children’s Advocate office. Will you support 
such an Act, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Point number one, Mr. Speaker, let me 
say this again: I will have reviewed by my department 
immediately after question period the exact course of events 
which happened on Friday. It is my understanding that the issue 
of discussion in Melville on Friday was the issue of the court; 
the court made a decision. 
 
It was my understanding the department officials were 
intervening for the protection of the children. I repeat: if that 
did not occur, Mr. Speaker, we’ll find out immediately after 
question period. 
 
Now to the member’s final question. Of course I’m not going to 
commit to any legislation which we haven’t seen. But just to 
remind that member and all members, there is no government in 
Canada, no government in Canada, including the federal Liberal 
government, that has taken such dramatic steps to protect 
children and enhance their well-being. No government like this. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Child Prostitution 
 

Ms. Julé: — Mr. Minister, my questions today are going to be 
for the Minister of Justice and it is my hope that actions not 
taken by the Minister of Social Services will be taken by the 
Department of Justice. 
 
Mr. Minister, Manitoba Justice Minister Vic Toews has put 
forward legislation requiring police to seize vehicles used for 
prostitution-related offences. And the only way those vehicles 
would be released is if the accused provides a security deposit 
equal to the value of the vehicle. If convicted, perpetrators 
would lose their vehicles and their security deposit in addition 

to facing criminal consequences. 
 
Now both Alberta and Manitoba have taken concrete action to 
fight this deplorable activity. What has Saskatchewan done? 
Saskatchewan has hung up posters. 
 
Mr. Minister, I am imploring you as well as the Premier and 
your entire caucus to show us some leadership through similar 
strong action. Pass the Bill I have put forward, or formulate one 
of your own that is equally as strong in order to protect 
Saskatchewan children enslaved through the child prostitution 
trade. 
 
Will you do that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, again the member stands 
in this House and belittles the work of community agencies, 
individuals, organizations and groups across this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, she seems to have it in her head that one small 
change to legislation is miraculously going to lift the children 
off of the streets of Saskatchewan or Canada. Mr. Speaker, I tell 
you that’s not going to work. What will work, and what we’re 
being told by the people who are working on the streets, is 
resources at the street level to work with those children, to work 
with their families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have said to that member on a numerous number 
of occasions in this session that we are studying her Act. We are 
taking her Bill, we’re communicating with the community, 
we’re discussing it with them. 
 
If I may say, Mr. Speaker, the response is not unanimous. There 
are many who would oppose that piece of legislation. Simply 
lifting up legislative proposals that have been done in Alberta or 
done in Manitoba, hoisting them on to the people of 
Saskatchewan is not the solution, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, doing 
nothing is not the solution either. By its very inaction, this 
government is in effect condoning sexual abuse of children by 
pimps, johns, and pedophiles. How much longer, Mr. Minister, 
will child victims be subjected to the destruction of their minds, 
their bodies, and their spirits, to a potentially slow death 
through HIV (human immunodeficiency virus) and other 
diseases, to the pain of exploitation? 
 
Mr. Minister, when will Saskatchewan and our legislators send 
a clear message and take concrete measures to let the rest of 
Canada and the world know that we will go to any lengths to 
protect and enhance the lives of our greatest treasure, our 
children? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, in this budget debate, 
which we are not engaged in, the member will know and all 
members will know there is an amount of $750,000 dedicated to 
working with these children on our streets — $750,000, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s an increase of $500,000 — an increase of half a 
million dollars from last year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Those funds are being directed to use with community-based 



1074 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 1998 

organizations, with individuals and organizations who are 
actually on the streets — who, by the way, participated with us 
and fully supported the poster campaign which she belittled just 
moments ago. Mr. Speaker, that’s a tremendous resource to be 
investing in the children who are being abused on our streets. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is not helpful, it is not helpful — and I can tell 
her this — it is not helpful when the member stands in the 
House and belittles these people who are giving so much of 
their lives, so much of their time, so much of their own resource 
to this tragic situation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is quite 
amazing to recognize that other provinces know that this is a 
many faceted problem, as does Saskatchewan. People here that 
are in the know, know that there are many measures that must 
be taken to combat this problem. 
 
Funding of street teams is, of course, important. Other 
provinces have recognized that. We need to do that, but we 
need to bring in legislation that will certainly, certainly cause 
some deterrent for the pimps and johns that prey on our 
children. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, we have the chance to do that right now. To 
take action to save our children. My question is, do you have 
the will and the compassion in your heart to do it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, we as government are 
anxious on all fronts to find those solutions which work. We 
don’t need solutions which don’t work. We need solutions 
which do work. 
 
It is our conviction that the solutions that will work are those 
solutions which are born in the communities where the problem 
exists. That is why, Mr. Speaker, we will work 100 per cent of 
the time with those people who are right there on the front lines, 
not trying to grab political headlines by making legislative 
change. 
 
We have taken the proposals that have been introduced in 
Manitoba. We’ve taken the proposals that the member has 
introduced which are almost identical, if I may say, to the 
Alberta legislation. We’re talking with those various groups and 
individuals, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I can report today, the opinion of Saskatchewan people is by no 
means unanimous and there are many, many legal questions. I 
and this government, Mr. Speaker, want stuff that works. What 
works in this case is working with people at the community 
level. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 46  The Credit Union Act, 1998 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 46, The 
Credit Union Act be now introduced and read the first time. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 47  The Saskatchewan Insurance 
Amendment Act, 1998 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 47, The 
Saskatchewan Insurance Amendment Act, 1998 be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 59 — The Jury Act, 1998/ 
Loi de 1998 sur la jury 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 59, The 
Jury Act 1998 be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 60 — The Wildlife Act, 1998/ 
Loi de 1998 sur la faune 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 60, The 
Wildlife Act, 1998 be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 61 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation 
Amendment Act, 1998, (No. 2)/ 

Loi no 2 de 1998 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la 
réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et des jeux de 

hasard 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 61, The 
Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 1998 (No. 2) 
be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 62 — The Highway Traffic 
Amendment Act 1998 (No. 2)/ 

Loi no 2 de 1998 modifiant le Code de la route de 1996 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Minister, I move that Bill No. 62, The 
Highway Traffic Amendment Act, 1998 (No. 2) be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

House Recess 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Before orders of the day, Mr. 
Speaker, I move, by leave of the Assembly: 



May 11, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1075 

That this Assembly do now recess until 4 p.m. this 
afternoon in honour of Saskatchewan's Olympians. 

 
I so move. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Speaker: — Now, hon. members, during the recess, 
members and guests will have an opportunity to meet our 
Saskatchewan Olympians at a tea held in their honour in room 
218; and at 3:15 there will be a presentation ceremony in the 
main rotunda just outside the Assembly. Following the 
presentation, the grade 7 Olympic dancers from W.F. Ready 
School in Regina will perform also in the rotunda. 
 
I will ask the Sergeant-at-Arms to have the bells rung at 3:55 to 
call the members back and the House will resume sitting at 4 
o'clock. This House now stands in recess. 
 
The Assembly recessed for a period of time. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Finance 
Vote 12 

 
The Acting Chair (Mr. Whitmore): — I would like to ask the 
minister to introduce his officials that are here today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes. Thank you, Mr. Chair. With me to my 
immediate left is Bill Jones, who is the deputy minister of 
Finance; and to his left is Bill Van Sickle, who is the executive 
director of administration in the Department of Finance. And 
directly behind Mr. Jones is Kirk McGregor, who is the 
assistant deputy minister of taxation and intergovernmental 
affairs in the Department of Finance. 
 
Behind me is Len Rog, who is the assistant deputy minister in 
the revenue division of the Department of Finance. And right 
behind the Provincial Secretary is Jim Marshall, who is the 
executive director of economic and fiscal policy in the 
Department of Finance. 
 
Subvote (FI01) 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And, Minister, and 
officials from the Department of Finance, welcome here this 
afternoon. 
 
Minister, what I’d like to do if that would be a logical way of 
operating, you have about seven or eight categories on the 
expense side, different sub-departments if you like, on the 
expense side and as well the potential of talking about the 
revenue side. What I’d like to do is start talking and asking 
some questions about the revenue side. 
 
First of all, on taxation. There is a number of types of taxes that 
the province collects. The province is estimating something like 

1.26 billion will be taken through the provincial income tax 
system this year. Can you tell me what the breakdown will be in 
specific areas? For example, can you tell me, of that total 
amount, what would be the basic provincial income tax? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, the estimate is $1.26 billion from 
income tax, Mr. Chair. And in answer to the member’s 
question, of that, the estimate is $925.3 million would be from 
the basic Saskatchewan tax. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister, and maybe to make 
the process simpler, could you give me the breakdown with the 
other areas — for example the 2 per cent flat tax, the debt 
reduction surcharge, and the high income surcharge — how that 
full amount breaks down? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes. As I said, basic Saskatchewan tax — 
$925.3 million; Saskatchewan flat tax — $311.7 million; low 
income reduction — this is a negative figure so you might want 
to, Mr. Chair, the member will want to put into brackets — 
$49.9 million in brackets; high income surtax — $38.2 million; 
debt reduction surtax — $64.8 million; unapplied tax it says, I 
guess it’s sort of miscellaneous income tax — $5 million. 
Maybe that’s the member’s tax bill, Mr. Chair. And there’s 
some very minor items that I won’t go into, but that’s basically 
it. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. I think we both can 
only wish. Can you tell me, Minister, how these individual 
amounts would compare to the last fiscal year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes. With respect to the basic 
Saskatchewan tax . . . Well I should start actually . . . let me 
start this way. The revised forecast for last year for personal 
income tax is 1.327 billion. This year the estimate is 1.262 
billion for a reduction in income tax receipts to the Government 
of Saskatchewan of about $65 million. But I should explain that 
of that $65 million reduction in personal income tax estimated 
this year, there is a prior year’s adjustment of $29.7 million 
which, as I understand it, would be due to an overpayment last 
year. So that in other words, the federal government gave us too 
much money and now they will take it back. So to put it another 
way, it would appear that about $36 million overall reduction, 
but I think I’ll go through them individually because it might be 
easier. 
 
Starting with basic Saskatchewan tax, last year it’s estimated 
now that we took in . . . will take in $949.8 million; this year, as 
I said, $925.3 million, for a reduction of $24.5 million. I would 
point out to the member in that regard that in 1999 that 
reduction would be doubled in the sense that the income tax 
reduction introduced in the budget took effect July 1 so you 
could calculate next year’s reduction on that basis, roughly. 
 
Saskatchewan flat tax, as I said, this year will be estimated 
$311.7 million; last year we think it will be about $303 million, 
so that would be an increase of $8.7 million. Low income 
reduction — that’s the negative figure — this year low income 
earners get that reduction of 49.9 million. As I said before, last 
year it was 49.6 million, also a negative figure, for a difference 
of $300,000 more reduction this year if, Mr. Chair, you can 
have more of a reduction. 
 



1076 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 1998 

High income surtax this year, as I said, we will take in $38.2 
million. Last year it was $39 million — for a reduction of 
$800,000. 
 
Debt reduction surtax this year projected to be $64.8 million, as 
I said. Last year was 63.4 for an additional amount this year of 
$1.4 million. 
 
Miscellaneous has gone from $5 million this year . . . Last year 
it was 8.2 million for a difference of $3.2 million less this year. 
 
And there are some other minor figures that I won’t go into 
because I think that answers the member’s question, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. Yes it does. In a 
general sense then — and I don’t need the specific numbers for 
each breakdown — is there trends that are developing or is 
there a concern in your department because you certainly see a 
bit of a trend down pretty much across the piece? Does your 
department do an analysis of these trends in an attempt to see if 
they are following any kind of a general direction? Or what’s 
your evaluation of the downward turn? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — No. In answer to the member, Mr. Chair, 
the Department of Finance is not concerned about the fact that 
we will be taking in less income tax in the sense that income tax 
has been reduced in 1995 and 1996, and again in the 1998 
budget. So the fact that we take, you know, somewhat less from 
each individual is not a concern. 
 
Overall the economy continues to grow. So even though the 
individuals may pay less tax individually, collectively we’re 
still getting more income tax, except for the prior year’s 
adjustment of approximately $30 million. And that’s something 
that the department has planned for. 
 
So the department has planned to reduce income tax 
expenditures . . . or I’m sorry, receipts. We knew we would be 
getting less money. That’s a deliberate policy of the 
government on the income tax side, and we knew that there 
would have to be this adjustment because we were overpaid by 
the federal government last year. 
 
So these are things that we have planned for, taken into account, 
and therefore not matters of concern. They’re what was 
expected. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Minister, I have a few more questions 
in this area and my colleague would like to ask a question, from 
Humboldt, and then I’ll pick this up again. 
 
In terms of the income tax, what I hear you saying, Minister, is 
that the reduction in growth dollars is the result of the rate being 
reduced. Has the actual base amount then, where the calculation 
is based on, has that actually increased? And I understand that if 
the percentage that you’re calculating is less, that would result 
in less income potentially, and you indicate that the 
department’s planned for it. But has our base increased? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I’m advised that we expect the base to 
grow, Mr. Chair, by roughly about 3 per cent this year. But 
because of the reduction in tax we . . . and some of the other 
changes in the budget, I would imagine. There’s the personal 

income tax reduction but there’s some other changes occurring 
too. We expect the base to grow, people to be earning more 
money in the province, by about 3 per cent. But we expect the 
income tax that we will charge on what they earn to be less. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Welcome to 
your officials, Mr. Minister. I have just a couple of questions 
put to me by some constituents. Many, many people are saying, 
Mr. Minister, that the cost of living is certainly going up a great 
deal in the past few years. They are bombarded by taxes, people 
are finding it very hard to find profit at the end of the day in 
order to feed their families and to maintain a healthy lifestyle. 
 
Mr. Minister, the question put to me was, is there any 
possibility that there would be an increase in the personal 
income tax deduction within the next few years. Is that the 
responsibility of the provincial government or the federal 
government, or how is that calculated and who determines it? 
 
(1615) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I thank the member for the question, Mr. 
Chair. Changes to the tax base are under the control of the 
federal government and we don’t have the right, by virtue of 
our agreement with the federal government, to make them 
unilaterally. That would be different in the province of Quebec 
in the sense that they made a decision years ago not to have 
Revenue Canada collect their taxes. Which we could do too, but 
if you elect to have Revenue Canada collect your tax, then 
you’re also bound by their rules. And so that’s the situation that 
we’re in and every other province is in also except the province 
of Quebec. 
 
So we can adjust the rate of taxation. We can say that our 
percentage of the basic federal tax will go from 50 per cent to 
48 per cent, for example, as we did this year. But we can’t 
increase the personal deduction or bring in tax credits of various 
kinds without the consent of the federal government. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Okay, thank you very much, Mr. Minister, for that 
response. And I’m taking it from what you said then, that there 
is nothing within the parameters of provincial jurisdiction that 
could increase that personal deduction? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — That’s correct. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. In terms of the 
general category of individual income, the debt reduction 
surcharge, this year you told me $64.8 million. As the name 
implies at least, this money is directly targeted to the reduction 
of the debt. Can you tell me if that indeed is the case? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, Mr. Chair. In answer to the member’s 
question, the revenue from the debt reduction surtax is paid into 
the General Revenue Fund. And then . . . But I will say this in 
addition, that this year it’s estimated that we will take in, as I 
said, about $64.8 million debt reduction surtax. But we also 
estimate that we will reduce overall government debt by about 
$301.9 million. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Where will the 300-and-whatever-odd 
million dollars come from that reduces the debt by that amount? 
 



May 11, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1077 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Chair, in answer to the member’s 
question, I would refer the member to page 69 of the budget 
document. And the total debt of the government — I said a few 
minutes ago that the debt, government purpose debt, would go 
down by about $301.9 million, that is the government purpose 
debt, but the overall debt will be reduced by about $500 million 
this year — and that is detailed, as I said, on page 69. 
 
The Crown corporation debt will be reduced by about $430 
million, by my calculation very quickly, while the other debt 
will be reduced from 415 million to about 366 million. Overall 
the debt will go from 12.1 billion to 11.6 billion for a reduction 
of about $500 million. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — So without the benefit of the details of the 
calculations, the vast majority of the dollars that are going to 
the reduction of debt are coming from the Crowns. That would, 
I assume, be by way of the dividends pay-down of principal and 
liquidation of assets, one-time asset sales. 
 
On the General Revenue Fund side, can you tell us if the $64.8 
million was used to reduce the General Revenue Fund debt? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — To repeat, Mr. Chair, the debt reduction 
surtax is estimated to be bringing in this year about $65 million 
and we will be paying down the overall debt of the government 
— of the province, of all of us, by about $500 million. 
 
So our position would be that we’re paying down the debt far in 
excess of the debt reduction surtax. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — But I think clearly by your statement a 
couple of questions ago you said that, as I recall and quickly 
jotted down, over $400 million is coming from the Crown debt 
reduction. Can you tell me is that . . . how’s that broken down 
in detail? How much of that amount is sale of assets which are 
one-time debt reduction opportunity? And how much is by way 
of dividends and/or profits and/or principal debt retirement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Chair, I would refer the member again 
to page 69 of the budget document, because you will see that 
it’s difficult to give a simple answer to the question — for this 
reason, that if you look at the document you will see that there 
are at least three kinds of debt. There is the gross debt of the 
Crown corporations which are being reduced in the amounts 
indicated. There is general government debt. So that the Crown 
corporation debt is going down, as I indicated before, the 
general government debt is going down. But what you have to 
remember is that there’s also guaranteed debt. That is being 
reduced on the Crown side and otherwise. 
 
(1630) 
 
Also there are sinking funds where money is set aside to pay 
debts. And in the Crown corporations, the sinking funds are 
being reduced over the year from 811 million to 518 million, 
presumably because they’re actually using some of the money 
to pay down debt rather than debt that is due. 
 
But on the general government side, the sinking funds are going 
from 254 million to 317 million. So in addition to the reduction 
in government debt that I referred to before and that is outlined 
here, we have to bear in mind that we’re putting more equity in 

sinking funds to pay off debt on the general government side. 
And that has to be taken into account as well. 
 
And all of which is to say that when you get into the numbers it 
is a bit complicated. And I acknowledge that and it’s difficult to 
say, when money is going into the General Revenue Fund and 
it’s pooled, which of that money is going to pay down debt 
immediately, which of it is going into sinking funds, and so on. 
 
But I would repeat the point that when you take into account the 
fact that money is being set aside to pay debt in the future — 
which are sinking funds — and when you take into account the 
other matters that we’ve talked about, the overall debt will be 
reduced by about $500 million over the course of the year. And 
the debt reduction surtax is only about $65 million this year. 
 
So clearly, most of the debt payments will in fact come from 
other areas — areas other than the debt reduction surtax. But 
certainly that tax going into the General Revenue Fund is 
obviously going to affect the amount by which the province can 
pay off debt or put monies into the sinking fund to pay off debt 
in the future, because otherwise that money wouldn’t be 
available to pay debt. 
 
So I apologize for that rather longwinded answer, Mr. Chair. 
But it’s a fairly complex matter and it’s the only manner at this 
time that I can think of to answer the member’s question. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. And I think it’s clear 
that we can quite easily separate the Crown debt and the Crown 
sale of assets and the Crown dividends from the general 
revenue. 
 
The question to hopefully simplify it: is it the commitment of 
the government to apply the money collected under the specific 
purpose of debt reduction, in this case $64 million, is it the 
commitment of the government that at least that amount of 
money goes from the General Revenue Fund into direct debt 
reduction? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Let me say to the member, Mr. Chair, that 
one of the things that we’ve been most successful at as a 
government, I would argue, is reducing the amount of the debt 
of the province. 
 
In 1993, the debt that we had was equal to 70 — that’s seven 
zero — per cent of the gross domestic product, which is all the 
goods and services we produce. Today that figure is down to 
about 45 per cent of the gross domestic product. So our debt, as 
a percentage of what we produce, has gone down quite a bit. 
 
We were paying 19 cents on the dollar in debt, interest charges 
on the debt; today we are paying 14 cents. Our debt was $15 
billion; today it’s $12.1 billion. When we talked to the 
investment bankers and the bond rating agencies and so on, as I 
recently had the opportunity to do, they are of the opinion — 
these are not people from Saskatchewan or people involved in 
any of our political parties — they’re of the opinion that the job 
this government has done in terms of debt reduction is — they 
will tell you — remarkable. They think that it’s a major success. 
 
And so what I’m trying to say to the member, Mr. Chair, is that 
last year and this year we will reduce the overall debt of our 



1078 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 1998 

province — for which all of us are responsible — by $1.2 
billion. We will go from 12.1 billion at the present time to 11.6 
billion at the end of this fiscal year. We will make very, very 
large payments on the public debt; as we’ve done in the past, 
we’ll continue to do. 
 
So the fact that we collect 66 or $65 million for debt reduction 
is far, far less than what we will actually pay to reduce the debt. 
We will reduce the debt by half a billion dollars in this year 
alone. 
 
So I would argue, Mr. Chair, without trying to be 
argumentative, that we’re doing a good job paying down debt. 
Some would argue we do it too quickly; I wouldn’t make that 
argument. Certainly we will pay down the debt far, far more 
than the $65 million that will come in from the debt reduction 
surtax. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. And I too will not get 
into a debate with you on the details. However, you did indicate 
to me that by far of the amount of debt that’s being reduced in 
this past year — and I suspect and you can correct that if it’s 
not the case — that the vast majority of the dollars that have 
been used to apply against debt have come from the Crown 
sector. Is that true? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I can advise the member, Mr. Chair, that 
both the Crown corporation debt and the General Revenue Fund 
debt is tax-supported debt. And both of those debts are debts 
that we have to take some serious steps to reduce, as we’ve 
been doing. 
 
Certainly the reaction of the bond rating agencies and the 
investment bankers to the way in which we’re handling our debt 
has been very positive. They have said that we are doing the 
right things when it comes to trying to reduce the overall debt 
that we have. And as the member will know, we’ve had three 
credit rating upgrades in the last few years, and Moody’s 
recently said that they are adjusting the outlook for 
Saskatchewan from stable to positive. So they think things are 
going in the right direction as well. 
 
And I can’t really add much more than I added before — that 
we’re reducing the Crown corporation debt, we’re reducing the 
general government debt. Some of that money will come from 
Crown corporations obviously, some of it will come from the 
General Revenue Fund. The numbers are all laid out on page 69 
of the budget document, and I would invite the member to 
examine those numbers. 
 
The main point I think I would make about the upcoming fiscal 
year is that the debt will be reduced by about half a billion 
dollars. And that’s a very significant reduction in debt, and 
certainly something that will put us in a much better position in 
the future. 
 
So we do want to continue paying down debt. So far our record 
has been very good. We’ll endeavour to continue to reduce the 
debt as much as we can while still maintaining the programs 
that are so important to the people of the province. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Minister, you referred to the fact that we’re 
going to plan to reduce the debt about a half a billion dollars. If 

I remember your comments a moment ago, you said about 430 
of that would come from the Crowns and some will think in the 
magnitude of 70 from the General Revenue Fund for the total of 
the half a billion dollars. Is it true that something in the 
magnitude of $430 million is debt reduction by way of the 
Crowns? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well the numbers are all laid out, as I say, 
on page 69 of the budget document, and if you look at that 
document you can see all of the Crown corporations debt by 
Crown corporation listed, and specifically the amount by which 
each is going to be reduced; or in a few cases the debt of some 
of the Crowns is going to be increased because of capital 
activities. 
 
And you can see that the guaranteed debt is going to be 
reduced, the equity and sinking funds on the Crown side would 
be reduced, and the general government’s side would be 
increased. So that I mean you could look at the fact that Crown 
corporation debt, just looking at that figure, is going from $4.5 
billion to $4.06 billion. But on the other hand, as I tried to 
indicate a few minutes ago, you have to realize that equity in 
the sinking funds for the Crowns is decreasing from 811 million 
to 518 million. 
 
So that you have to take that into account. Whereas on the 
general government side, the debt, the debt of the government, 
is going down not as much. But on the other hand, the sinking 
funds are being increased by about over $60 million and that 
has to be taken into account as well. 
 
But the sinking funds to the Crown corporations are being 
decreased by almost $300 million. So I’m simply making a 
point that all of those things have to be factored in together. 
 
But the bottom line is that the total debt is going to be reduced 
from $12.1 billion to $11.6 billion — a reduction of $500 
million. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — I accept the overall amount and I recognize 
that you have to make the adjustments between the general debt 
and the amount that’s applied to the sinking funds to get an 
overall picture of what’s happening in both the Crown sector 
and the general revenue side. 
 
The point I’m trying to make: is there something in the 
magnitude, if you take the pluses and minuses adjusting for the 
sinking funds of that $500 million, is it reasonably fair to say 
that in excess of 400 million of that is going to come through 
the Crown sector and less than $100 million of the 500 million 
is going to come through the general revenue sector, 
recognising the need to make the adjustments because of the 
adjustments to the sinking funds? 
 
(1645) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Chair, I’d like to make these points in 
answer to the member’s question. As the member can see by an 
examination of page 69 of the budget document, the gross 
general government debt — that is the General Revenue Fund 
debt — is going from $8.17 billion to 7.97 billion, which is a 
difference of approximately $190 million. So general 
government debt is going down by about $190 million. 



May 11, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1079 

If we then look at sinking funds to pay down debt, the sinking 
funds on the general government side are going from $254 
million to $317 million, which is a difference of another 
approximately $63 million. 
 
So the point I’m making to the member in answer to his 
question, is that on the general government side — as the 
member will see if he examines the budget document — the 
general government debt will be reduced by 102 . . . I’m sorry, 
$192 million. Plus another $63 million will be set aside, 
approximately $63 million will be set aside in sinking funds to 
pay debt. So the member can do his own calculations. 
 
But the point is, and I repeat this point, on the Crown side — 
because the member is trying to say that most of the Crown 
debt is being paid — the document also shows that while the 
Crown corporation gross debt is going from 4.5 billion to 4.07 
billion approximately, which is a big reduction, the sinking 
funds are being reduced by approximately $300 million. 
 
So I think if the member examines those figures, as I know he 
has — but we’ve just had an opportunity to review them — the 
member will see that in the upcoming year we will reduce 
Crown corporation debt, yes. But we will also reduce the debt 
of the General Revenue Fund, the general government debt. 
And both of those will be reduced in a very significant way. 
 
And at the end of the year, the end of this fiscal year, we will 
have reduced the debt of the province by half a billion dollars 
— half a billion dollars. Last year we reduced the debt of the 
province by $700 million. You can look at the figures in various 
ways. You can pick out one line of different documents. But the 
bottom line will be this, the bottom line will be that over the 
course of last year and this year, we will reduce the debt of the 
people of the province by 10 per cent. We will pay off a full 
$1.2 billion in debt. 
 
Last year a big chunk of that. This year another half a billion 
dollars. And the debt is steadily going down. Last year we paid 
about $760 million just in interest payments. This year that will 
go down to 725 million, and next year it will be less again — I 
think closer to about 700 million. It used to be 860 million. 
 
So we’re going in the right direction. And all of the independent 
observers confirm that — that we should keep doing what we’re 
doing. And we are going to make very significant debt 
payments. We’re going to pay the debt down, both the Crown 
corporations and the General Revenue Fund. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Minister, using your numbers, over the past 
two years of overall debt reduction of $1.2 billion, how much of 
that total is by virtue of sale of assets? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Chair, in answer to the question, we 
received about $700 million a few years ago on the sale of the 
Cameco shares — and I’m mentioning that because I think it’s 
one of the things the member would be thinking about — but 
that sale was in the fiscal year 1996-97. And the two-year 
period that I’m referring to is the ’97-98 and ’98-99 period. And 
the money from the sale of the Cameco shares was received in 
’96-97, and some of it was paid into the General Revenue Fund, 
I believe in the fiscal year ’96-97. But I’m talking about the 
fiscal years ’97-98 and ’98-99. 

I believe the government netted about $123 million from the 
sale of Wascana Energy shares in the fiscal year ’97-98, and 
$308 million will be received on the sale of the Lloydminster 
upgrader, but I believe that is over the years ’98-99 but not 
’99-2000. But it was my understanding we were receiving 
money in the General Revenue Fund over the course of two 
years, not all in one year. 
 
In any event, there are four fiscal years perhaps involved, 
maybe three, and so it’s difficult to answer the question, what 
out of those sales during the two fiscal years in question comes 
from the sale of those Crown assets. And I think what I might 
like to do is undertake to provide a more detailed explanation to 
the member at a different time because I think the member can 
see that we’re mixing up some fiscal years. 
 
The first one that’s relevant to the question is probably ’96-97. 
But I believe you’re intending to ask me about events in ’97-98 
and ’98-99 . . . or the member is asking, sorry, Mr. Chair, to 
you, to the member, that I think that’s what the member is 
referring to. So hence my difficulty answering the question. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Leave of Absence 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — With leave, I move, seconded by the 
member from Regina Dewdney: 
 

That leave of absence be granted to the members for 
Battleford-Cut Knife, Kindersley, and Melville from 
Tuesday May 19, 1998 to Thursday May 21, 1998 
inclusive to attend the Midwestern Legislative Exchange at 
Columbus, Ohio on behalf of the Assembly. 

 
I so move. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:59 p.m. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1063 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1063 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1063 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1063 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1063 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1063 
  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1063 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1063 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1063 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1064 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1064 
  Haverstock...............................................................................................................................................................................1064 
  Goohsen ...................................................................................................................................................................................1064 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ........................................................................................................................................................................................1064 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1064 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Speaker ....................................................................................................................................................................................1064 
  Romanow .................................................................................................................................................................................1064 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1065 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1065 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................1066 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1066 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1066 
  Kasperski .................................................................................................................................................................................1066 
  Stanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................1066 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1066 
  Koenker ...................................................................................................................................................................................1066 
  Murray.....................................................................................................................................................................................1066 
  Jess ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1066 
  Haverstock...............................................................................................................................................................................1066 
  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................1066 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1067 
  Goulet.......................................................................................................................................................................................1067 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1067 
  Lingenfelter .............................................................................................................................................................................1067 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Saskatchewan Mining Week 1998 
  Ward ........................................................................................................................................................................................1067 
 Child Care Week 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1068 
 Women’s Groups Receive Grants 
  Stanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................1068 
 File Hills Agency Health Building Plans 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1068 
 Saskatchewan Elocution and Debate Association Model Historic Legislature 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1069 
 Multiple Sclerosis-related Events 
  Haverstock...............................................................................................................................................................................1069 
 National Nursing Week 
  Murray.....................................................................................................................................................................................1069 
 Saskatchewan Mining Week 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1069 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Challenges for Agriculture Industry 
  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1069 
  Teichrob...................................................................................................................................................................................1070 
 Doctor Shortages 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1070 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1070 



 

  Romanow .................................................................................................................................................................................1070 
 Plains Health Centre Closure 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1071 
  Romanow .................................................................................................................................................................................1071 
 Health District Deficits 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1071 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1071 
  Romanow .................................................................................................................................................................................1072 
 Melville Child Protection Case 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1072 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1072 
 Child Prostitution 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1073 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1073 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 46  The Credit Union Act, 1998 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1074 
 Bill No. 47  The Saskatchewan Insurance Amendment Act, 1998 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1074 
 Bill No. 59 — The Jury Act, 1998/Loi de 1998 sur la jury 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1074 
 Bill No. 60 — The Wildlife Act, 1998/Loi de 1998 sur la faune 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1074 
 Bill No. 61 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 1998, (No. 2)/Loi no 2 de 1998 modifiant la Loi de 

1997 sur la réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et des jeux de hasard 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1074 
 Bill No. 62 — The Highway Traffic Amendment Act 1998 (No. 2)/Loi no 2 de 1998 modifiant le Code de la route de 1996 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1074 
MOTIONS 
 House Recess 
  Shillington................................................................................................................................................................................1074 
 Leave of Absence 
  Shillington................................................................................................................................................................................1079 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund 
 Finance — Vote 12 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1075 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1075 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1076 
 
 


