





























































Hansard: March 11, 1998


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 35 
 March 11, 1998 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
today to present on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to enact legislation to 
completely ban the practice of night hunting in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks out in 
Liberty, Holdfast, Imperial, and Penzance. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have petitions on 
behalf of the citizens of Saskatchewan. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to enact legislation to 
completely ban the practice of night hunting in 
Saskatchewan. 
 

The signatures on this petition are all from Melfort, Mr. 
Speaker. I so present. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And the people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, are 
from Ogema, Scout Lake, Assiniboia, and all throughout the 
land. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
petitions on behalf of citizens concerned about the Plains 
hospital closure. 
 
And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And those who have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 

communities of Killdeer, Wood Mountain, Rockglen, just to 
name a few. I so present. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise today 
to present petitions on behalf of concerned citizens — citizens 
gravely concerned about the rising increase in crime in our 
society. 
 
The prayer reads: 
 

To the Hon. Assemblies of Canada and Saskatchewan. The 
petition of the undersigned citizens of Canada humbly 
showeth: . . . 

 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. I’ll advise the hon. 
member that in presenting the petition, the only portion that is 
appropriate to present in the House when reporting the petition 
is the prayer itself. And I’ll ask the hon. member to proceed 
immediately to that portion of her petition. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that the 
Parliament of Canada and the legislature of Saskatchewan 
enact legislation and policies to deal with the problem of 
youth crime. 
 

The petition has been signed by citizens from Lake Lenore, 
Humboldt, Kelvington, Prince Albert, Leroy, Saskatchewan; 
Bruno, Saskatchewan and throughout east-central 
Saskatchewan. I so present. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy today to 
present petitions on behalf of the people of the south-west: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reach necessary agreements with other levels of 
government to fund the twinning of the Trans-Canada 
Highway in Saskatchewan so that work can begin in 1998, 
and to set out a time frame for the ultimate completion of 
the project with or without federal assistance. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And these folks today are from Lancer and Portreeve, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
bring petitions forward on behalf of people in their efforts in 
saving the Plains Health Centre here in Regina. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pay. 
 



36 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 1998 

The people that have signed these petitions, Mr. Speaker, it 
appears to be Assiniboia, Fife Lake, Lafleche areas of the 
province. I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order, a petition regarding ongoing 
problems with young offenders, presented on March 10, have 
been reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) is found to be 
irregular and therefore cannot be read and received. 
 
According to order the following petitions have been reviewed, 
and pursuant to rule 12(7) they hereby read and received. 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 
cause the government to reach necessary agreements with 
other levels of government to fund the twinning of the 
Trans-Canada Highway; and 
 
Of citizens of the province petitioning the legislature to 
enact legislation and policies to deal with the problem of 
youth crime; and 
 
Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to act 
to save the Plains Health Centre; and 
 
Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 
cause the government to work with aboriginal and Metis 
leaders in an effort to end the practice of night hunting. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 8 ask the government the following questions: 

 
To the Minister of Intergovernmental and Aboriginal 
Affairs: (1) what annual lease revenue does the province of 
Saskatchewan receive from all sources from the Primrose 
Air Weapons Range? (2) what additional revenue does the 
province of Saskatchewan receive from the Primrose Air 
Weapons Range over and above lease revenues? 
 
What levels of monetary resources, as opposed to human 
resources, has the province of Saskatchewan committed in 
respect to the Primrose Air Weapons Range to the Canoe 
Lake First Nations? What levels of monetary resources, as 
opposed to human resources, has the province of 
Saskatchewan committed in respect to the Primrose Air 
Weapons Range to the Primrose Air Weapons Range 
negotiating committee which represents the Metis of the 
province? 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, what current strategies and 
commitment does the province plan to initiate in the fiscal 
year 1998-1999 to assist in the efforts of the Metis people 
of the area affected by the Primrose Air Weapons Range? 
And further, the question, in the past year how many 
meetings have you personally attended with this 
committee? 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 

shall on Friday next move the first reading of a Bill, the labour 
standards amendment Act, 1998, indexed minimum wage initial 
rate. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker; to you and through 
you to the members of the Assembly, I’d like to introduce a 
number of people that are here in the Assembly today, hoping 
to hear some good news from the government. 
 
In your gallery, Mr. Speaker, we have Bonnie and John 
Stevenson, Diana Rockeye, Katherine and Casey Marquist, 
Debbie Roger, Randy Haynal, Darwin Appell; and Anita 
Powless, I’m sure, needs no introduction to the Minister of 
Health. Also, Mr. Speaker, joining us behind the bar in the 
Assembly today are Terri and Ken Sleeva and Kent and Laurel 
Brace. And I’d ask the Assembly to give them a warm welcome 
please. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, I as well would like to extend a 
special welcome to all of the individuals who have joined us 
this afternoon. Certainly the conditions you’re dealing with are 
something that we’re all concerned about, and I would be more 
than pleased as well to just sit down. We thank you for the 
times we’ve had to visit before, and again, members, would you 
join us in welcoming the individuals that have come here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to introduce to you and through you to the other members 
of this House, Valerie Montgomery-Bull sitting in your gallery. 
She is the daughter of Helen Montgomery. Helen Montgomery 
was the caring mother and grandmother who opened her North 
Battleford home to two young offenders and was consequently 
murdered in December of last year. 
 
Since that time Valerie has become an eloquent spokesman for 
the effort to bring about changes to the Young Offenders Act. 
Would you help me in welcoming her here to this House. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
caucus, and certainly my colleague from the North Battleford, I 
also want to take this opportunity to welcome these two very 
special ladies — Donna Challis and Valerie Montgomery-Bull, 
who travelled all the way from North Battleford to be with us 
today and certainly appreciate your visit. And I’ll ask the 
members to once again congratulate them on visiting the 
Assembly and certainly making an effort to be here. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too want to join 
the member opposite in welcoming Anita Powless and all of the 
folks who are here today in the Assembly. 
 
As you know, Anita and I have had a very close working 
relationship over the last couple of months in working together 



March 11, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 37 

and accomplishing a number of issues that are important for MS 
(multiple sclerosis) patients across the province. And so I 
welcome Anita and look forward to that continued relationship. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Farm Safety Week in Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Langford: — Mr. Speaker, on March 4, Agriculture and 
Food minister, Eric Upshall, and Labour minister, Bob Mitchell 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. Now I’ll have to 
remind the hon. member that . . . Order, order. I know it’s early 
in the session and perhaps some of the hon. members have 
forgotten the rules of the Assembly, but the hon. member I 
know understands not to use the proper names of members, but 
the positions held in this House only, when speaking in the 
Assembly. And I’ll recognize the hon. member for 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 
Mr. Langford: — Mr. Speaker, on March 4 Agriculture and 
Food minister and Labour minister proclaimed the week of 
March 11 to 18, 1998 as Farm Safety Week in Saskatchewan. 
 
Saskatchewan farm families seem to be increasingly aware of 
the potential hazard on farms and are taking precautions to 
prevent accidents. Farm accidents have declined steadily in 
Saskatchewan since 1994, both for adults and children. In 1994 
there were 28 farm fatalities in Saskatchewan. Of those, seven 
were children or youth. In 1997 there were nine farm fatalities, 
and of those, only two were children. 
 
There are three main reasons why the numbers have declined. 
They are: the production of three safety videos for children and 
youth by the Saskatchewan Safety Council; the creation of the 
farm safety team by the Saskatchewan Safety Council; and the 
farm safety calendar contest sponsored by Saskatchewan 
Labour. 
 
The government knows a farm is a great place to grow up and 
live. We are trying to make it as safe as well as we could. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Review of Community Homes Program 
 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday, the 
Minister of Social Services announced a review of the 
community homes program and I congratulate him for that. 
However I am concerned that the minister says that the tragedy 
in North Battleford which sparked this review will not be 
looked at. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the question as to whether Mrs. Montgomery’s 
home was an appropriate place for violent young offenders to 
serve their sentence is quite separate and apart from the issue of 
the guilt or innocence of the youths charged with her murder. 
 
I’m upset that the minister says I’m misleading the province 

when I say that Mrs. Montgomery’s home wasn’t properly 
licensed. I challenge him to produce the licence. I challenge him 
to say that the Montgomery home size met the requirements of 
two youth placements. I challenge him to tell us why the 
liability insurance required for custody homes wasn’t in place. I 
challenge him to tell us what, if any, training and experience 
Mrs. Montgomery had to operate such a facility. I challenge the 
minister to say that the use of private homes for youth custody 
is related to anything more than cutting costs. 
 
When the Liberals proposed using the Dundurn training centre 
for young offenders, the minister refused, saying it wasn’t 
appropriate because it didn’t have sufficient custody and 
supervision. Apparently the minister thinks the Dundurn army 
camp doesn’t have the necessary security but Helen 
Montgomery’s home did. 
 
I am concerned that the minister says that Mrs. Montgomery 
was fully briefed about the youths in her care but declines to 
say whether that briefing included telling her that the Crown 
had opposed the transfer of one girl . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. The hon. member’s time has 
expired. 
 

Battlefords and District Citizens of the Year 
 
Mr. Jess: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A couple of weeks ago I 
took part in an event in North Battleford sponsored by the Lions 
Club, the Co-op, and the local paper. The event was the 30th 
annual Battlefords and District Citizen and Junior Citizen of the 
Year banquet. 
 
The Citizen of the Year award went to . . . one of them went to 
a close friend of mine, John Welykochy. For 50 years, John’s 
second job has been the betterment of his community. He’s 
been involved in amateur hockey, his church, the Lions Club, 
the Legion, the library, and a host of other volunteer 
organizations. 
 
Second, and just as important, I was happy to see a young high 
school student, Dana Pasutto, given the Junior Citizen of the 
Year Award. I was glad to see this because the citizenship does 
not kick in with our grey hair or the lack of it. You can make a 
difference at any age, and Dana has done that. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Gift for Premier and Deputy Premier 
 

Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well this session 
has begun, and I expect it’s going to be a long session. And for 
some members, it’s going to seem a lot longer than for others. 
In particular, there’s a couple of members opposite who are 
going to have a real long session. They’re both kind of getting 
up in years and neither one of them has looked too happy lately. 
Of course I’m speaking about the Premier and the Deputy 
Premier. 
 
Just a few weeks ago the Premier got beat up pretty good at a 
SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) 
convention. It made him kind of owly. So much so that one of 



38 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 1998 

our respected journalists referred to him as a grumpy old man. 
 
Of course the Deputy Premier hasn’t been in a real good mood 
either lately. The Premier took away his little boy toy power 
company in Guyana; then he had to fire Jack Messer; and now 
he had to fess up to losing millions of dollars on Channel Lake 
— made him kind of grumpy too. 
 
So actually we have a couple of grumpy old men running 
around government. I don’t expect either one of these guys is 
going to get any happier in the next few weeks. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, you know the Saskatchewan Party is always 
trying to spread sunshine wherever we go. So in order to help 
the Premier and Deputy Premier get over their foul moods and 
pass the time during the session, we all chipped in and got them 
a really funny video to watch — Walter Matthau and Jack 
Lemmon in Grumpy Old Men. I’d like to present that to them 
now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. The hon. member will 
recognize that exhibits are not appropriate to use in the House, 
and he’ll recognize there has been precedent in this House, and 
I’ll ask the page to return it to him. And he may want to take 
appropriate action, but not to use it as an exhibit in the House. 
 

Saskatchewan Winter Games 
 
Mr. Renaud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To begin with I’d 
like to first welcome all the members back to the House for the 
third session of the twenty-third legislature, and including the 
member from Rosthern, Mr. Speaker. I notice he’s gotten a little 
grayer over the summer, and grumpier, but certainly he’s . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Now all hon. members will 
recognize that in statements by members they are not to be 
debated. The statements by members is an opportunity for 
members simply to make statements but not to be debated by 
others. And I think the hon. member for Carrot River Valley 
knows that he is very, very close to entering into the debate and 
I’m sure he’ll want to continue this with his statement. 
 
Mr. Renaud: — Mr. Speaker, what I really wanted to say was I 
want to congratulate the community of Nipawin on their 
outstanding job of hosting the 1998 Saskatchewan Winter 
Games. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Renaud: — Nipawin is the smallest community to ever 
host the Winter Games. Hats off to the surrounding 
communities of Carrot River, Melfort, Tisdale, White Fox, 
Codette, Zenon Park, Aylsham, Choiceland — and the list goes 
on, Mr. Speaker — who provided their assistance to ensure the 
provincial Winter Games were a success. 
 
More than 2,100 volunteers donated their time and expertise. 
These are individuals that make Saskatchewan such a special 
place to live. We can never say enough about the dedication 
volunteers make with their time and support in creating 
successful events like the Winter Games, Mr. Speaker. 

The huge success in Nipawin speaks very well for the future of 
the Saskatchewan Winter Games. It’s not the size of the heart 
that counts . . . or it is the size of the heart that counts, Mr. 
Speaker, not the size of the community. 
 
And I know that with the athletes, the coaches, the officials, the 
volunteers, and all the corporate sponsors, Mr. Speaker, and 
even Wilbur the mascot, though the flame is out, the spirit is 
still burning in . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. The hon. member’s times 
has expired. Statements by members will continue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Primrose Lake Committee Seeks Compensation 
 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I’d like to 
pay tribute to a group of people from northern Saskatchewan 
that have been an example of perseverance and commitment. 
These people have come from all walks of life and have yet to 
see the fruits of their labour — very special people like 
Lawrence Yew of Canoe Lake; Alex Maurice and Victoria and 
Art McCallum of Beauval; Clement and Daniel Daigneault of 
Ile-a-la-Crosse, and the many people from Jans Bay and Cole 
Bay, have contributed a great amount of time, energy, and 
dollars. 
 
This committee has worked hard for 48 months. Or if you’d 
like, 1,420 days. Or if you’d like, 34,080 hours of interviewing, 
research, and meetings. Above all else, this committee has 
given tons of patience towards seeking justice on a very 
important matter. And today I’d like to point out that the 
Primrose Lake Air Weapons Range negotiating committee is 
more determined than ever to seek fair and equitable 
compensation towards settling their long-standing grievance in 
relation to the displacement of their families and communities 
in the Primrose Lake Air Weapons Range in the early 1950s. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that displacement has drastically affected the 
economic development and social fabric of the families, the 
communities, and the entire region to this day. We’ll hear more 
on this matter as the session progresses. And the only hope that 
I have is that all 58 MLAs (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly) in this Assembly will work as hard as the committee 
in resolving this matter. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Youth Ambassador at Winter Olympics 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Nagano 
Winter Olympics were the most successful in Canadian history. 
Saskatchewan influence, thanks to athletes like Sandra 
Schmirler, whose prairie roots are in the town of Biggar in the 
constituency of Rosetown-Biggar, played a very significant role 
in Canada’s success at these Olympic games. 
 
We’ve heard the many good stories of the Olympic experience 
from all the participants. But it was not just the athletes who 
were able to enjoy this experience, but fans as well. 
Nineteen-year-old Devin Dubois from Rosetown was one such 
fan. But Devin was no ordinary fan; he was one of seven people 



March 11, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 39 

chosen from a field of 158 applicants by the Canadian Olympic 
Association to be a youth ambassador for Canada. 
 
Olympic experience is nothing new to the Dubois family. 
Devin’s father, Marcel Dubois, was the coach of the Canadian 
trap shooting team who competed at the ’96 Olympics in 
Atlanta. Devin wouldn’t trade his Olympic experience for 
anything. In fact it only strengthened his desire to compete 
himself in the Olympics — a desire which may soon become a 
reality. Devin is currently ranked 12th overall in the world in 
trap shooting. He hopes to compete in Sydney in the 2000 
Summer Games. 
 
I’d like to offer both my congratulations and extend my best 
wishes to Devin on the road to Sydney. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Sale of Channel Lake 
 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, where do we begin? Where do we begin to deal 
with the NDP (New Democratic Party) incompetence, 
negligence, and plain stupidity that cost Saskatchewan 
taxpayers $10 million? 
 
I guess we should start with the $5 million you lost because 
your people didn’t read the contract. They didn’t read a 
multimillion dollar contract. I guess that’s what the NDP due 
diligence we’ve been all hearing about is about. They didn’t 
read the contract. 
 
You know, Mr. Minister, you couldn’t make up a story like that, 
it’s just too ridiculous. Mr. Minister, you haven’t identified who 
didn’t read the contract. Who signed the contract? Will you 
release a copy of the contract with the signatures attached? Who 
are these people, and have they been fired? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — As I mentioned the other day to the 
members opposite, Mr. Speaker, obviously the circumstances 
that occurred around Channel Lake were unfortunate, and I 
have explained to the House in great detail the circumstance 
surrounding the arrangement. 
 
The member wants to know who is involved in the signing of 
the contract and the negotiating of the contract. You’ll find the 
names in the report and I believe it’s on page 7 of the Deloitte 
Touche report. Read it and you’ll find out the members of the 
management staff who were involved in the Channel Lake 
project. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Minister, back in 1992, with much 
fanfare, your government picked NDP campaign manager Jack 
Messer to head up SaskPower. Your hand-picked NDP 
henchman lost Saskatchewan taxpayers millions of dollars 
because he couldn’t read a contract. And now you’re actually 
thinking of giving him severance. Unbelievable! You’re going 
to give him more money from taxpayers to reward him for the 
millions he just lost. 
 
Mr. Minister, you shouldn’t be paying Jack Messer, you should 

be suing Jack Messer. Will you assure this House that Jack 
Messer will never receive one dime of severance? Will you 
assure this House that Jack Messer will never again work for 
the government? And will you consider legal action against 
Jack Messer for the recovery of the millions of taxpayers’ 
dollars he lost through his negligence? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — First of all, Mr. Speaker, as the 
Deloitte Touche report confirms, that on the issue of the sale of 
assets of Channel Lake — and I just explain in very simple 
terms to the member again — this asset was purchased for $25 
million. During the lifetime of the project, $12 million was paid 
back to SaskPower, and the asset was sold for 21 million 
including the $6 million trading losses, and the Deloitte & 
Touche report confirms this. There was a net return of $2 
million to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And if you read the report — if you read the report — you will 
understand it. And to the severance you talk about, I can tell 
you that this issue has been referred to Milt Fair who is the 
vice-president of the corporation, former CEO (chief executive 
officer) of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, for a solution to that 
issue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — The NDP just lost the taxpayers $10 
million. I don’t care if the new math that the minister is using 
says elsewise, it’s $10 million. Somebody has to pay for this 
and it shouldn’t be the taxpayers — it should be the people 
responsible. The Minister of CIC (Crown Investments 
Corporation of Saskatchewan) has the legal opinion of this 
whole matter but he refuses to release it. What are you hiding? 
Does it recommend civil action? Does it recommend criminal 
action? Who are you protecting? 
 
My question is for the Minister of Justice. Mr. Minister, will 
you launch a criminal investigation into the whole Channel 
Lake fiasco? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I say to the member 
opposite again. If you read the report clearly you will see the 
circumstances are considerably different than what you are 
explaining here in the House today. Now that doesn’t surprise 
me given your commitment to honesty with your own former 
Liberal members; so it doesn’t surprise me at all that you would 
try to twist, try to twist the Deloitte & Touche report to your 
own political benefit. I understand that. 
 
But having said that, I say again that when we got the report we 
did what I think was appropriate. We explained it to the 
Assembly, we tabled the reports, and I say to the members 
opposite that I would like it at least if they had the honesty and 
integrity to read the report and explain it fairly to the people of 
the province — because you’re not doing that here today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Minister, you’re also playing with the 
facts on the Guyana deal. First you said there was $800,000 that 
was spent on Guyana figuring out what everybody knew you 



40 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 1998 

shouldn’t do for a dollar. And then all of a sudden, whoops, it’s 
now $1.4 million. What’s the real figure, Mr. Speaker? Are we 
going to have new numbers next week? 
 
Mr. Minister, you paid a million dollars to lawyers and 
consultants to tell us not to invest in Guyana. Mr. Minister, who 
are these lawyers and consultants? Will you give us the 
breakdown? Who got rich off of this misguided adventure? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a little difficult to 
please the members opposite today, and speaking of grumpy old 
men, there’s a few of them sitting over there today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the issue of the Guyana consultation and legal 
opinions that were required to do the due diligence on this 
project — which led us to make the decision not to go ahead 
with the investment — cost the company 1.3 million. The 
additional sum that you have here is in part, in large part, 
because of the cost that CIC had in the project as well. 
 
I say again it’s hard to please, because when we disclose the 
numbers, they still complain vehemently that the numbers 
aren’t right. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, my final question is for the 
Premier. The former minister of SaskPower spoke at great 
length in the last session about due diligence: due diligence in 
Guyana; due diligence in Channel Lake; due diligence with all 
the activities of SaskPower. Due diligence in Guyana cost $1.4 
million. Due diligence in Channel Lake cost $10 million. 
 
Mr. Premier, if you’re not going to hold the current minister of 
CIC responsible, will you dismiss the former minister in charge 
of SaskPower, the minister of due diligence? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — I want to begin, Mr. Speaker, by 
wishing the hon. member from Melfort well in his quest for the 
leadership of the Tory, the Tory Party. 
 
Now just calm down. Calm down. I know you’re very nervous. 
Calm down. I wish you all the very best in your pursuit of the 
leadership of the new Tory or old Tory Party. But let me give 
you a piece of untendered advice. A little less feigned outrage, I 
think would give more credibility to your questions and more 
credibility to your leadership race. 
 
The answer to your question, simply put, is as the report 
indicates right here on page 30, the report of Deloitte Touche 
document. In summer the Sask board was clear in its direction 
and expectations respecting the Channel Lake investment but 
did not receive enough regular and substantive information to 
know about the dealings which the minister has fully described. 
That’s his position. 
 
They knew full well what the situation was as provided to them 
and acted on that information. In any event, there is a new 
minister in charge of Saskatchewan Power Corporation, and we 

are on to now, having learned from the lessons of Channel 
Lake, turning the page and moving forward. Something which 
you and your Tory colleagues have never been able to do is to 
learn and turn the page and to grow from that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Young Offenders Act Reform 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Social Services. Mr. Minister, 
last Christmas Helen Montgomery, a 58-year-old widow living 
alone in North Battleford, decided to give something back to 
her community by taking two young people into her home. 
 
Your department placed two young offenders with Helen and 
established her home as an open custody facility. But friends 
and family aren’t even sure anyone from Social Services sat 
down with Helen to discuss the background of the young 
offenders or to warn her about possible dangers. 
 
Mr. Minister, your department placed a young offender 
suffering from fetal alcohol syndrome who had been convicted 
of manslaughter into open custody in a home of a 58-year-old 
woman with polio. Mr. Minister, within two days Helen 
Montgomery was dead from multiple stab wounds inflicted by 
one of the young offenders your department placed in her home. 
 
Mr. Minister, Helen’s daughter, Valerie Montgomery Bull, is 
here in the legislature today. Will you commit to meet with her 
today to listen to her concerns? And, Mr. Minister, will you 
apologize to Valerie and her family for the devastation your 
department has inflicted in this case? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, to the member and to all 
members, that member and all members will recognize that we 
as elected members of this legislature must exercise much 
caution when we discuss the tragic events in the home in North 
Battleford. Because we all know that these are before the courts 
and I’m sure not any one of us in this room would want to 
jeopardize either the case for the prosecution or the case for the 
defence in this regard. And so I say, Mr. Speaker, that we need 
to be careful and guarded in our public comments. 
 
In terms of the very narrow issue of the licensing of Mrs. 
Montgomery’s home in North Battleford, all proper process and 
procedures were followed. Mrs. Montgomery’s home was 
licensed entirely appropriately under both designation of the 
Young Offenders Act and under provincial regulation, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
you’re probably well aware of all the petitions that are being 
signed throughout Saskatchewan and across this country with 
reference to Young Offenders Act and what happened in North 
Battleford. And it took awhile but we are happy to see that the 
NDP government has finally joined with the Saskatchewan 
Party caucus and the vast majority of Saskatchewan people in 
recognizing the Young Offenders Act needs some serious 
reworking. 
 



March 11, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 41 

Mr. Minister, will you and the Minister of Justice commit today 
to join the Saskatchewan Party in a non-partisan trip to Ottawa 
to deliver the petitions of more than 25,000 Saskatchewan 
people? Will you and your colleague, the Minister of Justice, 
prove your commitment and will you sign that petition and join 
us in Ottawa to ensure the meaningful changes to the Young 
Offenders Act do take place? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the commitment of this 
minister, the Minister of Justice, this Premier, and this 
government is very clear. We have proposed in considerable 
detail to the federal government those changes which we 
believe must be made to the Young Offenders Act. We have 
communicated that — our position is very clear — we have 
outlined the changes that we recommend. Changes which would 
bring a presumptive transfer to 14- and 15-year-olds charged 
with serious crime to adult court, changes in regard to the 
publication of names. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask that the Tory Party and the Liberal 
Party would stand in support of these changes which we 
recommend. Mr. Speaker, I would ask that they today make 
very clear, as we have, the kinds and specific changes that they 
would recommend to the Young Offenders Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s simply not good enough to call for changes 
without identifying those changes. We’d like to know where 
you stand on those specific changes. We invite you to join us in 
the changes that we have recommended. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Multiple Sclerosis Drugs 
 
Mr. McLane: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. opposition has been 
approached by a number of victims of multiple sclerosis and 
who are also being victimized by this NDP government. People 
like Terri Sleeva, Bonnie Stevenson, Darwin Appell, Kent 
Brace and others, who have joined us in the legislature today, 
have come here to try and bring some common sense to this 
issue. 
 
The Minister of Health announced last fall that a board would 
be established to ensure MS patients who might benefit from 
Betaseron and Copaxone receive these drugs. Unfortunately, 
Mr. Speaker, one in four people who go before this board are 
being turned down. Others are simply not attempting because of 
the arbitrary criteria the board is following. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Minister of Health explain why he’s 
robbing many MS victims, people like Terry Sleeva, of the 
hope that they want, and that they deserve, and that you 
promised them. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, as you well know and to the 
member from Arm River and those folks that are here today, 
that this is a very difficult and a very emotional issue. And over 
the past four months we have deliberated in an open fashion 
with folks from the MS community to deal with the issue as to 
how best we might be able to provide two drugs that are on the 
market today to assist them with their lives. 

And we’ve been able to complete that process, Mr. Speaker, in 
consultation with a broad range of individuals who’ve provided 
guidance for us. Because the reality of it is, is that the benefits 
of these two drugs are still being discussed in great detail and 
there’s a great deal of conflicting information about the value of 
these drugs. However, in spite of all of that, in Saskatchewan 
today, we have two drugs insured of Betaseron and Copaxone. 
Only three other provinces in Canada of the 10 provinces and 
two territories that we have, have these drugs insured, Mr. 
Speaker. And we did that on the basis of providing some 
assistance and hope to those people. And we did it on the basis 
of establishing a panel that is consistent with those in the other 
four provinces. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Remember the 
throne speech, Mr. Speaker. Made in Saskatchewan, the 
Premier says. Mr. Minister, remember that when you’re 
deciding and quoting in only three other provinces. This is 
Saskatchewan. Let’s make it in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to give the minister an example of how to 
demonstrate how arbitrary and unfair the rules are. Kent Brace 
has joined us here in the legislature today. He has been rejected 
by the committee because he is unable to meet a requirement 
that he walk 100 metres without any assistance. Mr. Speaker, 
that’s true. Kent is unable to walk 100 metres. But not because 
of MS, it’s because he was partially paralyzed 40 years ago, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Minister, how can you possibly support criteria which is 
not only arbitrary but borders on discrimination? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I have here the application 
form that MS patients use in making application for the use of 
Copaxone and/or Betaseron. This application form, Mr. 
Speaker, was developed by physicians and health professionals 
across the country. They weren’t developed only by physicians 
or the Government of Saskatchewan, they were developed by 
physicians and professionals across the nation to help develop 
what kinds of criteria is valuable in assigning a drug for the 
benefit of individuals today. 
 
I am insulted, Mr. Speaker, to think for a moment that 
individuals like Dr. Hader, who’s dedicated his life to MS 
research and clinical work in this province, isn’t capable of 
sitting on a panel of this nature. I’m insulted to learn that Dr. 
Andrew Kirk, who is a neurologist in this province and served 
on this committee and is a practising clinician in this province 
. . . I’m insulted to learn that Dr. J.K. Wood, who is a family 
physician in Saskatoon; Ms. Heiser, a clinical nurse; and Ray 
Bannister, a pharmacist in this province, are not capable of 
making decisions on behalf of Saskatchewan people. I’m 
insulted to learn that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I can tell the 
minister that the people of Saskatchewan are insulted that you 
are forcing them to go through this process to retrieve the drug 



42 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 1998 

anyway, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we believe that an appeal process must be put in 
place until, as the Premier says, a Made in Saskatchewan 
solution is developed. We feel the solution is a creation of an 
independent body made up of care-givers, doctors, and 
neurologists who diagnose and treat MS patients on an ongoing 
basis. The present system under which the 
government-appointed body makes a decision based on 
arbitrary criteria is not working. You can see that; here’s the 
proof. It’s just not acceptable. 
 
Mr. Minister, MS victims are hoping that you will put politics 
aside and adopt our Made in Saskatchewan solution to this 
problem. Mr. Minister, make that commitment to the people of 
Saskatchewan today, and the people that are sitting here on the 
floor. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, in the establishment of this 
committee we had a great deal of dialogue with Saskatchewan 
people, which included the MS Society. And the MS Society 
provided us with confidence and direction in establishing the 
committee that we have before us today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I read in the recent article of the Leader-Post in where Mr. 
Melenchuk is quoted as saying that we should set up a new 
committee of people who diagnose and treat MS patients. 
People who diagnose and treat MS patients every day, is what 
he says, and set up criteria that should be developed here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, this is criteria that’s been developed in 
Saskatchewan. These are people who are practising medicine in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And here we have a Leader of the Third Party who is 
suggesting that his colleagues who practise medicine in the 
province of Saskatchewan are incapable of providing decisions 
on a daily basis for people who suffer from MS and attacks the 
very integrity of the individuals from whom he trained with and 
he practises with, Mr. Speaker. And I find that absolutely 
appalling. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Sale of Channel Lake 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday the 
minister told us that the government had been fooled into losing 
about $10 million on the stroke of a pen in Channel Lake. Well 
last April 10 the member from Regina South was trumpeting 
Channel Lake as one of the great successes of our Crown 
corporations. He told us that Channel Lake was proof that our 
Crown corps are being handled in a responsible and sensible 
manner. 
 
My question, Mr. Speaker, if Channel Lake is one of our 
success stories, one of the examples of how our Crown corps 
are handled in a sensible and responsible manner, can he tell us 
how big a loss we will have to chalk up before he’ll call it a 
failure. 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, as the Deloitte Touche 
report explains to the member opposite, I want to make it clear 
that the Channel Lake company was purchased for $25 million. 
During the lifetime it repaid $12 million of that, which left $13 
million. The company were sold for 15, and even with the 
trading losses it still ends up as a net of 2 million to the people 
of Saskatchewan. Read the report, read the report — to the 
member from North Battleford — read the report and you’ll see 
that. 
 
As to whether or not the advice that we get on deals that 
everyone of them is good, obviously yesterday I said this was a 
difficult situation; one that we are sorry happened and wish that 
it hadn’t. But when it comes to the operation of the Crowns, 
whether it’s the sale of the Husky assets, which you, sir, and 
your party recommended that we sell for 7 cents on the dollar 
which would have meant hundreds of millions of dollars less — 
that was a good deal. 
 
When it came to the advice we got on the sale of Cameco 
shares, they made hundreds of million dollars for the people of 
the province. Was Channel Lake a mistake? I agree, but there is 
no reason to believe that many men and women aren’t doing a 
wonderful job in the Crowns for the people of the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — All I know is that last December when I was 
trying to question you about the Channel Lake fiasco and you 
were stonewalling with the help of your Sask Party cohorts, you 
were making jokes, you were making jokes about it. You said 
over the sale: there couldn’t have been a more open process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at that time the minister told us that Mr. Portigal, 
in working for Channel Lake, who did work on the 
negotiations, the company was sold. Mr. Portigal was then 
without work and the new company hired him. That’s about as 
devious as the plot gets, he told us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that was a half truth at best. Will the minister now 
tell us that he knew when he made that statement that the whole 
plot was a great deal more devious than that Mr. Portigal had 
resigned? He had been fired because of the allegations now 
contained in this report. And you knew that the plot was a great 
deal more devious than what you told us. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, speaking of plot and 
the words, the cohorts in the Saskatchewan Party, I have here a 
document that says the opposition Liberal caucus members, by 
signing this statement, indicate their continuing loyalty and 
support to the cause of the Saskatchewan Liberal Party and the 
opposition. Now where are half of those cohorts today? They’re 
sitting over in the old Conservative Party. Don’t tie us to your 
cohorts in the Saskatchewan Party. The member who was 
asking about Channel Lake earlier — those are your buddies. 
 
As to the issue of Channel Lake, I say to the member opposite: 
the statement that I made in the House speaks for itself. We 
made it very clear that we wish that the circumstances were 
different with Channel Lake, that we lacked information. The 
Deloitte & Touche summary speak to the issue of lack of 
information that we had. I wish the member would simply read 
the document and try to understand it, because he would be 



March 11, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 43 

greatly informed as to where he’s working from in his notes 
today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Well the problem isn’t over. The problem isn’t 
. . . The hemorrhaging continues. SaskPower has agreed to buy 
all its natural gas for its generating stations from Lawrence 
Portigal’s new company for the next 10 years. 
 
Why have we blundered into this 10-year contract? How much 
is that going to cost us? Why are we going to enrich a private 
Alberta oil and gas company, rather than buy from SaskEnergy? 
How much is this exclusive contract going to cost the people of 
Saskatchewan over 10 years? 
 
You told us a couple of weeks ago that Millar Western is 
hemorrhaging badly. How much are we going to haemorrhage 
over this? Tell us about what the full bleed is going to be. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 
refers to the 10-year contract, again not a new piece of 
information obviously, because it’s referred to a number of 
times in the Deloitte & Touche report. But all of the indications 
are from the officials at CIC that the 10-year contract was 
signed for a reasonable amount. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. McLane: — Mr. Speaker, pursuant to rule 46, I seek leave 
of the Assembly to move a motion of urgent and pressing 
necessity. 
 
The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, the hon. member for 
Arm River has indicated his desire to introduce a motion for 
debate that he believes to be of urgent and pressing necessity. 
 
I’ll ask the hon. member to, very, very briefly, to inform the 
House as to the reason he feels that the House should set aside 
its business to entertain the motion, and then to advise the 
House of the nature of the motion he wishes to introduce. The 
hon. member for Arm River. 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 46 
 

Reform of the Exception Drug Plan for treating 
Multiple Sclerosis 

 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. If I could, just by 
reading the motion, would give the House a hint of what it’s all 
about. 
 

That this Assembly call upon the Government of 
Saskatchewan to reform the exception drug plan for 
medication used in treating multiple sclerosis, namely 
Betaseron and Copaxone, firstly by allowing for trial 
periods of usage followed by review to consider whether 
the drug is effective in particular cases; 
 
Secondly, by removing the arbitrary barriers faced by 
patients in their application for the drug, such as the 

requirement that a patient must be able to walk 100 metres 
in order to qualify; 
 
Thirdly, by putting in place an appeal process so that 
patients who are initially turned down for the drugs may 
appeal to an independent review body; and 
 
Fourthly, by adding to the formulary the second generation 
of Betaseron, known as Betaseron 1A, which has been 
approved by Health Canada and which is more refined than 
the original Betaseron and has fewer side effects. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I think the reason that it’s important — of course I 
could go on at some length — however, I think with the people 
that we have sitting here today is self-explanatory why there 
needs to be an inquiry into this issue. 
 
The Speaker: — The hon. member for Arm River has advised 
the House as to his request to set aside the House’s normal 
business to entertain the motion, and he has advised the House 
of the motion he wishes to introduce. Leave is required. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Leave not granted. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Ms. Hamilton, seconded by Mr. 
Ward. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it gives me great pleasure to rise in reply to the throne 
speech, the third time I have done so in this legislature. 
 
I want to take this opportunity to welcome all members back to 
the House. Judging from our short time together in December, I 
know this session will be filled with lively debate on the many 
issues facing Saskatchewan. And I look forward to taking part 
in many of those debates with members opposite. 
 
I want to also take this opportunity to welcome our new pages 
for this session, Barton Draper, Pamela Kovacs, Angela 
Smalley, Jason Trost, and Cara Renkas. I am sure your 
experiences over the next four or five months will prove both 
enlightening and valuable in your future lives. Welcome to the 
legislature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I want to issue a special 
greeting to many people in Saskatchewan but especially those 
in the Canora-Pelly constituency. With the expansion of the 
legislative communication channels through satellite, through 
cable, many communities in Saskatchewan are accessing the 
legislative channel for the first time. I know many communities 
in Canora-Pelly are doing so. And to those people who are 
watching the legislative channel for the first time, I want to — 
on behalf of the official opposition — wish them enjoyable time 



44 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 1998 

watching. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to congratulate you for your efforts in 
terms of conducting an education process around 
Saskatchewan. My constituency, two communities of 
Preeceville and Sturgis, had the opportunity last fall — students 
in grade 10, 11, and 12 — had the opportunity to hear your 
remarks and comments about how the democratic system works 
in Saskatchewan. And I want to thank you for that. And I want 
to encourage you to continue on that process because I think our 
young people in Saskatchewan need to know more about how 
this place works and how the province functions, and I want to 
thank you for them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since we met here last spring, much has changed. 
This is the first full session with the Saskatchewan Party filling 
the role of the official opposition. And I’m honoured to carry 
the title of opposition leader into this session. It’s a title that I 
know comes with enormous responsibility to the people of this 
province and it’s a job that I take very seriously. 
 
As I’ve said, Mr. Speaker, much has changed with the look of 
the legislature since our last session. I’m not speaking of the 
long-overdue refurbishing project that is now under way. I’m 
also talking about the members inside this Chamber who 
collectively decided that the old way of doing things was no 
longer adequate. I think I’d be remiss, Mr. Speaker, if I didn’t 
speak very briefly today about the new and improved official 
opposition. I know it’s of keen interest to the members 
opposite. 
 
The eight of us who put our political careers on the line and 
decided to leave our former caucuses did so with an idea of 
creating something new on the political landscape in this 
province. Those of us who decided to set aside our minor 
differences and come together did so because we know the 
challenges facing Saskatchewan now and in the future. These 
challenges have to be met by people who are willing to look 
past artificial political labels that are meaningless in this day 
and age and instead focus on finding solutions to 
Saskatchewan’s problems. 
 
Those of us who have come together under the Saskatchewan 
Party banner have done so because we believe that ideas are 
more important than the old-style political labels that have kept 
centre and right of centre political parties divided for too long 
— plus denying the majority of Saskatchewan voters their say 
too often in the past. 
 
Those of us who saw wisdom in this finally decided that it was 
more productive to stop looking at the minor areas where we 
differed and instead look at the major areas where we agreed. 
Once again it was simply putting ideas ahead of old-style and 
artificial political leg room, Mr. Speaker. While others continue 
to cling to weak labels, we stand strongly on the foundation of 
ideas, principles, and clear policies. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we find ourselves as the official opposition, 
and every member in this new opposition knows that the people 
of Saskatchewan are watching us closely. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order. I apologize for 
interrupting the hon. member, but if I could ask the 

Sergeant-at-Arms to have the cameras removed from the door. I 
find it distracting to debate in the House. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, camera shy as I am. 
 
There might even be one or two who do not support the actions 
we took in creating this new political vehicle in Saskatchewan. 
It’s up to members on this side of the House to show the people 
of Saskatchewan that we do offer a clear and realistic 
alternative to the government opposite. 
 
And in these early months of the life of the Saskatchewan Party, 
I am hopeful that we have begun doing that. Because to be an 
effective opposition, a party must do more than simply criticize 
anything and everything the government does. When we agree 
with the government, we’ll say so. And when we don’t, we’ll 
say so as well. 
 
(1430) 
 
But we’ll also tell the people how a Saskatchewan Party 
government would do things differently. In order to be a 
credible . . . in order to be credible, an opposition must tell the 
people what they’ll do differently if they were entrusted by the 
people to form a government. And even though this new party 
is still very young, I think we have done that very, very well. 
 
Prior to the opening of the session, the Saskatchewan Party 
opposition laid out a detailed and comprehensive package that 
we plan to bring into this House during this session. In fact we 
called it our alternative throne speech. This package includes 
upwards of 30 private member Bills we plan to introduce during 
this session — the most ever brought forward by an opposition 
party. 
 
And thank goodness, Mr. Speaker, because listening to the 
throne speech on Monday, it quickly became clear that the 
members opposite have nothing fresh to offer the people of 
Saskatchewan in terms of ideas. It seems they are content to 
simply ignore the problems that are on the horizon for 
Saskatchewan — just pretend that they’re not there. 
 
Earlier this week with the media, Mr. Speaker, I used the 
Titanic as an analogy. And anybody who has seen the movie 
knows that for two hours you sit there watching and hoping that 
the captain of the ship will wake up soon enough to steer clear 
of the iceberg. But of course that doesn’t happen. In the end, in 
the end you know the ship is heading straight for the iceberg 
and all you can do is sit there watching helplessly. 
 
And I see similarities right in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. We 
have the captain of the ship blithely sailing through the water 
oblivious to the icebergs that are threatening this province. And 
those of us who can see the iceberg coming over the horizon 
can warn him as much and as loudly as we want. If he refuses to 
listen, there’s very little that can be done. At least until the next 
election, when the captain’s job performance is up for 
evaluation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many enormous issues facing this 
province over the next few years. And I really didn’t hear 
anything in the throne speech that makes me believe this 
government is ready to react to the pressures facing us. 



March 11, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 45 

On the contrary, the actions of the government opposite over 
the course of the last while indicate to me that the NDP has 
grown further and further out of touch with the concerns of the 
Saskatchewan people — concerns over oppressive taxation; 
concerns over the lack of quality, good-paying jobs and 
opportunities in Saskatchewan; concerns over lessening health 
care and education services in Saskatchewan; concerns over an 
overburdened and deteriorating transportation infrastructure; 
concerns over Crown corporations which are operating in an 
increasingly arrogant manner. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are just a few of the hazards facing 
Saskatchewan, and there’s absolutely nothing in this throne 
speech that indicates to the Saskatchewan public that the 
government is willing or able to come up with innovative 
initiatives to deal with them. 
 
We hear more of the same. The captain of the ship is saying, 
steady as she goes. And the icebergs are getting very, very near. 
And our young people are heading for the lifeboats, moving to 
other provinces as quickly as they can. Because that’s where 
they continue to find opportunities. That’s where they find it 
possible to start their careers and their lives. It’s the same old 
story, Mr. Speaker. We educate them here and send them away. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Now I recognize that all 
hon. members have some messages in their heart that they’d 
like to bring to the attention of the Assembly, but I would 
encourage them to do it at the appropriate time when entering 
into debate. It is difficult to hear the Leader of the Opposition’s 
remarks in the debate. And I would ask all hon. members to 
accord to him the courtesy of allowing his remarks to be heard. 
The hon. member, the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as I 
was indicating, many people are educated here in Saskatchewan 
and we send them away. So the members opposite can say more 
people are working in Saskatchewan than ever before. But that 
gets us nowhere if most of the jobs created in Saskatchewan 
involve a paper hat and a mop. This is a long-term problem in 
our province. As for young people, they continue to go. 
 
It sets up a situation where our population is rapidly ageing. 
Without the quality, high-paying jobs available here in 
Saskatchewan, our youth continue to leave. And our ability to 
pay all of our bills with a shrinking tax base will become 
impossible. It’s an unsustainable situation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And yet I heard nothing in the throne speech that even 
acknowledges that this is a very real problem facing 
Saskatchewan. The government can pretend all it wants that this 
problem doesn’t exist. That doesn’t make it true though. 
 
If our tax base keeps shrinking, how are we going to be able to 
sustain essential services even to the existing inadequate levels? 
If we don’t do anything to encourage our young people to stay 
or to encourage high-skilled labourers to come to 
Saskatchewan, who is going to foot the bill for the services the 
government should be providing? If we don’t encourage 
entrepreneurs to set up shop here in Saskatchewan, how are we 
going to employ our own people? 
 
We need to encourage these people to come to our province and 

to stay. And you can’t do that when you have the highest tax 
burden in the country. You can’t do that when the province 
right next door has the lowest tax burden. And you certainly 
can’t do that when both of our neighbours have just cut their 
personal income taxes. And is there any indication of tax relief 
in the throne speech, Mr. Speaker? Absolutely not. 
 
At the same time, over the last year, all we’ve heard from the 
members opposite is how well the province is doing, how our 
province has never enjoyed such economic times. How the 
government is taking in more money than ever before. But what 
those members fail to realize is that just because the 
government is doing well, it doesn’t mean the people of this 
province are doing well. 
 
Just because the government is rolling in money, thanks to its 
high taxation policy and a fair amount of luck, it means very 
little if the people aren’t allowed to enjoy the benefit. It means 
very little to the family of four with an income of $30,000 a 
year. This family pays about $1,900 in income taxes to the 
province every year. In Alberta, their income tax bill would be 
just $470. That gap is just too wide to even pretend that 
Saskatchewan is competitive. 
 
Last year we saw a bit of progress on the taxation front — or at 
least what passes for progress in this province. Last year we 
saw the government reduce the provincial sales tax to the level 
where it was when the NDP came to power in 1991. And they 
praised themselves to no end. 
 
We heard about their new-found belief that yes indeed, tax 
reduction does result in job creation. But then what did they do? 
They took every penny of this modest tax relief back in the 
form of SaskEnergy increases; in the form of SGI 
(Saskatchewan Government Insurance) increases; in the form of 
SaskTel increases. And they’re even getting more creative 
about it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now they’re tacking on another dollar a month onto everyone’s 
phone bill — supposedly to pay for the province-wide 911 
service. But two years ago, this same government said the 911 
service would be paid for out of the VLT (video lottery 
terminal) revenues that the NDP decided could not be entrusted 
to the hands of the municipalities. Now that promise has been 
broken too and it’s going to cost Saskatchewan residents 
another $8 million a year. 
 
And it just goes on and on, Mr. Speaker. They put the money in 
one pocket and take it out of the other. It’s almost an addiction 
for the NDP — the more taxes they collect, the more they want, 
the more the need. Because it is the view of the NDP that the 
government knows how to spend the people’s money better 
than the people themselves do. 
 
Well that’s not the view of the Saskatchewan Party, Mr. 
Speaker. We say it’s time to break the addiction. We are at the 
end of the road when it comes to governments overtaxing its 
residents. Now is the time to give something back and that’s 
what we’ll be fighting for during this session, Mr. Speaker — to 
share the wealth with the people who have put up with so much 
tax pain for the last seven years. 
 
They say they want to invest in families. Of course all this 



46 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 1998 

means to the NDP is creating yet another expensive government 
program with ill-defined goals and probably less than tangible 
results. Why not simply invest in families by reducing their tax 
burden? People can figure out how to spend their own money. 
They don’t need the government doing it for them. 
 
Government, lest we forget, is here to provide the essentials: 
health care, education, highways, and safe communities. That’s 
what people expect for their taxes but that’s not what they’re 
getting, Mr. Speaker. While the people are paying higher taxes 
than ever before, they’ve watched their health care services 
scaled back, including the imminent closure of the Plains 
Health Centre in Regina, a hospital that serves residents in 
communities throughout the whole of the southern part of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
They’ve watched . . . The schools have begun to close in 
communities, not because there isn’t enough students, but 
because there isn’t enough money. The people of Saskatchewan 
have watched as their highways have continued to deteriorate, 
and all they hear from this government is a promise to continue 
highway construction at currently inadequate levels for another 
decade. The government calls this a commitment, Mr. Speaker; 
the people of Saskatchewan do not. 
 
So the members opposite must understand if the people of this 
province are slightly baffled. They pay more in taxes than ever 
before but continue to watch their essential services weaken. 
And the people have become even more confused when they 
watch how the government operates the Crown corporations. In 
the last few months the concern over this government’s 
handling of the Crowns has grown even more acute. 
 
While people in Saskatchewan are struggling to make ends 
meet under the enormous tax burden this government has put on 
them, they had to watch while the minister of CIC waltzed 
around Guyana like he owned the place. And thank goodness 
for the pressure put on him by the Saskatchewan people and the 
official opposition, because he might well have owned the place 
if he had his way. 
 
As soon as the Guyana deal was announced last year, Mr. 
Speaker, the people of this province began telling the members 
opposite that they had no business taking Saskatchewan 
taxpayers’ money to this foreign country when there were so 
many issues on the agenda here at home. While the 
Saskatchewan public faced one tax increase after another in the 
form of higher utility bills, there was SaskPower thinking it was 
wise to risk $30 million on a broken-down power company in a 
politically unstable South American country. 
 
If this isn’t the epitome of a government that is grown out of 
touch, I don’t know what is. But would the government listen to 
the people on this one? No, not soon enough at least. They went 
on their merry way, refusing to tell the people of this province 
anything about the Guyana deal. In fact the only way we were 
able to get any information about it at all, was from the 
Guyanese government and the Guyanese media. Open and 
accountable government, Mr. Speaker? I dare say not. 
 
It’s a shame that the government was too arrogant to listen to 
the people of Saskatchewan in those early days of the Guyana 
venture, because if they had they might have saved a pile of 

money. 
 
Even though the NDP was finally pressured to say no to Jack 
Messer and his Guyana dream, it wasn’t scuttled before the 
government blew at least $1 million — or so we thought. That’s 
the only amount that we knew about because the government 
refused to tell the people of Saskatchewan the full extent of 
SaskPower’s and CIC’s expenditures in South America. 
 
Never mind that this is supposedly a public company, one of 
our family of Crown corporations. Never mind that this 
government keeps telling the people that they own these 
corporations. Yesterday we noted in a second release a 
document that stated that the estimate was no longer 800,000; it 
in fact was now $1.4 million. I wonder what the next statement 
will indicate — a statement of account, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1445) 
 
It’s the height of arrogance. No-one in the province of 
Saskatchewan can trust the government any longer. But 
unfortunately it’s what people have come to expect from this 
government and the Crown corporations. 
 
People no longer feel the special bond to these companies that 
they might once have at one time. They no longer feel the 
Crowns are in place to protect the access to affordable, 
high-quality service for all Saskatchewan residents. The people 
feel that the Crowns have become nothing more than taxing 
authorities for this government. A source of quick cash — quick 
cash. 
 
Service is secondary to profits for the Crowns. And all Crowns 
now take this attitude. Should this be the role for our Crowns, 
Mr. Speaker? I don’t think so, and neither do the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
With embarrassments like the Guyana fiasco, the NST debacle, 
and the Channel Lake deal, which grows murkier and murkier 
with each passing day, the people are beginning to see the 
family of Crown corporations as a very dysfunctional family 
indeed. 
 
It’ll take a lot more than dumping the Jack Messers of the world 
to rehabilitate the image of these Crowns in the eyes of the 
public. The arrogance that permeates the Crowns stems directly 
from the arrogance that so personifies the current government. 
 
For this reason, the Crown corporations will be a major focus 
for the Saskatchewan Party opposition, especially since it’s this 
government’s stated goal that Crowns will continue undertaking 
more foreign adventures even after the Guyana disaster. 
 
In fact just one Crown, SaskTel, has stated it hopes to invest 
$200 million of Saskatchewan people’s money around the globe 
over the next five years. Something seems to be wrong here, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I don’t think anybody would have a problem with one of these 
companies doing all the horse-trading they wanted around the 
world, if they were private companies. And every Guyana deal, 
every NST fiasco would be simply between the company and 
its shareholders. But these aren’t private companies. 



March 11, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 47 

These Crowns do have a responsibility to the people of 
Saskatchewan, and they are failing that responsibility 
miserably. As long as they remain Crowns their priorities have 
got to be here at home to provide services to our own people. 
That, after all, is what they were set up to do. They weren’t set 
up so the Minister of CIC can play international jet-setter. They 
weren’t set up so that government could wring every last nickel 
out of the Saskatchewan public. But over the course of the last 
few years, that’s exactly what they’ve become, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we don’t think that this should be the case; so three of our 
private members’ Bills take this into account. The first will 
prohibit foreign investments by Crown corporations, period. 
They either make it here or they don’t make it at all. 
 
Another of our private members’ Bills is a simple requirement 
that the Crown corporations be upfront with the people of 
Saskatchewan. It’s a simple requirement that whenever a Crown 
corporation loses more than $100,000 on a single transaction, it 
report that loss to the Standing Committee on Crown 
Corporations within 60 days. Is this really too much to ask, Mr. 
Speaker? I don’t think so, but I suspect the members opposite 
might think such openness may be a problem for them. Imagine 
if they had to actually be honest with the people instead of 
trying to sweep things like NST and Channel Lake under the 
carpet. 
 
Finally, a third Bill of ours will create a long-overdue, 
much-needed utility rate review committee. Saskatchewan is 
the only jurisdiction in North America that doesn’t have a 
review body like this. The current process is nothing but a farce, 
a rubber stamp for the cabinet. Well the people deserve better. 
And we’ll try to give it to them. They’ve suffered through rate 
hike after rate hike without any effective say. This review panel 
will give them that say. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people will no longer stand for Crowns that do 
as they please. They will not stand for Crowns that lose 
three-quarters of a million dollars simply by forgetting to send 
out bills to its customers. And the people will not stand for a 
government that has mismanaged the Crowns to this extent. 
 
Something has got to change and quickly. And I urge — no I 
dare — the members opposite to seriously consider these Bills, 
consider what they’re saying. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another major focus of our legislative package 
will be on health care and returning some of the 
decision-making ability to the people of Saskatchewan — 
decision-making that was centralized in the minister’s office 
during the last five years. While we have several 
health-care-related Bills, Mr. Speaker, one of the most 
important is one that calls for a top-to-bottom review of the 
system as it currently stands. 
 
1998 marks the fifth anniversary of the NDP’s health care 
reform policies. Is it unreasonable that after five years we stop 
and take a look at what’s working well and what isn’t? This 
seems to be a reasonable course of action after such massive 
changes that were introduced in 1993. It’s simply meant to 
build on the current strengths of the system and do something 
about the weaknesses. So unless the government believes it has 
something to hide, I can’t see why the members opposite would 

have any objection to conducting such a review. 
 
Our other Bills will do away with government appointees on 
health boards and give the health board . . . the boards 
themselves more authority to spend their budgets on the 
services they believe essential. 
 
We will also be pushing for the establishment of a health care 
ombudsman — a sympathetic ear for Saskatchewan residents 
who are up against the faceless bureaucracy of the Department 
of Health. And I dare say, Mr. Speaker, we saw an example of 
that here today in the legislature with the Betaseron and the 
Copaxone problem, and the fact that people in this province are 
unable to turn to someone to appeal their decisions. Judging 
from the calls that continue to come in to our office regarding 
the health care system, we know this is a service that is badly 
needed in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this fall marks the end of the road for the Plains 
Health Centre — a facility that has served the people of 
southern Saskatchewan so well for so many years. 
 
But this government has decided that their concerns don’t 
matter, and they arrogantly force the Regina District Health 
Board to close it simply by withholding the necessary funds 
needed to operate it. I hope, I pray, that the government sees the 
light and changes its mind between now and this fall. But once 
again, I don’t hold out much hope that they will. 
 
In fact in the throne speech the government makes a blatant 
reference to Regina’s two facilities. Mr. Speaker, the Plains is 
more than just the third Regina hospital. In fact, it is a 
Saskatchewan hospital, and one that has grown even more 
important after the government has closed down so many health 
care services in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
But will they listen? I seriously doubt it. They are hell-bent on 
closing the hospital despite what the people think. It’s typical of 
this government’s actions for the last seven years, Mr. Speaker. 
Arrogant to the core. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another issue that has become a prime concern for 
the people of this province is crime. For over two years now the 
opposition parties have been raising this matter with the Justice 
minister and the Premier. And in each of the last two sessions 
they have scoffed at suggestions that crime — and in particular, 
youth crime — is a real problem in Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, all I can say is that the government polling 
must have told them they were dead wrong, because suddenly 
now in this throne speech the government is saying it is 
concerned with the problem after all. 
 
Last year there wasn’t a single word in the throne speech about 
crime. Twelve months ago we had a Justice minister stating that 
crime in our province wasn’t really anything to be concerned 
about. Now we see a section devoted to what the government 
plans to do about this supposed non-problem. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I hope the members opposite are being 
honest when they say they are now concerned about the 
problem of worsening crime in Saskatchewan. I hope they mean 
what they say. But realistically, how can we really believe 



48 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 1998 

them, that they have this new-found commitment, when for the 
past few years they’ve refused to even acknowledge a problem 
exists? I feel the government, reading its polling, has decided to 
simply pay some lip-service to the issue of crime. I hope I’m 
wrong, but I fear I’m right. 
 
Mr. Speaker, time does not allow me to get into each and every 
detail that is of concern to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
But I want to make a couple final observations before moving 
an amendment to the government motion. Mr. Speaker, over the 
course of the last year, or even the last two years, we have heard 
nothing from the government except how good things are now 
in Saskatchewan. Over and over again we’ve heard how, 
supposedly thanks to their astute management, the province has 
turned the corner. The pain was worth it we were told; a new 
day has dawned. 
 
But then the government found it had a real problem on its 
hands because the people began to believe them. They began to 
say that with this new day the people should get something in 
return for their sacrifices of the last seven years. Municipalities 
began to ask for some of their funding back. Communities 
began asking for some of their health care services back. School 
boards began asking that the government now pick up an 
increased portion of the education bill. And most of all, 
taxpayers began demanding that they may be allowed to keep a 
little more of their pay cheques for themselves. 
 
And suddenly the government’s tune has changed. Whereas a 
new day had dawned not too long ago, as soon as the people 
began to expect a dividend for their years of pain the Premier 
says, things aren’t as good as you think; things aren’t as good as 
we would have had you believe. We aren’t rolling in dough. 
That’s the new line from the government. And once again the 
members opposite will have to forgive the people of 
Saskatchewan for being more than a little confused. 
 
We have just come through a period when the government has 
taken in more in taxation than ever before in the history of 
Saskatchewan. We have just been through a period of record 
high natural resource output in Saskatchewan. We have just 
been through a period of low interest rates, which have reduced 
our debt servicing charges. We continue, we continue to take in 
over $130 million in VLT revenues — money that simply 
wasn’t part of the equation six years ago. And yet even after all 
this the government cries poor. And the people are wondering if 
after all these positive economic factors that we’ve seen in the 
last few years, how come this government just manages to 
squeak by. 
 
What happens? What happens, Mr. Speaker, when the resource 
sector weakens, as it is doing now? What happens when the 
agricultural sector goes through a down phase. What happens 
when the interest rates begin to rise? It’s just a little troubling, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, questions like these need fresh ideas — fresh 
approaches. They require a government that is at least willing to 
consider doing things differently, perhaps even doing things 
that were unheard of a few years ago. Mr. Speaker, the policies 
of the ’70s, ’80s, and even the ’90s will not be adequate as we 
move very rapidly towards the 21st century.  

And in this throne speech, the government has not given the 
people of Saskatchewan any sense of a new vision or new ideas 
to meet the challenges that are coming over the horizon. For 
that reason I move an amendment to the government motion, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 

That the following words be added to the end of the 
motion: 

 
But regret the lack of new vision and direction of the 
government and calls on the government to change this 
course through meaningful consultation with 
Saskatchewan people and through a re-examination of the 
real priorities of taxpayers; and further, calls on the 
government to adopt the policies of grass roots voters as 
reflected in the policies of the Saskatchewan Party. 

 
Motion is seconded by my colleague, the member for 
Cannington. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1500) 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I’ll ask the hon. 
members who are engaged in a debate across the floor to cease 
and desist. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 
very pleased to enter this debate, this debate this afternoon on 
behalf of the Liberal opposition and on behalf of the people of 
North Battleford. 
 
First of all, as the newest member of this Assembly I want to 
say that, well my first year as MLA has had as many ups and 
downs as many people with long political careers. I continue to 
be proud to represent the people of North Battleford. And I 
continue to believe that to be chosen by one’s fellow citizens to 
speak for them in this Assembly is one of the highest honours 
which can be bestowed in a democracy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, like many Canadians I enjoyed watching the 
recent Winter Olympics. I was especially proud to see Fiona 
Smith of North Battleford playing for the Canadian women’s 
hockey team. I know all members will want to join with me in 
congratulating our women’s hockey team on their success. 
 
While watching the Winter Olympics, I learned a whole new 
vocabulary from the snowboarding event. And in that vein I 
want to assure this House that we in the Liberal opposition are 
like, totally stoped and ready for air this session. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I share the honour of representing the Battlefords 
in this House with my friend from Battleford-Cut Knife. 
Recently at the urging of local New Democrats who were 
concerned that I am heard far more frequently than she, a news 
release appeared over her name, accusing me of not doing a 
good job of representing the Battlefords. 
 
The news release puzzled our local media because my name 
was spelled H-I-L-S-E-N. Certainly the member for 
Battleford-Cut Knife knows perfectly good and well how to 
spell my name. I can only assume that some NDP staff person 



March 11, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 49 

took it upon herself, or himself, to write the article and put the 
member’s name to it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the Minister of Highways . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Ignorance prevails, Jack. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Yes. Mr. Speaker, the S-E-N ending I 
understand is Danish; as to my family we’re Swedish, so that is 
indeed a sensitive point. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the Minister of Highways for 
meeting with members of the North Battleford City Council and 
myself to discuss the eastern entrance to our city. There is a 
convergence of several roads at different angles at our entrance. 
The situation is confusing even to those of us who live there; 
for visitors to our city it is dangerous. We have had fatalities 
there in each of the past two years. We are asking for the 
Minister of Highways to move Highway 40 so that it enters the 
Yellowhead outside the city. This would remove some of the 
congestion and eliminate a very badly configured intersection. 
We look forward to a positive response from the minister about 
this project in the near future. 
 
Speaking of bridges, Mr. Speaker, members will recall that the 
bridge over the North Saskatchewan at Borden was recently 
twinned. A former councillor of the city of Saskatoon, Morris 
Cherneskey, suggested that the new bridge be named after 
World War II hero, Peter Dmytruk, who was raised in the 
vicinity of the bridge. Mr. Dmytruk is remembered in France as 
Pierre Le Canadien, where he is credited with saving the village 
where he worked for the French Résistance. His work in France 
cost him his life. Unfortunately, although he is remembered as a 
hero in France, we have nearly forgotten him in Canada. 
 
I thought Morris Cherneskey had an excellent suggestion for 
naming the bridge in honour of Peter Dmytruk, and I said so. 
The member for Redberry disagreed, as is his right. However, 
he went on to say that my coming out in favour of naming the 
bridge in honour of Peter Dmytruk was aggravating. Mr. 
Speaker, I find it unfortunate that, while other countries such as 
our American friends honour their heroes, we do not. Here an 
MLA can openly say that it is aggravating to suggest that we 
recognize someone killed in the defence of this country and of 
freedom. I hope that the member for Redberry will think better 
of it and retract his statement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, may I offer my congratulations to one of the more 
talented members of this Assembly, the hon. member for 
Saskatoon Eastview, who of course last year produced his first 
album, entitled Stuff that Works, and has donated the proceeds 
from his album and CD (compact disc) to crisis services. I 
enjoyed the album from the member and I’m looking forward to 
his Christmas album, which I understand is to be entitled The 
Pringle Jingle. I further understand that the Minister of Crown 
Investments, not to be outdone, will also soon have out for us 
his own first album, which is to be entitled The Channel Lake 
Cha-Cha, or Stuff that Doesn’t Work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of my Liberal colleagues, I want to say 
that we are proud of the long tradition of our party and of the 

contributions it has made to the development of this province 
and of this nation. 
 
As we read the history of Canada and of Saskatchewan, we see 
again and again that the Liberal Party has been in the forefront 
in building a country which is strong and prosperous and just. 
 
The other traditional party in our country is the Conservatives. 
History tells us that the term “Tory” is an ancient Gaelic word 
meaning robber. Well, Mr. Speaker, never was it more 
appropriately applied than here in Saskatchewan. However, 
what happened was that the people of the province came to 
realize the full scope of what had been done to them by the 
former Conservative government, and that party was, of course, 
in need of a name change. 
 
So now we have what is called the Saskatchewan Party. This is 
the Tory Party under the witness protection program. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Whether this new party will last long enough 
to make any mark on our history remains a question. Whether 
— if it does make its mark — that mark will be any more 
reputable than that of its predecessor is an even bigger question. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, what are some of the issues that the Liberal 
opposition will be raising during the coming session. I would 
like to discuss two issues. I’m sure my colleagues and friends 
will have other pressing issues that they will be discussing in 
the coming debate. 
 
First of all, as the member for North Battleford, I will be 
demanding answers as to what went wrong with the province’s 
young offender custody program. Christmas in the Battlefords 
was shattered by the news that the provincial government has 
designated the small home of a 58-year-old woman as a custody 
facility for young offenders. Into that home were placed two 
youths serving terms for violent offences, one for manslaughter. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not only was Mrs. Montgomery a polio victim, 
she had received virtually no training, and had little background 
or no work experience for running a youth custody facility. The 
preparation and backup she received was woefully and 
tragically inadequate. 
 
She kept the youths’ records and cleaning solvents from her 
kitchen under lock and key as she had been told. But she had 
not been told that when operating a custody facility it is 
important that knives . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the hon. member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Langford: — I’d like to ask leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Langford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today in your 
gallery, Mr. Speaker, we’ve got the RM (rural municipality) of 
Buckland in here. They are in for a SARM (Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities) convention and they are 



50 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 1998 

going to be meeting with the minister of SERM (Saskatchewan 
Environment and Resource Management) and the Justice 
minister. 
 
In your chambers, Mr. Speaker, is the reeve from the RM of 
Buckland, Lawrence Viala; and councillor, Wes Stubbs; 
councillor, Sid Zdrill; and administrator, Lorne Marshall. So 
everyone please welcome them here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Ms. Hamilton, seconded by Mr. 
Ward. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker. Mrs. Montgomery 
had not been told that when operating a custody facility, it is 
imperative to keep knives and other potential weapons under 
lock and key. Although she was told a youth worker would be 
available to provide backup on a regular basis, when one youth 
was sent to her home, it was by way of Mrs. Montgomery 
herself going to the bus depot to pick up the girl unaided. 
 
The Minister of Social Services claims that Mrs. Montgomery 
was fully briefed about the girls she was receiving. He has not 
indicated whether that full briefing included telling her the 
Crown had opposed the transfer of one of the girls into open 
custody on the grounds that she was a danger to society. 
 
When I checked the regulations I found that the only regulation 
under Residential Services Act which makes specific reference 
to youth custody homes, was not the regulation under which 
Mrs. Montgomery was registered. There are two regulations. 
Only one makes reference to youth custody homes. This was 
not the regulation under which Mrs. Montgomery was licensed. 
Instead she was registered under apparently the more general 
regulation for private homes, which include group homes for 
the elderly and the mentally challenged. 
 
(1515) 
 
I think it is self-evident, Mr. Speaker, that the needs of the 
mentally handicapped and the requirements for running a 
custody facility for violent youths are very different. If the 
Montgomery home had been licensed under the proper 
regulation there would have been a board of directors. There 
would have been programs and security regulations in place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the fact that the regulations under which Mrs. 
Montgomery was supposedly licensed make no reference to 
young offenders custody is to me a clear indication that it was 
not the original intention of the government to use private 
homes as custody facilities. The fact that the Minister of Social 
Services never uses the term custody facility, but instead prefers 
the term community service home, clearly shows that he still 
doesn’t appreciate the difference between a group home for the 
elderly and mentally challenged, and a resident, and a custody 

centre. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we in the Liberal opposition proposed that the 
Dundurn training centre could be used for open custody. The 
intention was that with the help of the Corps of 
Commissionaires, there would be a program which would 
include education, addictions counselling, work placement, and 
a form of basic training. 
 
Incredibly, when the Minister of Social Services heard about 
our proposal he turned it down. He said in a letter that Camp 
Dundurn did not provide and I quote, “the level of custody 
which in our assessment was required to meet public safety 
concerns, and provide the supervision required for youth who 
may not voluntarily remain at the facility.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, sadly I say, this is how crazy and illogical our 
young offender custody program has gotten. The minister says 
that the Dundurn training centre doesn’t provide sufficient 
security but apparently private homes, and Helen 
Montgomery’s home in particular, did provide that security and 
that supervision that he sees as necessary and inadequate at the 
former army camp at Dundurn. 
 
The minister says that I’m misleading the public when I say that 
Helen Montgomery’s home wasn’t properly licensed, but he 
hasn’t produced a copy of the licence. He hasn’t told us that the 
home met square footage requirements for two youths. He 
hasn’t told us what was done about training or security. He 
hasn’t told us why the home didn’t have the $1 million liability 
insurance that custody homes are supposed to have. The 
minister will have to take responsibility for this terrible 
breakdown in government administration. 
 
Mr. Speaker, asking the federal government to change the 
Young Offenders Act will not do any good if this province 
continues to arbitrarily designate private homes such as Helen 
Montgomery’s as custody facilities. 
 
I’m very pleased that the minister has now ordered an external 
review of the community homes program. Initially, he said that 
he thought an internal, behind-closed-doors review would be 
good enough. I’m pleased that he’s responded to our demands 
for a more open process. 
 
I do, however, continue to have some concerns. The minister 
still seems comfortable lumping young offender custody 
facilities in with homes serving the mentally challenged. The 
essential point that custody facilities are a separate type of 
facility with very specialized needs still seems to be lost on the 
government. 
 
Although the minister says that the Montgomery tragedy led to 
the review of the community homes, he says the Montgomery 
home will not be included in the review. The reason given is 
that there are outstanding criminal charges. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the question of whether Helen Montgomery’s 
home was an appropriate place for violent young offenders to 
serve their time in custody is quite separate from the question of 
the guilt or innocence of the youths charged with her murder. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was pleased to hear His Honour say in his 



March 11, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 51 

speech that the government is now interested in investing in 
people. This is a switch from last year when investing in 
third-world countries was the major preoccupation. 
 
We now know that this government has mismanaged our Crown 
corporations. While raising utility rates at home, we were losing 
money on a cable company in Chicago, an electrical company 
in Guyana, and gas futures contracts in Alberta. 
 
If we want to know what our Crowns are up to, we have to do a 
search at the Alberta corporations branch or read the 
Georgetown Times. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the fundamental question is: do our Crown 
corporations exist to provide service to the people of 
Saskatchewan at reasonable rates? Or do we have the Crown 
utilities so they can raise money in Saskatchewan from 
Saskatchewan residents to invest in risky ventures around the 
world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are still many unanswered questions about 
Channel Lake. I do, however, congratulate the minister for his 
statement in this House yesterday, in his frank admission that 
this whole fiasco was mismanaged or not managed at all. He 
did not once say that it was Ottawa’s fault. 
 
Finally, the provincial government has the moral fortitude to 
stand up and say we lost money through our incompetence and 
our lack of due diligence. They didn’t even try to say that their 
failure to properly discharge their responsibilities to the people 
of Saskatchewan was the fault of the federal government. 
 
Last year we were told that Channel Lake was one of the 
Crown’s successes. It was proof the people’s investments were 
being responsibly and sensibly handled. Well, Mr. Speaker, if 
Channel Lake is one of the success stories, what will the 
failures look like? 
 
We may yet find out. Two weeks ago the minister said in 
Meadow Lake that Millar Western was hemorrhaging badly. 
What did he mean by that? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier recently said the government should 
not be in business. That’s not what the government is meant for 
or good at. 
 
Well this government is certainly proving the truth of the 
Premier’s statements. Is it asking too much to say that this 
government should get back to health, to roads, to schools? 
 
A government consumed with foreign investments is a 
government which has lost interest in its real mission. A plane 
for the cabinet becomes more important than the Plains Health 
Centre. A cable company in Chicago becomes more pressing 
than the buildings at the University of Saskatchewan with their 
collapsing roofs. Running casinos becomes more important than 
running schools and hospitals and fixing roads. An electrical 
company in Guyana becomes more important than keeping 
electrical rates low for Saskatchewan residents. 
 
In that regard, Mr. Speaker, the former president of SaskPower 
wrote to me to say that I needn’t be concerned with Guyana 
because all of the profits would be repatriated to Saskatchewan. 

Well my question now is: where are all the losses going? We all 
know that the losses are also, in Mr. Messer’s phrase, going to 
be repatriated to Saskatchewan and Saskatchewan ratepayers 
and taxpayers. 
 
Yesterday, Mr. Speaker, the Premier was critical of the federal 
government for its spending money on post-secondary 
education. Unfortunately we know that we in Saskatchewan 
have the least educated workforce in Canada. We know that we 
have tremendous numbers of aboriginal youths who will soon 
be coming of age. They must receive the education and training 
they need to ensure that they will be able to integrate into the 
workforce and the economy. 
 
These are challenges we must address for the good of our young 
people and for the good of our province. In view of the attitude 
displayed by the Premier in this House yesterday, all I can say 
is, thank heavens the federal government takes its 
responsibilities to our students more seriously than does the 
NDP. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of this province know that their 
government’s priorities are not their own, personal priorities. 
They want a return to basics. They want a government which 
believes in providing services to its people. They want a 
government which believes in this province and its people, 
whose cabinet ministers are seen more often in North Battleford 
and Nipawin and Estevan than in Georgetown, Guyana; 
Santiago, Chile; or Montevideo, Uruguay. 
 
Mr. Speaker, dare we to hope that this government has learned 
its lesson? Dare we to hope that this province and its people are 
indeed the new-found priority of the NDP? Dare we to hope 
that risky foreign adventures in heavily indebted, third-world 
countries are a thing of the past? Dare we to hope that the NDP 
will not use fed-bashing to hide its lack of responsible action? 
Dare we to hope that this chastened government is not only 
older but wiser? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the appearance of the government members 
yesterday, looking smug and self-congratulatory despite the 
revelations of mismanagement we listened to, does not sound 
encouraging. But I’m pleased to say that I am by nature an 
optimistic person. Optimism is at the basis of Liberal thought, 
Mr. Speaker. Optimism is what built this country, this province, 
and this party, and optimism is what will keep Saskatchewan 
and the Liberal Party growing and building in the 21st century. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s always a great 
pleasure to rise and reply to the Speech from the Throne in this 
astute Assembly in the greatest province in the best country. 
And now if we could only move the legislature to my 
constituency of Swift Current, we could truly say we were in 
the best spot in the whole world. 
 
I would personally like to welcome all of you to this special 
place, Swift Current. Pioneers of medicare, pioneers of 911 
rural service, smallest city to support not only a western junior 
hockey franchise but a championship franchise as well. 
Excellent recreation places. A super place to visit, but even a 



52 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 1998 

superior place to live. Beautiful parks. But most important of 
all, an innovative, caring, compassionate people. 
 
I would like to welcome back my colleagues from the session 
last year. But, Mr. Speaker, I find it difficult to recognize a few 
of the members opposite. Oh, perhaps that is because of the 
change to Tory blue from Liberal red. Somehow it just doesn’t 
seem to suit them. Oh well, Mr. Speaker, bedroom politics, of 
which the hopeful leader is so tired of, especially in the dead of 
the night, creates strange bedfellows. 
 
Mr. Speaker, allow me a few minutes to congratulate you on 
your outreach program. Your commitment to this Assembly and 
the concepts of democracy are beyond question. And you must 
be commended on your enthusiasm, dedication, and devotion to 
not only explaining how our system operates, but also on being 
a true champion of democracy. 
 
Last year I referred to you as the keeper of the keys of the 
quorum in this House and the guardian of the recess bell. And 
you performed these tasks with great wisdom and 
understanding. 
 
This year I would prefer to recognize your contribution to the 
fostering of democracy in this great province. If I may phrase 
your admonition to all the people you address: we must never 
take democracy for granted. And just as important, we must 
play an active part. Both elements are so vital. 
 
We must exercise our franchise but exercise it wisely, as the 
greatest dangers to democracy are ignorance and apathy. 
Though we are practitioners of democracy in this House, it is 
the people who will ensure that democracy will prevail. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I thank you for your dedication and your 
enthusiasm to this great cause. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — However, Mr. Speaker, I cannot go so far as the 
student who described the tricorn hat you wear as the trinity. 
You may be, you may be virtuous, honest, and sincere, but we 
in this Assembly know that you are not an angel. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what an inspiring Speech from the Throne. The 
people spoke to us and we listened. We will place people first 
and will assist small businesses in creating jobs. We will place 
people first with our emphasis on health, education, and social 
services. 
 
Contrast this with the federal Liberals, who will respond to the 
needs of the people but not until the new millennium. In the 
meantime, big corporations will continue to eliminate jobs and 
make absurd profits at the expense of the common person. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on March 1, 1998 the federal Finance minister 
was defending the Liberal budget on an open-line radio show. 
He claimed that the new scholarship fund to be instituted in 
2000 would create opportunities for all Canadians. What he 
failed to mention is that Saskatchewan’s share of the new 
venture will be approximately $10 million a year. 

In the meantime, the transfer payments for education have been 
slashed by 40 to $50 million each and every year. Then he 
wonders why the provinces are less than enthusiastic about this 
plan. We promise to cut you by 40 million. Now we will only 
cut you by 30 million. Thus we’re giving you an additional sum 
of 10 million — marvellous man. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we often hear the Saskatchewan Party — oops, 
sorry — Tories, by any other name, decry the medicare system 
and speak in favour and advocate a two-tier system. They 
howled incessantly about waiting-lists, poor service, and 
inadequate funding. They and their Liberal cronies, led by Dr. 
Gloom and Doom, pray on the misfortunes of the people and 
paint a gloomy, dark picture of a system which is admired 
throughout the world and by those who have had to use the 
system. 
 
Poll after poll have shown of those who have been in the 
system, 80 to 87 per cent rate the service as good to excellent. 
That’s 80 to 87 per cent, Mr. Speaker. Not too shabby a 
response. Listening to the Tories and Liberals wail you would 
think the health system was in utter chaos. 
 
(1530) 
 
Mr. Speaker, as this Assembly knows, medicare was started on 
a trial basis in south-west Saskatchewan and then expanded to 
the rest of the province. It was completely funded by the 
provincial government. Then when the federal government 
introduced a national medicare program the funding was shared 
on a 50/50 basis. National standards were established and 
enforced. Today, thanks to the savage slashes by the Liberals to 
block transfers, only 13 per cent is financed by the national 
government. 
 
Now the sad part about this is that now some of the provincial 
jurisdictions are seriously contemplating opting out of the 
national program and instituting two-tier or even private 
insurance. Well this, Mr. Speaker, this may be attractive to 
some individuals, especially those with deep pockets, but it will 
never be acceptable to the majority of the people. 
 
Keith Bossaer, an insurance agent from North Battleford, who 
I’m sure the member from North Battleford has consulted with, 
recently spent four weeks in Texas. While there he made some 
inquiries with regards to all types of insurance and one of the 
things he looked at was health insurance. Here are his findings 
— I hope the opposition is listening carefully. 
 
A typical family of four could expect to pay premiums 
anywhere from 300 to $750 per month with the $500 deductible 
and still be responsible for 10 per cent of the cost. The 
deductibles for major surgery could easily run up to 10,000 or 
more. He asked the question: where would you rather live? I 
think it’s self-explanatory. 
 
An Hon. Member: — No wonder all the people from Texas are 
moving here. 
 
Mr. Wall: — That’s right. Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned earlier, 
my constituency is in the heart of the former health region no. 
1. The pioneers of the south-west recognized the need for a 
comprehensive medical scheme and, against all odds, organized 



March 11, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 53 

and instituted a system which was to be a model, first, for 
Saskatchewan and then for the nation. 
 
Not only these people but all the people of Saskatchewan know 
which political party introduced medicare, and they will never 
forget which party used every conceivable method available to 
prevent its inception. That was the Liberal party. A shameful 
legacy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our medicare system is not perfect. Of course we 
do not have all the answers, but we do have faith in the people 
of Saskatchewan. Let me cite an example. 
 
There is a problem across this whole nation of a doctor 
shortage. This holds true for the Swift Current area. True to the 
pioneering spirit so evident in this region, a public meeting was 
organized on Thursday, March 5, to determine how this 
problem could be addressed. They came, 170 to 200 strong, not 
to whine and lay blame on either the health board, the doctors, 
or the government, but to offer suggestions how they — not the 
doctors alone, not the health board alone and not the 
government alone but all the people working together 
cooperatively — could arrive at solutions. 
 
I was very proud to be a part of that meeting, and I know that 
through their deliberations, wisdom and determination, these 
people of the south-west will once again become a model for 
the rest of the country. A special thank you to Dr. Radford, a 
family physician in Swift Current, and to Drew Lockhart, the 
CEO of the Swift Current Health District, for organizing this 
public meeting. 
 
The only negative aspect of this whole evening, Mr. Speaker, 
was the comment of the member for Moosomin who, posing as 
the health critic of the Tory Party, hinted that the hospital in 
Swift Current would close because of the shortage of doctors 
caused by the underfunding by this provincial government. A 
deathly silence fell over the whole meeting and nobody — and I 
mean nobody — believed this statement for one minute. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if this is a listing to the people, grassroots party, 
the only party . . . part which is valid is the dark underground 
roots of this unholy alliance spawned in the depths of the night. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, medicare is alive and doing well in 
Swift Current and in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as stated in the throne speech, our government 
will be redesigning the social assistance program and creating 
new programs and opportunities for individuals, children, and 
families. In July 1988, the Department of Social Services will 
be introducing Saskatchewan Child Benefit. This benefit will 
work to reduce barriers to independence and reduce poverty. 
There will be a basic allowance for all children who qualify and 
will include supplementary health coverage including drugs, 
dental, optometric, and others. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another important aspect of the social assistance 
program will be the Saskatchewan employment supplement. As 
you know, Mr. Speaker, there are many barriers to work 
presently built in Saskatchewan’s social assistance system. The 

new Saskatchewan employment supplement will work to reduce 
these barriers for children and families and, in effect, will begin 
tearing down the welfare wall for these families. 
 
As a result of these and other programs, Saskatchewan’s social 
safety net will change significantly over the next few years. 
Saskatchewan is moving towards a system that provides greater 
support for educational training and employment opportunities. 
 
These programs will have the long-term impact on improving 
the health and well-being of Saskatchewan children, reducing 
cycles of dependence and building a stronger, healthier society. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is to be commended for this 
initiative. Child poverty is a blight in this country. This 
government tackles the problem head-on. But other 
governments and political parties believe that tax cuts alone will 
solve this problem. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here are some startling facts. Between 1989 and 
1995, child poverty has grown by approximately 7 per cent in 
Saskatchewan. And this is a horrible record, but compare this to 
the tax-free — so-called — oil-rich Tory Alberta where child 
poverty has risen by 34 per cent and to Harris’s Ontario where 
the rise is an unspeakable 99 per cent. 
 
Yes, this government cares for the children. Yes, it is 
compassionate for the needs of the young. And yes, we will 
provide our children with opportunities to learn, to become 
independent citizens of this great province. 
 
What would the Tories do? Well if they are the same ilk as their 
Tory cousins in Ontario — and we have no reason to believe 
otherwise — they would slash funding to these programs, and 
then they would privatize social assistance programs allowing 
private companies — especially American companies — to 
profit in the millions of dollars at the expense of the poorest of 
the poor. 
 
As we speak, the minister of Ontario is negotiating the 
privatization of social assistance and profits to the company will 
exceed $100,000,000 — a vicious attack on the poorest of the 
poor. 
 
And what of our Liberal friends? Well they say perhaps it is 
best that we have no policy because then we can shift in 
whatever direction the public seems to want to go. The member 
from Regina Wascana Plains suggested yesterday that the new 
Tory Party be renamed the Panamanian party. I have another 
name but we won’t mention that one. Given the Liberals’ 
admitted lack of principle, I think they too should change their 
name to NIP for the new — no, sorry, — no ideology party. 
They have no ideology. 
 
Liberals and Tories should work with us, help us to overcome 
this blight in this rich nation of ours. Mr. Speaker, child poverty 
is not our vision of the future. This is not going to occur in 
Saskatchewan because the people of Saskatchewan are a caring, 
compassionate people who truly believe in being their brother’s 
helper. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to make a few comments on 
economic activity in this province and refer to certain areas in 



54 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 1998 

my constituency. In my constituency it is becoming a problem 
to obtain qualified workers for all the needs of the system. 
Although there are many programs in place, there still is a 
shortage. 
 
In fact, a seminar was held just recently in Swift Current to 
determine how to attract and train workers to fill these needs. 
At Urban Recyclers, manufacturers of eggplants, they are 
working around the clock to keep up to their sales. 
 
Dura Products, who are involved with oil field equipment, has 
difficulty trying to maintain a reserve of supplies. In fact, they 
are quite a few months behind. REM, the agricultural 
manufacturing firm, has expanded to twice its size. Benallack 
manufacturing, which makes pressurized boilers and oil field 
pumping equipment, is taxed — pardon the pun — to the limit 
and exports many of its products to Alberta. He says he will 
compete with Alberta at any time and he does. 
 
Pratt Motors, a General Motors dealership, opened a brand new 
service centre, a state of the art. Patterson grain handles 
millions of bushels of grain this year. Bapco, manufacturers of 
grain augers, is expanding. The Horseshoe motel is undergoing 
extensive renovations. The Best Western Inn is doubling its 
operation. The list goes on. Pemico oil is becoming a major 
player in the oil patch along with Renaissance. 
 
A great incentive for oil exploration was the creation of a new 
tier for the medium-heavy crude which is found in this area. 
Pasta Dura Canada Incorporated recently signed an agreement 
with Penn Company Construction to design the plant and 
buildings that are required to house Pasta Dura’s milling and 
pasta manufacturing equipment. Swift Current is the location of 
two high-throughput grain-handling facilities, and another one 
is planned. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all this economic activity speaks well for my 
constituency but also for all of Saskatchewan. 
 
The opposition often whines that the policy of this government 
discourages economic activity. Well let me cite what the people 
from Wascana Energy stated to me on an oil field tour. When I 
asked why they were willing to invest millions in the oil patch, 
their response was simply this: there is a strong, reliable 
government in Regina which when it gives their word, they can 
rely on it. This state keeps their word. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Wall: — This is a government that listens to the people, to 
the business world, and as a result the economic outlook for this 
province is indeed very bright. 
 
The opposition speaks about all the Crowns. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
the member from Estevan yesterday spoke very eloquently 
about the Crowns. Continuing in that vein, we hear a lot of talk 
from the opposition about privatizing our Crowns. They 
obviously forget that the majority of the people of this province 
are adamant that they, through this government, retain 
ownership of the Crowns. And why wouldn’t they? 
 

These Crowns whose rates are very comparative to other 
provinces are the lowest or second lowest in various categories. 
But what is so important is that the profits which are about the 
same, or comparable to privately owned corporations in other 
provinces, basically remain within the province either as a 
dividend to the people or used for capital expenditures needed 
to provide services to Saskatchewan residents in the future. The 
profits do not flow out to — as the Premier often states — New 
York, London, or Zürich. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in simple language so that there can be no doubt, I 
would like to say a few words about how the dividends and the 
taxation works with regards to the Crown corporations. 
 
The Crown corporations pay about half of their profits to the 
Crown Investments Corporation, which we of course call CIC, 
as a dividend. This represents a normal rate of return on the 
money that CIC has invested on behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan and these Crown corporations. 
 
CIC uses this money to continue to fund the remaining costs of 
the Devine Tory megaproject investments. This drain of money 
has been slowly but steadily declining as a result of the 
negotiations of many of these deals. 
 
The remainder of the Crown dividends is turned over to the 
governments to help pay for health, education, and highways. 
And it is only reasonable that we receive some of that return. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why would we privatize the Crowns? The Tories 
and Liberals would privatize the Crowns so that their cronies in 
the big corporations would reap the profits from these Crowns 
and siphon them off to Zürich, London, New York, and not a 
penny stays in this province. 
 
We say no to this privatization and will oppose any and all 
attempts to privatize them. Much criticism has been heard 
recently from the Tories and the Liberals regarding foreign 
investments by the Crowns. Well the net result is that our 
Crowns, unless they invest in foreign investments, will see a 
steady decline in revenues from its Saskatchewan home base. 
 
Is this why the Tories and the Liberals scream loudly about 
foreign investments? Do they wish the Crowns to become such 
a liability that the people will insist on privatization? No, they 
wouldn’t have that type of a plan. I’m sure they wouldn’t. 
 
Only one question we have. Why is it a good investment for the 
individual to take his hard-earned dollars and through a mutual 
fund invest in foreign businesses, while it is a bad investment 
for Crowns to do the same thing? Crown corporations have to 
expand. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Because you lose money. 
 
Mr. Wall: — If the Crowns were to listen to the terrible Tories 
and the limping Liberals, we would only be hastening the 
financial crisis of the Crowns. 
 
It is true as the member opposite mentions, that some of the 
Crown ventures have lost money. It’s also a fact that some of 
the Crowns have been very active in foreign investment. There 
have been successes and a few failures, but overall these 



March 11, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 55 

ventures have returned over $100 million net in profit to the 
people of this province — not to the money barons of Zürich, 
London, and New York. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — This is one of the reasons why we will not . . . 
why we must invest in foreign investments. 
 
Where were the Tories, the Liberals, when these success stories 
occurred? Hiding their heads in the sand as they refused to 
acknowledge the good things of this province. The Crowns 
must invest, and though there are no ironclad guarantees of 
success — in fact some may flop — we must give the Crowns 
the resources they need to invest in foreign ventures. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is a province that relies heavily on 
trade. Because of this, it is absolutely essential that a solid 
transportation system is in place. Saskatchewan has a network 
of roads, which you’ve heard so many times will encircle the 
equator four and a half times. 
 
We also used to have a fairly extensive railroad network to 
carry our profits to market. But now thanks to the elimination of 
the Crow rate, the deregulation of railway rates, and the 
abandonment of rail lines — all thanks to the protector of large 
corporations, the federal Liberals — a tremendous stress has 
been placed on our transportation system. 
 
This government recognized this problem and announced in the 
1997 budget — this information is for the Liberal and Tory 
members who seem to have forgotten this minor policy — that 
we would invest $2.5 billion over the next 10 years for 
highways, 2.5 billion, an average of $250 million a year for the 
next 10 years. Not enough by the Tories. Not enough by the 
Liberals. Negotiate with our federal cousins. They have a 
highway policy. Well, Mr. Speaker, to give credit where credit 
is due, yes, they do have a highway policy. The problem is that 
is not national, not by any stretch of the imagination. 
 
As we all know the recent federal budget held not one thin dime 
for the national highways in western Canada. Saskatchewan’s 
federal minister warned us not to count on any cash from 
Ottawa to help twin the Trans-Canada, forgetting, as do its 
provincial Liberal brothers, that we also have plans to twin the 
Yellowhead from Battleford to Lloydminster. Fighting for our 
interest, as always, is our minister in charge of rail line 
abandonment and highway attrition. 
 
We in Saskatchewan can rightly complain that there appears to 
be federal money for the New Brunswick portion of the 
Trans-Canada — 32 million given by Minister Young. So 
“Chairman Young’s Maritime Road Development Corporation” 
can build and then charge a toll on the section of the highway. 
The Liberals also need to explain why 98 per cent — about 500 
million — is spent in eastern Canada. 
 
Twinning the No. 1 Highway is high priority in my 
constituency and this government has committed that the 
Trans-Canada will be twinned probably without help from 
Ottawa. The Yellowhead will be twinned without the help from 
the member for North Battleford. Planning for both projects is 
well underway and they will be completed in due course. They 

will be completed on time, within budget, with no deletion of 
other necessary programs nor serious deterioration or distortion 
of the highway building economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a warm welcome to the present for the Liberals. In 
their petition, they are urging what is already happening, and 
true of course, they are defending their federal cousins. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have touched on a few points with regards to the 
Speech from the Throne. Other members more eloquent than I 
will talk on other issues. I want to close, Mr. Speaker, by 
reaffirming something that I said last year during the debate. I 
am proud to be a politician. I am honoured to be a public 
participant in our democratic process which is as Churchill said 
— and, Mr. Speaker, you’ll realize this — the worse system of 
government in the world except for all the other kinds. 
 
I am more than willing to put my beliefs, my principles, and my 
party’s policies up for public scrutiny in this or any other 
forum. We are human, yes. We make mistakes, certainly. And 
some of us fall pretty far from grace. And when we betray the 
public trust the response must be swift and severe. But I reject 
the idea that there is a disease which we contract at the drop of 
the writ. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, I also recognize why the people of 
Saskatchewan would have more cynicism toward a politician as 
a result of the back-room politics which occurred during the last 
year. However, I have great trust in this government and greater 
faith in the people of Saskatchewan, and I am proud to show my 
support to this government’s Speech from the Throne. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would be proud to show my support to this 
government’s throne speech. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Murray: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My 
colleague from Swift Current has certainly given us a very 
animated speech and this will be a very tough act for me to 
follow. 
 
Well I am so pleased to be here, Mr. Speaker, and it’s been my 
pleasure to be here for a fair number of years now and the 
magic is still there. It’s still very exciting when I stand up. It’s 
an honour to stand in this Chamber and represent the people of 
Regina Qu’Appelle Valley; it’s an honour to be able to 
participate in this debate; it’s an honour to be among such fine 
colleagues and be part of this parliamentary process that we all 
cherish. 
 
I want to welcome you back to the Chair, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to see you there. I know you will conduct this House 
with a fair and just hand as you have in the past. And I know 
you are ever mindful of the traditions of parliamentary 
democracy. Yours is an honoured position. 
 
I also want to congratulate you, as other members have before 
me, on the work you are doing with young people in this 
province. Now I have been privileged on two occasions to 
participate in your outreach programs — one in Lumsden when 
you visited the school there and one right here in this Chamber 
with MacNeill School. And I must say I was very impressed 



56 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 1998 

and entertained, as I know the students were and the teachers as 
well. So I really want to commend you on your efforts to bring 
the work of the Legislative Assembly to the young people of 
Saskatchewan. Congratulations. 
 
I also want to extend a warm welcome to the young men and 
women who are our pages this session. We appreciate you and 
your work. You are invaluable, not just to us as members but to 
the smooth functioning of this House. 
 
I also want to welcome the Clerks at the Table and the 
Sergeant-at-Arms, as well as the commissionaires. 
 
Now before I begin my brief remarks, I think thanks and 
congratulations are due to the mover of the throne speech, the 
member from Regina Wascana Plains, my former seat mate and 
special friend. What a terrific speech — wise words. She spoke 
of the challenges and the triumphs of the past, and she gave us 
words of hope and words of action for the future. Good words, 
easy to listen to, spoken with warmth and passion and humour. 
 
And also to the member from Estevan, who seconded the 
motion, my current seat mate and good friend. A wonderful 
speech and a tough act to follow. Fine, inspiring words from 
both of you and my thanks and my congratulations. 
 
Well as is traditional, Mr. Speaker, I would like to say a few 
words about my constituency and my constituents. I thank them 
particularly for staying in touch with me as well as they do. 
Now we do this through personal visits, mail, fax, phone, and 
even by e-mail, Mr. Speaker. They’re sharing their views and I 
always appreciate that when they do, as I know all of us in this 
Chamber do. 
 
I thank them also for their welcome when I stop by to visit them 
in their homes or their businesses. And I certainly appreciate 
their honesty. 
 
Regina Qu’Appelle Valley is a very diverse constituency. 
Physically, it’s very beautiful, encompassing, as it does, the 
north-west part of Regina and rural areas to the north, the west, 
and the east. The community of Lumsden to the north is 
situated in the gorgeous Qu’Appelle Valley. And Grand Coulee, 
located to the west, is located on the prairie — the prairie which 
is so well described by W. O. Mitchell, who recently died, in 
his book Who Has Seen The Wind when he says: 
 

Here was the least common denominator of nature. The 
skeleton requirement simply of land and sky, 
Saskatchewan prairie. 
 

And that’s where Grand Coulee sits — right on the prairie. 
Many families make their living on that prairie, Mr. Speaker. 
They grow a variety of crops: oats, wheat, barley; they grow 
grain. They raise cattle, hogs, and horses. And right in the 
valley they grow a bountiful harvest of fruits and vegetables in 
their market gardens. 
 
The constituency is growing, Mr. Speaker. Contractors are 
building new homes and businesses. We welcome new families 
every week and we regularly send out letters of congratulations 
to people beginning new businesses. And the businesses in our 
constituency are many and varied, from a small corner store to 

the large Co-op in the Sherwood Village Mall; from restaurants 
offering a variety of cuisine to franchise operations. There are 
clothing stores and drug stores, hardware stores and gas 
stations, financial institutions, and a call centre. We have an 
active professional community — physicians, optometrists, 
therapists, chiropractors, lawyers, and dentists. 
 
(1600) 
 
And schools, Mr. Speaker, such great schools. We have 10 of 
them in our constituency. And they’re all involved in many 
worthwhile activities — from environmental projects like Clean 
Cat, to safety programs involving safe riding, safe walking. 
They take part in fund-raisers and this year Winston Knoll 
raised money to adopt a family at Christmas time. They have 
competitions to gather food for the food bank and they often 
sponsor citizenship courts. 
 
So I congratulate all of them, the teachers, the staff, and their 
students, on their programs and their involvement with their 
communities and their commitment to excellence in education. 
 
Regina Qu’Appelle Valley has a vibrant cultural community, Mr. 
Speaker. We have nationally recognized writers, painters, 
sculptors, potters, and other artists, and they add much to the 
quality of our life here. 
 
Now if you want to swim or play hockey, bowl, curl or play pool, 
you can do all that in our constituency too. You can walk or cycle 
in several parks, both large and small; and when the weather 
warms up a little, you can play golf at either of two very fine 
courses. All in all, a very fine constituency, Mr. Speaker. And as I 
said, one I’m very proud to represent. 
 
Now the Speech from the Throne talks about investing in people. 
And it talks about how we are planning to do that. Members 
before me on this side of the House have spoken about investing 
in jobs, education and training, health care, and transportation, and 
about investing in families. Investing in families, Mr. Speaker. 
And I would like to quote from the throne speech: 
 

My government will make it a priority this year to address 
issues that affect Saskatchewan families and especially 
Saskatchewan children. 
 

And especially Saskatchewan children, Mr. Speaker. I would 
like to say a few words about social assistance redesign and the 
wonderful work that has been ongoing, that is being done in this 
province, and how that work will benefit Saskatchewan 
children. 
 
Now everywhere I go, people have an opinion on welfare. 
Whether I’m visiting a coffee shop in Lumsden or watching a 
hockey game in Regina or visiting people in their homes or 
businesses, people often talk about welfare. And in 
Saskatchewan, social assistance — commonly referred to as 
welfare — is provided to families and individuals under the 
Saskatchewan Assistance Plan. This is a program of last resort. 
 
Benefits under the plan are provided to families and individuals 
who for various reasons, including disability, illness, low 
income, or unemployment, cannot meet basic living costs. They 
just can’t pay the rent or provide nutritious meals for 



March 11, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 57 

themselves or their families. 
 
Well we all know and recognize that our current welfare system 
is not perfect. It was designed in the 1960s and has fallen 
behind changes in the labour force. There are also parts of the 
current system which can in fact discourage people from 
working or pursuing independence. Changes need to be made. 
 
As you may know, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is redesigning 
social assistance in the province and creating new programs and 
opportunities for individuals, children, and for families. As a 
society, we need to provide supports that help people become 
independent. We need to build opportunities instead of 
dependants. We need to help families move into and stay in the 
workforce. We need to change our system so that people are 
encouraged to work and are rewarded for their efforts. 
 
We need also to actively address child and family poverty. And 
I am so proud, Mr. Speaker, so proud that Saskatchewan, 
through the leadership of our Premier, has played a major role. 
Our Premier has been most eloquent on social programs, on 
maintaining social programs at the national level, and our 
current Minister of Social Services, who continuously works 
with groups and agencies and the Department of Social Services 
towards these positive changes. 
 
And I also want to acknowledge, Mr. Speaker, the work of our 
former minister of Social Services in this area as well. This 
work, Mr. Speaker, has resulted in the first new social program 
in Canada in 30 years — 30 years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Murray: — I am talking about the National Child Benefit, 
an important element in a national strategy to combat child 
poverty. And Saskatchewan was there, Mr. Speaker, playing a 
leadership role. 
 
Saskatchewan initiatives as part of the National Child Benefit 
will start in July. And let me just tell you briefly about three of 
those initiatives. The Saskatchewan Child Benefit will be a 
monthly allowance that will assist low income families with the 
cost of raising children. It will help parents remain in the 
workforce rather than falling onto social assistance because of 
their children’s needs. Through this benefit we are building a 
strong, healthy society — a strong future, because we are 
investing in our children today. 
 
Let me also say a few words about the family health benefits, 
also part of the social service redesign. We all know that 
healthy early childhood development has a long-term impact on 
a healthy, productive society. We have heard of the work of Dr. 
Fraser Mustard, and many of us are familiar with the work of 
the Perry preschool studies. 
 
Children who are raised in a supportive environment with 
adequate housing and nutritious food, have a far, far better 
chance of developing into happy, productive members of 
society. 
 
The family health benefits will help to improve the health of 
children in lower income families. The program will provide 
supplementary health benefits to those families to ensure that 

they do not fall onto social assistance because of the health 
needs of their children. This program will help families on 
social assistance enter the workforce without losing child 
benefits. Again, Mr. Speaker, we are investing in our children 
today for a healthy future tomorrow. 
 
May I just mention one more new initiative, Mr. Speaker. This 
is the Saskatchewan employment supplement. This supplement 
will prop up the wages and child maintenance payments of 
lower income parents. This means that families will be better 
off working than they would be on social assistance. This 
supplement will help parents with the child-related costs of 
going to work, and will support their decision to work. It will 
prevent parents in low income jobs from falling onto social 
assistance as a result of a family or household crisis. Again we 
are working to make the right choice for families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over time these new initiatives, these new 
programs are expected to reduce the number of people on social 
assistance and increase the number of families who are working 
themselves — who are supporting themselves, I’m sorry — 
through work. This will have a long-term impact on improving 
the health and well-being of Saskatchewan’s children, reducing 
cycles of dependence and building a stronger, healthier society 
for the future. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there have been some, I think, defining 
moments for this government: getting our financial house in 
order and balancing the first budget; the amendments to the 
Human Rights Code; the victims of domestic violence 
legislation; and I think that this social services redesign will be 
another defining moment for this government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Murray: — Now, Mr. Speaker, before I close and since we 
have just recognized and celebrated International Women’s 
Day, may I say a few words about the achievements of women 
in memory of a very dear and cherished friend who died nearly 
two years ago of cancer. I’m talking about Hannelore 
Frombach, and you will remember I spoke about her two years 
ago. 
 
Hannelore had an enormous impact on my life. She was warm 
and friendly, energetic, highly intelligent, willing to try 
anything and so much fun. She adored her family and managed 
to show that every day even while she was studying for her 
masters degree in psychology and even while she was working 
full time outside the home. She believed so strongly in the 
ability of women to do anything they set their hearts on. 
 
She is the woman I think of on International Women’s Day. It is 
through her that I recognize and applaud the many efforts of 
women throughout history who have worked to attain justice 
and equality for themselves and their families. 
 
Today as we commemorate the struggles of women all over the 
world and celebrate their accomplishments, we must also 
re-examine our directions and re-energize our efforts as we 
continue to work towards economic, social, and political 
equality for women. As a member of this government, I’m 
proud to be part of the ongoing process to achieve these goals. 
 



58 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 1998 

Mr. Speaker, I have been so pleased to be able to take part in 
this debate, the debate on the Speech from the Throne. And 
before I sit down, I would like to read one more quote from the 
speech itself: 
 

Our province is . . . strong as we look forward into the year 
to come . . . 
 
We are a young and growing province, vigorous and 
poised to take our place as a leader of our country and an 
example to the world that there is strength in community 
. . . 
 
As we chart our course into Saskatchewan’s future, we 
must recognize that our landscapes change, and we cannot 
steer by even our most sturdy landmarks. 

 
We must instead steer by the bright shining stars that have 
always been our truest guide: Our unvarying common 
values of compassion, common sense and community. 

 
It is with great pride, Mr. Speaker, that I support the Speech 
from the Throne. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to rise again this 
year to make my comments with regard to the Speech from the 
Throne; and how quickly a year passes. And, Mr. Speaker, 
we’re a year older. I think we’re a year further down the 
positive track; we’re a year wiser. 
 
And you look pretty good, Mr. Speaker. Certainly I know that 
you’re not going to say that I’m engaging in a conversation 
when I’m complimenting you, but I really wanted to echo the 
comments of my colleagues, to say that I very much appreciated 
— as did the Hugh Cairns School — when you came out to 
spend some time with us. 
 
As a matter of fact, they are still talking about that visit. And it 
was a very informative, as you recall, a very interested young 
group. You were very entertaining; you really left your mark 
there. So we appreciate that very much. 
 
(1615) 
 
I will echo the comments from the members as well, especially 
the member from Swift Current when he talked about your 
strong desire to promote democratic institutions and how 
precious you view that; so we appreciate that. 
 
I want to also say hello to the constituents of Saskatoon 
Eastview. This is my 10th year here, and I’m very honoured to 
have represented the constituents of Saskatoon Eastview for 
that period of time. It’s been a real pleasure. And also to say I 
know lots of seniors watch this program, and I had the pleasure 
over the last month of going into most of the senior centres, not 
only in Eastview but in Saskatoon, to do a number of songs and 
have some sing-alongs, in terms of kind of the MLA report, and 
they weren’t very interested in the MLA report, they just 
wanted to sing. They had a great time and sold quite a few of 
our CDs and cassettes for crisis services, which I greatly 
appreciate. 

So we had a great time, and as I say we talked a lot about very 
serious issues as well that people have. The issues that have 
been raised regarding the importance of jobs, or good economic 
activity, a strong health care system, investment in our young 
people regarding education, and of course the importance of 
continuing that balanced approach of tax reduction and money 
towards the Tory debt, which is still a legacy that people 
haven’t forgotten about, is very much appreciated — the 
balanced approach that we’re involved in. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to thank those in not only Saskatoon 
Eastview but in Saskatoon and area, that came out to a public 
meeting that I sponsored last night, and the Minister of Health 
was there, and I want to thank the people who stepped forth and 
raised some of the issues they did with their frankness and their 
passion and also their understanding that we’re, I think, moving 
in the right direction; and the Minister of Health was very 
attentive and I think very responsive and in many cases 
reassuring. So it was a good public meeting. It was a very cool 
evening. I think we had about 70 people who came out, and I 
was very appreciative of that, and we had a great dialogue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as other members have alluded to, this is a very 
tough world in many ways. Certainly we are looking at global 
world changes. We’re looking at these changes that impact on 
everyone. It is kind of cliché to say this perhaps, but global 
changes really do impact all of us and I think that many people 
are beginning to see it in a way that they haven’t appreciated in 
the past. And in all of that, there’s a fair amount of anxiety and 
uncertainty. I know that a lot of uncertainty and anxiety around 
the MAI (multilateral agreement on investment) and other 
global kinds of rearrangements that people see occurring before 
them . . . 
 
Certainly I think there is also a sense of opportunity and 
certainly a sense of hope about some of the possibilities, and 
that’s as it should be. And Saskatchewan people have a good 
feeling, a good reason to be hopeful about lots of the global 
changes, in that we certainly have the opportunity to 
increasingly market our products, which we are doing with 
great success as we come to understand other parts of the world 
and make the links that are important there. We obviously have 
lots of products that are needed around the world and our trade 
numbers are very impressive. 
 
We also, of course, have lots of knowledge and expertise and 
skill, that is Saskatchewan people, to export. And I think our 
values of caring and compassion and our sense of community 
and our sense of co-op development is very much appreciated 
around the world. 
 
So I think that from a Saskatchewan perspective, as we did in 
the Olympics, as every member in this House was proud to see 
that little Saskatchewan flag waving with the Canadian flag, it 
certainly is the kind of influence I think, that we can have on 
the world scene generally, and are having generally. 
 
And just a few examples as to how we influence our world 
developments. We’ve had, as you know, legislators from South 
Africa here studying here and we’ve had people go over there 
as their democracy unfolds and I think that they are very 
appreciative of this model of parliamentary democracy. And I 
believe we’ve got a responsibility to work together and make 



March 11, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 59 

those kinds of contributions where we can. 
 
We also know that in Taiwan they’re very interested. Of all the 
models of health care they’ve looked at worldwide, they’re very 
interested in the Saskatchewan model. And of course they 
recently invited the Minister of Health and officials to go and 
provide some information on what we are doing. Now they 
value that very much. 
 
I know that bothers the opposition, to hear that health care is 
successful. It bothers them to hear good news and it bothers 
them to hear that somebody else is drawing and learning from 
our experiences. We are the pioneers in medicare and we have a 
responsibility to share that information to those who are 
developing their systems — and we can learn from them too. 
You always learn something from somebody else. 
 
But my point being is that others are interested in the good 
things we’re doing in health care. 
 
We have people around from this province visiting countries 
right now in terms of our experience, fifty years or so of co-op 
development, our way of cooperating. And that’s the expertise 
that we can provide, and we have some good models here. I 
know everyone in the House would agree with that. And the 
co-op movement is one of our three major engines of the 
economy, been very successful. 
 
And so the throne speech, I think, builds on the kind of 
background as I’ve tried to sort of outline here. It basically yet 
speaks to or is an example or reflective of . . . or the United 
Nations says that this is about the best place in the world to live. 
That doesn’t mean that we don’t have some challenges and 
problems. Well for men it’s about the best place to live; for 
women it’s about the seventh best place. So we got work to do 
on that front and we recognize that. 
 
I want to join with my colleague in thanking the mover, our 
colleague from Regina Wascana Plains, and the seconder, our 
colleague from Estevan. My home town is Carnduff, so we’re 
kind of the south-east connection there, and along with the 
member from Souris Cannington, and I want to thank him for 
the positive contribution that he’s made not only in his speech 
but since he’s been a member of this Legislative Assembly. 
And I might say it’s a refreshing kind of perspective to come 
out of Estevan. So it’s great to have him here. Now Estevan has 
always been great — I’m talking about members. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the theme of the throne speech, “Building on our 
Common Values”, I think is very timely because that’s what is 
the strength of Saskatchewan people — our common values — 
and as we look to a new millennium it even makes it more 
relevant, it seems to me, to kind of reaffirm what’s important in 
Saskatchewan, in Canada, in terms of the values that have 
served Saskatchewan people so well. 
 
I don’t share the doom and gloom that I heard from the member 
from Canora and the member from North Battleford about 
Saskatchewan or about our future. I think Saskatchewan’s a 
pretty good place to be, and it’s interesting that one of the 
leaders for the Saskatchewan Party is talking about 
Saskatchewan being a place to be rather than to be from. Well if 
he has any hopes of becoming a leader of the new Conservative 

Party, he’s going to have to start getting his facts right because 
people are coming into Saskatchewan — they’re not leaving 
any more. 
 
I know that they were leaving in droves in the 1980s and most 
people still think they’re leaving. They’re now coming back. 
You can’t get a hotel room, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, you 
can’t get a hotel room in Swift Current or Lloydminster or 
Meadow Lake or Estevan or Carnduff or Moosomin or 
Kindersley or Nipawin because things are booming across the 
province. You can’t get a hotel room there, Mr. Speaker; so 
people are coming back and things are booming. 
 
So it’s not doom and gloom — it’s not doom and gloom. 
Saskatchewan people, this party’s going to have to be in step 
with Saskatchewan people. Saskatchewan people are optimistic, 
they’re hopeful, they’re creative, they’re innovative, and that’s 
not where this party of the 1940s is from. This is nothing more 
than the recycling of the 1940s party, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s our responsibility, I would submit, as 
members of the Legislative Assembly, to be hopeful and 
optimistic rather than to promote doom and gloom. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have the Leader of the Opposition speaking 
today, and the Leader of the Opposition is saying . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order, order. Now the 
Chair is having some difficulty being able to hear the words by 
the hon. member from Saskatoon Eastview. I recognize that 
there are other hon. members calling back and forth in the 
Assembly, members who have not yet put their remarks on the 
record. I’m sure that they’ll want to do that at the appropriate 
time rather depriving us all from having them on the record 
right now. And we’ll allow the hon. member from Saskatoon 
Eastview to be heard in the throne speech debate. 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Mr. Speaker, when you start talking about the 
1980s . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Mr. Pringle: — I don’t like talking about the 1980s either 
because they’re very painful for all of us. When you start 
talking about the 1980s, the old new Conservative Party, they 
start getting defensive and interrupting and instead of getting up 
themselves . . . They had lots of time to get up themselves. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition was talking 
today about his doom and gloom message. And he’s talking 
about the tax base shrinking in Saskatchewan. He’s 
fundamentally, absolutely wrong about that. The tax base in 
Saskatchewan is growing because there are more people 
working today than ever in the history of our province. So the 
tax base is growing, not shrinking. He’s absolutely wrong about 
that. 
 
He talks about more people leaving than ever, the province. 
That’s absolutely wrong, it’s not true. For 13 quarters in a row 
we’ve had a net increase in population. That was the ’80s when 
people were leaving. People are now coming back and they 
haven’t picked that up yet. 
 



60 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 1998 

He talks about . . . he worries about where we’re going to get 
the revenues. Well we worry about that too. Well we’re going 
to continue to get the revenues from good economic 
development and the expanded tax base. He should have been 
worrying, he and his colleagues, he and his Tory colleagues 
should have been worrying in the 1980s, when they racked up a 
$15 billion debt, as to where the revenue was going to come 
from. 
 
Now we’re starting to pay that down, we’re starting to pay that 
down . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, they’re not too 
concerned about the details. But the thing is, 18 or so per cent 
of our revenue goes toward the Tory debt. Now this is the same 
crew that racked up the debt. Some of the same individuals are 
there. They can’t escape that by changing their name. 
 
This is the same crew. Imagine what we could do with 750 . . . 
$757 million interest? Imagine what we could with $757 
million on their interest payment that we don’t have to work 
with. And that leader has the nerve to say where are we going to 
get the revenue from. 
 
Well they should have thought about that a long time ago, Mr. 
Speaker, but we’re going to do it anyway in spite of their doom 
and gloom. So they can’t walk away from the debt. And 
Saskatchewan people are not going to be fooled by that change 
of name — it’s the same old crew. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they say the priorities are wrong. The Leader of 
the Opposition said that today. I want to know . . . I’ve been 
into all my senior centres, I had my public meeting last night, I 
met with my constituents at coffee row. I want to know how 
building on your common values of Saskatchewan people has 
the wrong priority. 
 
I want to know from them, if they stand up, how investing in 
families — investing in children and young people and families 
and strengthening communities — I want to know how 
investing in jobs and education and training, how investing in 
health care and transportation within a fiscal system that’s 
affordable, is the wrong priorities for Saskatchewan people. 
 
Those are the priorities that Saskatchewan people feel very 
profound about. Those reflect the Saskatchewan priorities. And 
they say we have the wrong priorities. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
know what their priorities are; where have they been? There’s 
no question that the Prime Minister does not have the priorities 
that were reflected at the public meeting we had last night, 
because the Prime Minister of Canada — and I understand the 
Minister of Health doesn’t even agree with him, Mr. Rock — 
the Prime Minister of Canada says there is no money in the 
federal budget because medicare in Canada is all right, it’s 
okay, it’s healthy. 
 
And the provincial Liberals are saying that too. They’re out of 
step with Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker. My constituents 
do not agree with the Prime Minister that he can get off the 
hook by not putting more money into health care because it’s 
healthy. 
 
Health care in Saskatchewan is only healthy because we have 
put back every cent that the federal Liberals have cut and we’ve 
added about 107 million new dollars in the last two years. To 

the degree that health care is healthy in this province, which I 
would submit is in the most healthy state in Canada, is healthy 
because of the money that we have replaced with the federal 
cuts and put new money in — 40 million last year, 57 million 
this year. Now that’s the priorities that were reflected at the 
public meeting that I had last night. 
 
(1630) 
 
So how the Saskatchewan Liberal leader can say that he’s 
standing up for Saskatchewan baffles me, Mr. Speaker. Now we 
don’t expect the old, new Tory party . . . At least they’re honest. 
At least they are honest. The Liberals say one thing when they 
are in opposition and then they do something different. And 
that’s a matter of public record historically in Canada. 
 
At least the Tories are honest. They believe in privatized 
medicine. They believe in profit medicine, for-profit medicine, 
medicare, and they believe in two-tier medicine. At least they’re 
honest about that and I respect that. They’re honest about that 
and I respect that. I respect that. 
 
Saskatchewan people, I don’t think . . . Also, as the Liberal 
leader says, he’s going to fire all the elected health boards. I’ve 
talked to some people about that. They don’t want the elected 
health boards fired. Who is he going to replace them with? The 
Liberal leader of Saskatchewan says he would replace the 
elected health boards — whom he’ll fire if he ever had a 
chance, which he won’t — that he’s going to replace them with 
those who know best about health care. 
 
And I think a lot of Saskatchewan people, his doctor friends 
perhaps, a lot of Saskatchewan people feel that is somewhat 
offensive. Because that’s the approach we’ve used in education. 
That’s the approach we’re using with the REDAs (regional 
economic development authority). The local people who are 
close to their communities, who are part of their communities, 
know best what decisions reflect the best interests of their 
communities. 
 
And that’s the philosophy behind the elected health boards. And 
the Liberal leader wants to fire them, and I don’t think he’s 
going to have the chance. And that’s one of the reasons he 
won’t have a chance. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I am proud of these six priorities as reflected 
in the throne speech. And I know that the budget, which is 
coming down shortly, will also reflect these priorities. But I 
don’t agree with the opposition to say that these are the wrong 
priorities. I think these priorities are right on target, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And the reason that they are is . . . Let’s take a look at that. 
What makes people feel secure? Well people feel secure if 
they’ve got a job with an adequate salary, not a poverty-level 
salary that those people want. They always oppose a minimum 
wage increase. They always oppose any increases to social 
assistance rates. So they’re not too concerned about that. 
 
But what makes people secure is a good job with some 
meaningful work with adequate salaries and benefits. They 
fought the part-time benefits for part-time employees. They 
fought every progressive labour-related agenda item ever. And 



March 11, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 61 

that hasn’t changed in a 100 years but they’re fighting that 
today. 
 
People feel secure if they’ve got good housing; if they’ve got 
some educational opportunities and a chance to participate 
meaningfully in the economy. They feel secure if they’ve got a 
good health care system. 
 
Those are the kind of things. They feel secure if they’re in 
support of communities and they’re safe and either with 
compassionate friends. Strong families, strong communities, 
that’s what makes people feel secure. 
 
Now how you can say that a throne speech that focuses on . . . 
you could say we’re going in the wrong direction or we need to 
improve here or there, but how you can say that the priorities 
are wrong when you’re investing in jobs and families and 
communities, in health care and education and transportation, 
and live within your means; how you can say those are all the 
wrong priorities baffles me. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in terms of the point, investing in families, I want 
to, I want to commend my colleagues and Saskatchewan 
people, because basically we worked very hard with 
Saskatchewan communities and leaders and justice groups and 
so on to try and develop, to sort of redesign the social assistance 
system in a way that will be . . . profoundly impact in a positive 
way the standard of living. This is a longer-term process but 
there’s some immediate things that will . . . there in the throne 
speech will have a medium impact but will profoundly impact 
in a positive way the standard of living of low income people. 
 
The National Child Benefit which has been referred to — I 
won’t go into that because it’s been treated very thoroughly 
here today — but this is going to have a big impact on not only 
lifting people off social assistance but preventing those people 
from following down into that trap. 
 
Also the employment support program will be revolutionary in 
Canada in terms of its features which will be enhancing, 
valuing, and supportive to low-income people rather than, sort 
of, kind of some of the negative implications or negative 
connotations to some of the social assistance programs that are 
now designed. 
 
The supplementary health care benefits. We know that the 
low-income working poor worry because they don’t have 
coverage for some of the benefits. There’ll be some 
announcements around that. 
 
The money related to your family needs in terms of your 
training opportunities is a program that’s working well. 
 
The 911 that was mentioned. And the changes to the Young 
Offenders Act, I think, will be changes that we can engage in 
some programmatic changes. This is federal legislation — 
which we need to remember. 
 
I want to remind my good friend from Rosthern, whom I’ve got 
a lot of respect for, I’ve got a lot of respect for my colleague 
from Rosthern. Well I want to remind him — and I’m not sure 
that if he knows this — that in 1984 when we were moving 
from the Juvenile Delinquents Act to the Young Offenders Act, 

I was at the public meetings. I remember this well. There were 
many people saying that the Young Offenders Act . . . the major 
flaw in the Young Offenders Act was that it obligated 
provinces. It demanded. It had in legislation that provinces had 
to develop jails for kids. That’s a matter of public record; that is 
true. 
 
It obligated provinces to do that, and it left optional the whole 
notion of developing community alternatives and other kinds of 
support programs. So provinces were required to build jails for 
kids, but the other services and approaches that actually worked 
were left optional. 
 
Now we’re talking about a Conservative government in Ottawa 
and one in Saskatchewan, and several Conservative 
governments in Canada. That Bill is a Conservative Bill. To the 
extent that that Bill was the wrong . . . It’s got many good 
elements, but the extent that it didn’t obligate the provinces to 
develop community alternatives was a Tory decision, federally, 
provincially. And social justice/corrections people were saying 
at the time that this won’t work. And it won’t work because 
provinces will build the jails and they won’t develop those other 
services. 
 
So what happened in Saskatchewan under the previous 
administration? — Mr. Devine’s administration? I’ll tell you 
what happened. We upgraded Kilburn Hall in Saskatoon and we 
doubled the size. We added more spaces to the North Battleford 
detention centre. We doubled Paul Dojack and upgraded it. 
 
In other words, we expanded the size of the jails and did 
nothing else. Well okay, the Young Offenders Act was 
implemented in 19 . . . took effect in 1985. By 1986 all those 
new jails were full. 
 
So what did the government of the day do? Well we got to build 
some more jails. And they opened in 1987 the North Battleford 
youth centre. By 1988 it was full. And they still didn’t know 
what was going on here. 
 
So my point being, 1991-92, we started to look at some 
alternative measures because all the jails were full, and that’s 
the wrong approach. The system did not have the ability to 
discriminate between young people who are involved in violent, 
serious crimes, and those with petty theft and so on. They were 
all thrown in together. 
 
Quebec was the only province — and I credit Quebec — 
Quebec was the only province, and this is a matter of public 
record, Quebec is the only province in Canada — most of the 
other provinces were Tory — that actually took a different 
approach and put services into the community and developed 
alternative measures to jail. Today we see that Quebec has the 
lowest rate of incarceration of young people in Canada because 
that’s what works. That doesn’t mean that young people 
weren’t held accountable, but families were also supportive. 
 
It took us to about 1989-90 to even get the previous 
administration to admit that poverty existed. And that’s on 
public record in Hansard. As late as 1989 the minister of the 
families was saying that there was no poverty in Saskatchewan. 
The province of Quebec proved that the alternative approach in 
joint effort with the . . . Obviously the closed testing facilities 



62 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 1998 

was the approach to use. 
 
We’ve only started doing that over the last few years. The 
reason I mention this is to remind my friend from Rosthern that 
your approach which was lock more young people up and throw 
away the key was what you said in ’84-85, and that’s what 
you’re saying today. That’s what you’re saying today. And that 
didn’t work then and it won’t work tomorrow. 
 
The other thing is this is where in the social policy field we see 
mistakes that are made in one year show up 10 years later — 10 
years later. It’s obvious that the member from Saltcoats doesn’t 
understand that. Human service mistakes made today take 7 to 
10 years to correct, to show . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well 
I hope that the member from Rosthern, Mr. Speaker, will have 
the courage to get up and talk about his vision, his view of why 
the Young Offenders Act hasn’t worked. I have the right to 
share mine. 
 
My view is it hasn’t worked because the 1980 Tories federally 
and provincially built jails and did nothing else. And they all 
filled and they built another one; they filled, they built another 
one. That’s all they did. And that was a miserable failure. So I 
wanted to set the record straight on that. 
 
What young people need, Mr. Speaker, what I would submit, 
what young people need is the kind of supports that are 
reflected in the priorities in this throne speech. They need to 
live in safe, secure families and supportive communities and 
sort out the problems in the communities, and not lock them up 
and throw away the key. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the action plan for children . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order, order. Now we’re having 
hon. members shouting at one another from opposite sides of 
the Assembly, and I’ll ask all hon. members to reserve their 
remarks and put them on the record and allow the hon. member 
for Eastview to continue with his debate. 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the priorities as reflected in the throne speech and 
the action plan for children are part of this in terms of the 
investing in families. Now again, I know . . . I’ve yet to hear 
one opposition member say ever that there is anything good in 
the action plan for children. I’ve yet to hear that. 
 
Yet this approach is not perfect but this approach is an 
innovative approach in Canada, in North America. And it won 
an award last year as one of the most innovative initiatives to 
build and strengthen families and communities in all of North 
America not just Canada, because the Child Welfare League of 
America was the organization that supported the award. 
 
And again in that action plan for children, and the reason it’s 
. . . the reason it got the award and the reason it’s supported is 
that it is an integrated approach between government 
departments and working with the community on prevention, on 
trying to look at issues holistically. 
 
The issue of poverty for example, just to take one example. It’s 
not just the responsibility of the Minister of Social Services. It’s 

the responsibility of the Minister of Economic Development, 
the Minister of Agriculture and Food, the Minister of Finance, 
the minister for Municipal Government, the minister of 
housing, the Women’s Secretariat. Everybody has to have 
ownership. 
 
Whether it’s a youth issue or a housing issue or a poverty issue, 
every government department — the government as a whole — 
takes an interest. And that’s the strength of the action plan for 
children. That’s partly why it’s been recognized across North 
America as the right direction to go in. 
 
Also because it’s community based . . . or community citizens 
decide on what their challenges are and they develop the 
strategies to address those challenges, because they know best. 
 
It’s an award winning approach because it promotes the 
emphasis on children, youth, and their families, and 
strengthening communities. And a partnership within 
communities and between the communities and their different 
levels of government: municipal, provincial, and federal. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that . . . I’ll just mention a few of these that 
in this current year that obviously members, all members, 
would agree are important initiatives. The northern housing 
initiative that I’m sure the member from Buffalo would 
appreciate. 
 
The Children’s Advocate, the successful mothers’ support 
program, the early skills development program, the fetal alcohol 
syndrome strategy, the teen and young parent program, the 
child nutrition and development program — these are all 
initiatives and they’re just a few examples that are making a 
difference in our community. And sometimes it takes 2, 3, 4, 5, 
6, or 7 years to see the impact of decisions we make. 
 
(1645 
 
Now the member for Saltcoats said you’ve had seven years. 
Well that’s the nature of investing in people and prevention. In 
investment, it takes sometimes 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 years. Sometimes 
we see what happens after 10 years — the mistakes that were 
made with the Young Offenders Act in 1985. 
 
We’ll make some mistakes. That’s fine, everybody makes 
mistakes. But what we all have an obligation to do is to at least 
offer some informed analysis of what’s happening and try to 
come to grips with what we do about it to make corrections in 
the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think Saskatchewan people know who’s on the 
right track. The Saskatchewan Party is not in step with my 
constituents as I see it. I wish them well, but I think they’re . . . 
it’s going to be, it’s going to be a tough load to haul. 
 
They’re made up of — and people haven’t forgotten this — 
they’re made up . . . That party is made up, the official 
opposition is made up of people — and let’s think about this — 
that party in here is made up of people who, first of all, were 
ashamed of their history and their name; they had to change it. 
And they’re made up of people who were negotiating with their 
leader and saying that they’re loyal to their leader on the one 
hand, and then negotiating with those who were ashamed to 



March 11, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 63 

have their names on the other. That’s what that party is made up 
of. I think it’s four and four, or something like that. 
 
Our Saskatchewan people are not going to forget that because 
those that were ashamed of their name have left us with a $15 
billion debt. Those across the floor, those of the other party, 
while pledging allegiance to their leader, how can you trust 
them to run the province? You can’t do that. Saskatchewan 
people are not going to do that. They don’t even trust each other 
— they don’t even trust each other so they are going nowhere. 
And I don’t think Saskatchewan people are going to take a 
chance and that’s true. 
 
And we have one of the leadership candidates saying that his 
strength is team-building. Now this is a guy who is pledging his 
allegiance to one leader and stabbing him in the back and 
saying that his strength is team-building. Now I wish him luck 
in trying to sell that one. 
 
The Liberals — they can’t even run their own party, they can’t 
even run their own party. And they’re defending the federal 
government for taking $5 billion over the last two years out of 
the human services package or health care loan — $7 billion out 
of health care that the provincial Liberal leader is saying that 
that’s okay. But that is not the priorities that we heard about last 
night, the Minister of Health and I, in Saskatoon. 
 
So not only can the Liberals not run their own party, they’re just 
simply supporting what Ottawa’s doing and that’s not good 
enough. And as I said earlier, the provincial Liberals, if they 
had the chance they’d be like the federal Liberals — they say 
one thing in opposition but do something else in government. 
Saskatchewan people have not forgotten that they’ve fought 
medicare tooth and nail. Saskatchewan people are aware that 
the provincial Liberals support two-tier medicine. The critics 
have been very forthright about that, very honest about that. 
Saskatchewan people know that they’re defending Ottawa, and 
Saskatchewan people know that they would fire the elected 
health boards. You think the Saskatchewan people are going to 
take a chance on that crew? No, they’re not. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, fortunately Saskatchewan people have long 
memories not short memories. So, Mr. Speaker, we’ll let them 
try to outmanoeuvre each other and throw stones at each other. 
And we’re going to continue through the throne speech and the 
budget speech reflecting the priorities of Saskatchewan people 
with Saskatchewan people, to go about the business of building 
a province, continuing to build a province that was in desperate 
straits in the 1980s. 
 
We’ve turned the corner and I don’t think we’ll every go back 
to the old days. So, Mr. Speaker, it’s going to be my pleasure to 
support the throne speech — and with pride. And now being 
near five o’clock, I move to adjourn this debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:49 p.m. 





   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  McLane ........................................................................................................................................................................................35 
  Osika ............................................................................................................................................................................................35 
  Belanger .......................................................................................................................................................................................35 
  Aldridge .......................................................................................................................................................................................35 
  Julé ...............................................................................................................................................................................................35 
  Goohsen .......................................................................................................................................................................................35 
  McPherson...................................................................................................................................................................................35 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ............................................................................................................................................................................................36 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Belanger .......................................................................................................................................................................................36 
  Goohsen .......................................................................................................................................................................................36 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  McLane ........................................................................................................................................................................................36 
  Toth ..............................................................................................................................................................................................36 
  Heppner .......................................................................................................................................................................................36 
  Belanger .......................................................................................................................................................................................36 
  Serby ............................................................................................................................................................................................36 
  Langford ......................................................................................................................................................................................49 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Farm Safety Week in Saskatchewan 
  Langford ......................................................................................................................................................................................37 
 Review of Community Homes Program 
  Hillson ..........................................................................................................................................................................................37 
 Battlefords and District Citizens of the Year 
  Jess ...............................................................................................................................................................................................37 
 Gift for Premier and Deputy Premier 
  Heppner .......................................................................................................................................................................................37 
 Saskatchewan Winter Games 
  Renaud .........................................................................................................................................................................................38 
 Primrose Lake Committee Seeks Compensation 
  Belanger .......................................................................................................................................................................................38 
 Youth Ambassador at Winter Olympics 
  Wiens ...........................................................................................................................................................................................38 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Sale of Channel Lake 
  Gantefoer .....................................................................................................................................................................................39 
  Lingenfelter .................................................................................................................................................................................39 
  Romanow .....................................................................................................................................................................................40 
 Young Offenders Act Reform 
  Heppner .......................................................................................................................................................................................40 
  Calvert .........................................................................................................................................................................................40 
 Multiple Sclerosis Drugs 
  McLane ........................................................................................................................................................................................41 
  Serby ............................................................................................................................................................................................41 
 Sale of Channel Lake 
  Hillson ..........................................................................................................................................................................................42 
  Lingenfelter .................................................................................................................................................................................42 
MOTION UNDER RULE 46 
 Reform of the Exception Drug Plan for treating Multiple Sclerosis 
  McLane ........................................................................................................................................................................................43 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
ADDRESS IN REPLY 
  Krawetz........................................................................................................................................................................................43 
  Hillson ..........................................................................................................................................................................................48 
  Wall ..............................................................................................................................................................................................51 
  Murray.........................................................................................................................................................................................55 
  Pringle..........................................................................................................................................................................................58 
 
 


