





























































Hansard: March 27, 1998


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 301 
 March 27, 1998 
 
The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have 
a petition to present on behalf of the residents of the community 
of Churchbridge. I’ll read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present today. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

These signatures come from my home town, Mr. Speaker, of 
Alida. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To present petitions as 
well. Reading the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And this petition is signed by people from the Melfort, Star City 
area. I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
And as is in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

The communities involved, Mr. Speaker, are Milestone, Regina, 
Hague, and Lang. I so present. 

Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
a petition, and I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And these are signed by the good people from Estevan. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well to 
present a petition on behalf of people of Saskatchewan. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 

Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from Redvers and 
Alida. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
to present today: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are all from Carnduff. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I as well have a petition 
to present to the House this morning with regard to the Jack 
Messer-Channel Lake fiasco. People from around 
Saskatchewan, as you know, Mr. Speaker, have en masse 
signed this petition and we are pleased to present on their 
behalf. These petitioners come from the Kelvington area of 
Saskatchewan. And I’m pleased to present on their behalf. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition I’m 
presenting on behalf of the good citizens of Coronach. And the 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
I so present. 
 



302 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 1998 

Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
petitions of concerned citizens with respect to the Plains Health 
Centre. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Those who’ve signed these petitions are from across southern 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. I so present. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to 
present on this fine Friday morning another petition from 
south-west Saskatchewan: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reach necessary agreements with other levels of 
government to fund the twinning of the Trans-Canada 
Highway in Saskatchewan so work can begin in 1998, and 
to set out a time frame for the ultimate completion of the 
project with or without federal assistance. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And these folks are coming from the town of Consul and the 
community, and as well from Swift Current, Mr. Speaker, and 
I’m happy to present them today. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) are hereby read and 
received. 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly 
regarding the twinning of the Trans-Canada Highway; 
acting to save the Plains Health Centre; and cancellation of 
severance payments to Jack Messer. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on Tuesday next move: 
 

That this Legislative Assembly urge the government to 
share the concerns of Saskatchewan citizens about the 
impact of the multilateral agreement on investment in our 
province, which agreement is scheduled for ratification in 
May of 1998; and about which many citizens and 
organizations are raising legitimate concerns about the 
impact that this investment treaty will have on 
Saskatchewan’s economic, social, and environmental 
well-being; with fears being expressed about corporate 
power superseding that of democratically elected 
governments. 

 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 

notice that I shall on day 20 ask the government the following 
question: 
 

Of the Minister of Highways and Transportation: in the 
matter of rail-line abandonment, do you have any plans to 
buy abandoned rail lines and place a moratorium on the 
removal of these lines; what plans do you have to assist 
farmers and farms groups to set up short-line companies 
and to operate these lines; how much financing are you 
making available for this project and; have you researched 
alternate uses for rail lines that could make them 
economical? 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
privilege to introduce through you and to you to all the 
members of the legislature, a group that is visiting here today 
from Weyburn from the South East Regional College. And 
they’re seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There’s 10 students here and they’re accompanied today by 
their teachers, Shanna Kosier and Robin Williams. And I look 
forward to meeting with them after question period and after 
their tour for questions and answers, and for, I think drinks, and 
for a photo. I would like everyone to join me today in 
welcoming the group from South East Regional College. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — To you and through you to the Assembly, I’d 
like to introduce a gentleman from my constituency, Peter 
Voldeng. He’s from Naicam and he’s the manager of Fairway 
Farms. He got his engineering degree at the U of S (University 
of Saskatchewan) and he came in today . . . he’s talking to us; 
he’s running as president of the Saskatchewan Party. He knows 
any hope for the future of this province lies in the hands of this 
party here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Johnson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I have two 
guests in your gallery, Clarence Fineday and Jackie Tipewan. 
They’re down here on business. They are working for the TLE 
(treaty land entitlements) for the Witchekan band. And I’d like 
the members to welcome them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce to you and through you to members of the Assembly, 
12 students. These are fourth-year interdisciplinary class 
students from the University of Saskatchewan and they are 
specializing in sustainability and environmental impact 
assessment. 
 
They are accompanied by their teacher, John Gillies. And it is 
great to see these young people concerned about the 
environment and will be certainly environmental leaders in the 
years ahead. And I would ask all members to join in welcoming 
them here today. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



March 27, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 303 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Saskatchewan Party Membership 
 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today 
is a very important day for the Saskatchewan Party. Today over 
4,500 ballots will go in the mail to be sent out to Saskatchewan 
Party members and they will choose the new leader of the 
Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, earlier this week when I announced the 
Saskatchewan Party had sold 4,579 memberships, the other 
parties tried to downplay that achievement. And in fact the 
Liberal leader said that during the Liberal leadership race in 
1996 there were over 13,500 Liberal members. 
 
That didn’t sound quite right to me, Mr. Speaker, so I went 
home and I checked my records. And it turns out the Liberal 
leader was a little off. Actually he was off by 9,000 members. 
In 1996, at the height of the Liberal leadership race, the Liberal 
Party had 4,222 current members. I have the records to prove it. 
 
I doubt that the Liberal membership today is even half that 
number, given all of the former Liberal members who are 
switching over to the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m not raising this point to try to embarrass the 
Liberal leader — well, actually I am. But the main point is in 
six short months the Saskatchewan Party has sold over 4,500 
memberships, and over the next two weeks those people will be 
electing the new leader of our party. And those are real 
members, not imaginary ones like some other parties seem to 
have on their membership list. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Good News Headlines 
 

Ms. Stanger: — Mr. Speaker, I want to read into the record 
five . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Ms. Stanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to read into 
the record five good news headlines in Saskatchewan weekly 
newspapers: (1) North’s Grain Handling . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. Order. Now the 
Chair is having difficulty being able to hear the member make 
her statement to the House, and I will ask the cooperation of all 
hon. members to allow the member to be heard when making a 
statement to the House. 
 
Ms. Stanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to read into 
the record five good news stories from Saskatchewan weekly 
newspapers: for instance, “North’s Grain Handling Mecca — 
Tisdale To Become Home of Four High-throughput Terminals,” 
the Tisdale Recorder; “Local REDA helped create 187 new 
jobs,” The Eston Press review, January 13, ’98; “Building 
Boom in Melville,” the Melville Advance, January 14, ’98; 
“New Government Policy Good News for Potashville,” the 
Esterhazy Miner Journal, February 10, ’98; “Southwest 
Saskatchewan Economy on the Upswing,” the Shaunavon 

Standard, February 17, ’98. 
 
These headlines have two things in common, Mr. Speaker: (1) 
They each introduce a story of economic development in our 
province in areas outside the major cities; (2) Each story occurs 
in opposition members’ constituencies. Opposition members, as 
you have heard in this Assembly the last few days, are so busy 
telling us that the sky is falling that they ignore what is 
happening in their own front yard. I’m happy to help them 
recognize the hard and successful work of Saskatchewan 
people. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Compensation for Hepatitis C Victims 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Minister of Health is in Toronto this morning announcing a 
long-awaited compensation package for hepatitis C victims. 
Many will be pleased that after many years, the government 
will compensate victims who contracted the diseases between 
1986 and 1990. But what about those who contracted this 
serious disease, hepatitis C, prior to 1986? 
 
We may have heard this in the House previously, Mr. Speaker, 
but I believe it’s important enough to reiterate. Richard Dupont 
of Welwyn contacted the Liberal opposition recently to express 
concern that because he contracted the disease before the 
arbitrary time lines established for compensation, he will not 
receive a dime. He tells us he is very disappointed and bitterly 
disillusioned by the NDP (New Democratic Party) 
government’s stance on this issue. He writes: 
 

I’ve always voted NDP and although it pains me to turn 
my back on the party I have no choice. I can’t relate to a 
government that is so insensitive to all the sufferings of its 
citizens. Obviously the NDP has lost its way and turned 
into Tories. 

 
That, Mr. Speaker, is the ultimate insult and says it all. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Religion is a Journey 
 
Ms. Murray: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I once read an 
interesting statement which originally puzzled me, but which I 
now think I understand. It goes, “Religion is a journey, not a 
destination.” 
 
When I heard recently that Howard Thornton, our local CBC 
(Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) weather guru, is leaving 
the mother corporation to study for the ministry, my immediate 
reaction was that here is a person for whom this quotation was 
coined. 
 
Too many of us, I fear, keep our beliefs and our behaviour in 
separate pockets. 
 
Howard Thornton I believe is one who, as they say, has no side. 
He is what he appears to be — a decent, honourable man of 
good humour and good works. And I, like viewers across the 



304 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 1998 

province, will be sorry to see him leave our screens. 
 
His manner of departure speaks well of him. For the past three 
days he has undertaken a one-man bike-athon to Saskatoon, 
raising money for food banks. The amount, which is bound to 
be substantial, will be announced this evening. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for 25 years Howard Thornton has given the 
weather to us. Since this is, as we all know, the best province in 
the best country in the world, he must have had something to do 
with this fact. He must have a direct connection to the real 
weather man — or should that be weather person? It is fitting 
then that he pursue this connection through the ministry. 
 
I know we all wish him and his family well in the next stage of 
his journey. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Compensation for Hepatitis C Victims 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well it does not look 
like today’s announcement by the Minister of Health is going to 
be a good news announcement for tens of thousands of innocent 
victims of hepatitis C, infected by tainted blood. 
 
Although many questions remain officially unanswered, it is 
becoming increasingly clear that the package will not include 
people infected before 1986, nor will it include the partners and 
children infected by victims of the blood supply. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our concern and the concern of so many is that 
this government will throw out a bone and hope that the general 
public will believe they have done enough. They are hoping that 
after their announcement today the issue will die. They are 
hoping that if they wait long enough to do the right thing by all 
the victims, there will be no victims around to fight the battle. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is clear time is on their side. Many of these 
victims have little time left, and as you can imagine, Mr. 
Speaker, their energy is low. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I have great confidence in the strength of the 
human spirit. Rest assured if the government fails to do the 
right thing today, victims and their loved ones will keep on 
fighting, and so will we. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Interest Paid on Public Debt 
 
Mr. Johnson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A constituent of 
mine called yesterday asking for the total amount of interest 
paid on the public debt since we have become the government. 
We all, I think, have a vague idea of the amount and it is high. I 
will pass it on to the Assembly today and remind everyone just 
how much the people of Saskatchewan have done to reduce the 
debt. 
 
According to Public Accounts, in 1992-93 we paid 740 million 
in interest on the debt; in 1993-94, 873 million; in 1994-95, 881 
million; in 1995-96, 794 million. Mr. Speaker, the projected 
costs for ’97-98 was 756 million, and an additional 725 million 

in the year ’98-99. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have paid nearly 5.7 billion in interest 
payments on the previous government’s debt. This year the 
entire budget was 5.2 billion. Mr. Speaker, that’s a lot of roads, 
home care workers, and classrooms lost, thanks to the Tory 
debt. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Health Care Crisis in Regina 
 

Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the past two 
weeks the Liberal opposition has raised a number of concerns 
about the state of health care in Regina. We’ve pointed out how 
on occasion there’s not a single hospital bed available in the 
entire city. We’ve talked about stretchers lining the hallways of 
our hospitals and we’ve revealed that the Regina District Health 
Board faces a $5 million funding shortfall. And what has the 
government response been? Deny, deny, deny. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, today there’s more evidence that there is a 
health care crisis in this city. The president of the medical staff 
with the Regina district says the health care system in the city 
has reached the breaking point. Dr. E. Abd-Elmessih says the 
district needs an immediate injection of cash, more hospital 
beds, and medical staff. 
 
The Liberal opposition has raised concerns on behalf of the 
people of Regina and southern Saskatchewan, nurses, doctors, 
ambulance operators, all of whom know there is a serious 
problem. But the question remains: why isn’t this government 
listening? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

First Nations Waterways Project 
 

Mr. Flavel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in recent 
years we have seen many partnerships forged and deep inroads 
made in native economic development. 
 
First nations is proposing a waterways project which will focus 
on developing tourism opportunities within Saskatchewan and 
Manitoba to attract European, Asian, and U.S. (United States) 
visitors. The initiative will see a number of primary and 
supplementary cultural attractions along two of the major 
waterways in Saskatchewan and Manitoba. 
 
The Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations has a 
partnership with Tourism Saskatchewan, the Canadian Tourism 
Commission, and the four Manitoba tribal councils in this 
project to development tourism opportunities within the 
aboriginal communities of Saskatchewan and eventually in 
Manitoba. 
 
The partners will contribute $628,000 to the project. Phase 1 of 
the three-year project will be identifying sites to be developed 
along the Saskatchewan River corridor and the 
Qu’Appelle-Assiniboine River corridor. Phase 2 will involve 
project development of individual attractions, and phase 3 is the 
marketing phase to attract tourists. 
 
Congratulations to the members of the FSIN (Federation of 
Saskatchewan Indian Nations) and the first nations waterways 



March 27, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 305 

project as you are taking yet another step towards 
self-determination. 
 
All the best. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Inquiry into Channel Lake 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My questions this 
morning are for the Premier. Mr. Premier, for two weeks the 
Saskatchewan Party has been calling for a full, open, 
independent public inquiry to look into the Channel Lake 
scandal. 
 
Mr. Premier, it’s also clear that there is overwhelming support 
for a full public inquiry, but unfortunately the NDP is doing 
everything in its power to avoid a full public inquiry, because 
the last thing you want is for Saskatchewan people to find out 
what really happened at Channel Lake. Now in a desperate 
attempt to cover up the NDP corruption and wrongdoing, 
you’ve decided to turn over the Channel Lake investigation to 
an NDP-dominated committee, chaired by an NDP member. 
 
Mr. Premier, I understand you’ve been summoned to appear 
before the Public Accounts Committee next week and you have 
been asked to bring along a long list of documents and 
information with you. Mr. Premier, Mr. Premier, if you won’t 
call for a public inquiry, will you at least appear before the 
Public Accounts Committee on April 1? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I say this in a friendly 
way to my friend from Kindersley, but you’ve got to be joking. 
You’ve got to be joking after two weeks of saying you didn’t 
want to go to the Public Accounts Committee. Your Chair of 
the committee said it was a kangaroo court. Now you’re 
demanding us to come. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you remember the member from Kindersley 
drawing the line in the sand. Remember that? — drew the line 
in the sand. Now he’s looking behind him saying the line is 
back here. You’ve given up your right in many ways to have 
credibility, to have credibility in consultation with this 
Assembly to call this committee. 
 
The Chair called the committee a kangaroo court, a kangaroo 
court. She didn’t have the decency to advise the Vice-Chair of 
the committee even that she was going to call it. She wrote to 
her colleague and they had a debate. 
 
I say to the members opposite, come to Crown Corporations 
Committee, that is legitimate, and let’s get on with the business 
of this Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. One would hope that all 
of Saskatchewan would see the kind of answers that are coming 
from this government because the arrogance is unbelievable. 

For two weeks the Saskatchewan Party has been calling on the 
NDP to come clean on Channel Lake and all we get is 
non-answers and useless NDP rhetoric. Everyone in 
Saskatchewan is calling for a full public inquiry, except the 
NDP and their wholly owned subsidiary, the Liberals. 
 
You arrogantly refuse to listen to overwhelming, the 
overwhelming majority of Saskatchewan people because they 
don’t believe your story any longer. They don’t believe you’re 
telling the truth and they don’t believe an NDP committee is 
going to get to the bottom of NDP corruption and wrongdoing. 
 
Unfortunately, unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, that’s what it looks 
like we’re stuck with here in Saskatchewan. Even worse, it 
looks like we’re going to be stuck with an NDP committee 
chaired by an NDP member. 
 
Mr. Premier, if you won’t 'fess up . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order, order. The hon. 
member has been extremely lengthy in his preamble and I’ll ask 
him to go now directly to his question. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Premier, if you won’t ‘fess up in front of a Public Accounts 
Committee, will you at least, will you at least screw up the 
courage to appear before the NDP’s Crown Corporations 
Committee and will you bring all of the relevant documents 
surrounding Channel Lake so that we can ask the relevant 
questions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
members opposite that they have shown total disrespect for the 
process of the Assembly. And I want to quote —these are not 
my words, they come from the World Spectator, Moosomin, 
Sask., Monday, March 23, 1998. A fellow by the name of Bruce 
Penton, and I want to quote, I want to quote. Here’s what he 
says. “Ordinary, ordinary people in Saskatchewan . . ." And I 
quote: 
 

When you consider the Sask Party is the official opposition 
almost under false pretence — not one solitary voter in 
Saskatchewan has ever cast a vote for a Saskatchewan 
Party candidate — its actions are galling. They’re also a 
little scary. If this is how Sask MLAs act when they’re in 
opposition, have no real power, what kind of stunts will 
they pull if the voters of this province ever put them in 
charge (if they ever put them in charge). 
 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we know that in the 1980s we had the 
Conservatives in government. They followed no process and we 
ended up with 15 billion in debt. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order, order. I want to 
ask for the cooperation of all the members of the House. The 
previous question and the answer both have been very lengthy 
and I’ll ask the hon. members to respect the time. 
 

Regina Hospital Bed Shortage 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s too bad 
that the government members have such selective reading 



306 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 1998 

ability. Too bad they can’t read contracts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of Health. We keep 
hearing that there’s no bed shortage in Regina, but yesterday a 
young woman named Glennis Frith of Redvers had surgery at 
the Plains hospital to remove some large gallstones from her 
gall-bladder. This is a serious operation, Mr. Speaker, and one 
that takes a few days from which to recover. 
 
And where did Glennis go to recover less than 12 hours after 
her surgery? The Howard Johnson Hotel. She spent the night at 
the Howard Johnson Hotel just a few hours after gall-bladder 
surgery because there wasn’t a single bed available at the Plains 
hospital. 
 
Mr. Minister, the Howard Johnson is a fine hotel but it’s not a 
hospital. How can you continue to say there’s no bed shortage 
when gall-bladder surgery patients have to go to the Howard 
Johnson for recovery? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to the matter the 
member is raising, at this point I don’t have any knowledge 
about. And certainly I can undertake that the Minister of Health 
and the officials of the Department of Health will look into the 
matter to see if there is any merit to what the member is saying. 
 
But I want to say to the member in the House, Mr. Speaker, 
without having any knowledge of what the member is raising, 
that I have every confidence that the Regina Health District, the 
medical doctors that work for the district, the surgeons and the 
nurses and so on, will deal with people that are in the hospital in 
Regina in a professional manner, Mr. Speaker, that is consistent 
with the health, well-being, and safety of every patient that 
comes into contact with the Regina health system, Mr. Speaker. 
We will look into the matter, but I’m quite confident that the 
matter would have been dealt with in a most professional way 
by the professional people that work for the health system here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. If the 
government isn’t prepared to provide beds, perhaps they’re 
prepared to pay for hotel rooms. Because, Mr. Minister, this is 
getting ridiculous; it would be funny if it wasn’t so serious. This 
is the kind of bed shortage we have before the Plains hospital 
closes. What’s going to happen after it closes? Not only will 
there be a shortage of hospital beds, but there’s going to be a 
shortage of hotel beds because all the people will be recovering 
in a hotel room. 
 
The newest NDP acute care facility, the Howard Johnson Hotel. 
Mr. Minister, what are you going to do about this dangerous 
situation, or does somebody have to die in a hotel bed before 
you do something? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I want to inform the member 
of something that the member certainly isn’t prepared to inform 
the House or others about, and that is the fact that most people 
from rural southern Saskatchewan today are served in the 

Pasqua and General hospitals in the city of Regina, not in the 
Plains, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I want to further advise the member in the House, Mr. 
Speaker, that the Pasqua and General hospitals have been 
undergoing substantial rebuilding in the last number of years, as 
the member knows, and not one bed is going to be closed as a 
result of the consolidation into two health centres rather than 
three in Regina. 
 
All of the people, services, and beds from the Plains, Mr. 
Speaker, are going to be consolidated into two locations for the 
better service to the people of southern Saskatchewan. And I 
want to quote from His Honour the Lieutenant Governor in the 
throne speech who said this on March 9: 
 

In Regina, the consolidation of facilities into two strong, 
effective 21st century base hospitals will serve the people 
of southern Saskatchewan for decades . . . (featuring) a 
new MRI unit, and state-of-the-art neurology and 
cardiology departments. 

 
That’s what we’re going to do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I spoke to 
Glennis’s mother and her husband this morning. I couldn’t 
speak to Glennis because she was very ill. However her mother 
and her husband were both very worried about this dangerous 
situation and they wanted it brought to your attention and to the 
public’s attention. 
 
Mr. Minister, Glennis is still down at the Howard Johnson, with 
her husband, trying to recover from gall bladder surgery, and 
they’re probably watching question period right now, And they 
want an answer from you, Mr. Minister. What are you going to 
do about the serious bed shortage in Regina? Or are you simply 
going to continue to deny that there is a serious problem? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve already said to the 
member that the matter the member raises will be looked into. 
Whether or not what the member says is true I don’t know. 
Things that have been raised by the opposition in the past have 
been found not to be quite the same as indicated when they 
have been looked into. This matter will be looked into. 
 
But I want to say to this member that in the budget last week, 
Mr. Speaker, that was introduced on March 19, an increase of 
over $8 million in cash will be going to the Regina Health 
District this year — $8 million more that last year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We, unlike other governments and unlike the federal 
government, Mr. Speaker, we are putting more money into 
health care, including more money going to the Regina Health 
District. And I have every confidence that the management and 
staff of the Regina Health District, with the increased resources 
they are receiving each and every year, can do the job that it is 
their job to do and can do it well and can manage the situation, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



March 27, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 307 

Lanigan Hospital Closure 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
questions are to the Minister of Health as well, or his designate. 
 
First of all, Mr. Minister, to say that people from south-east 
Saskatchewan aren’t in the Plains Health Centre, if you were to 
visit there as often as I visit it, you would find that there are 
many people that have been sent to the Plains Health Centre. 
And that the calls to my office certainly have brought forward 
the concerns about its closure. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, there are other closures taking place across 
this province. Last night over 400 people turned out to a public 
meeting in Lanigan to protest your government’s decision to 
close the Lanigan hospital. People offered dozens of solutions 
and alternatives, but at the end of the evening I don’t think you 
were listening. 
 
In fact the MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) for the 
area — the MLA for Watrous — didn’t even show up. He said 
it wasn’t his problem; it’s the board’s problem. Mr. Minister, I 
know you like to send the boards out to do your dirty work, but 
this is your responsibility, the responsibility of your 
government. Will you reverse the decision to close the Lanigan 
hospital? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, this is typical of what the 
opposition does in this House. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. The hon. members 
will recognize that it is inappropriate in the House, and not 
acceptable, that members will state from their seats what they 
are not permitted by the rules to say — order — to say from the 
. . . on the record. And I will ask the Minister of Agriculture and 
Food to rise and withdraw the remark and apologize to the 
House . . . (inaudible) . . . I will ask the Minister of Agriculture 
and Food to rise and withdraw the remark and apologize to the 
House. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Oh, I’m sorry, I didn’t hear you, Mr. 
Speaker. I apologize for saying that to the House, 
unequivocally. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, when the member from 
Moosomin — the Conservative member — gets up and says the 
decision has been made to close the Lanigan hospital, Mr. 
Speaker, that is not true. No such decision has been made and 
the member should know that. 
 
The health board in Living Sky has talked about several options 
that they are interested in pursuing to meet the health needs of 
people in that district, Mr. Speaker. Those options have been 
fully put out for public discussion and there’s public discussion 
going on. There is no decision that has been made as this 
member says, Mr. Speaker, no decision at all. So what the 
member is saying is not true. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I think and I’m confident that health 
services are going to continue to be provided in Lanigan, 
Wynyard, Strasbourg, and Watrous — in all of those places, 

Mr. Speaker. Which services? That decision will be made by 
the local health board, but services will be provided in all four 
of those places, Mr. Speaker, contrary to what that member 
says. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Plains Health Centre Closure 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, the Liberal opposition has 
maintained that the decision to close the Plains hospital was 
made long before this government put a gun to the head of the 
Regina District Health Board in January of 1996. 
 
But the current Minister of Health and his predecessor have on 
several occasions maintained that the decision was made in 
January of 1996. However, on at least two occasions in the past 
week the Minister of Health has indicated in this House that the 
decision to close the Plains hospital was made five years ago. 
 
Mr. Premier, I believe your minister has made a slip of the 
tongue. Are you now willing to admit that the decision to close 
the Plains hospital was made by your government three years 
before it ever went before the Regina District Board? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, the board of the Regina 
Health District has had the opportunity to look at this issue on 
several occasions. They have always come to the conclusion 
that the right decision is to consolidate services in two hospitals 
in Regina rather than three. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that we’ve listened to the 
Liberals and the Conservatives say that the sky is falling, and 
try to scare people, for a long time. But what it is, Mr. Speaker, 
is fearmongering. Because the reality is, Mr. Speaker, that 
people provide health services. Buildings do not provide health 
services; people do. 
 
And the services that are provided in the Plains hospital today, 
the people that provide those services are going to be providing 
the same services out of two locations. Except, Mr. Speaker, 
they’re going to have a new centre for MRI (magnetic 
resonance imaging) in southern Saskatchewan, which we 
haven’t had before. They’re going to have a centre of 
excellence for urology and for cardiology to better serve the 
people of southern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, there’s many reasons that the 
Plains hospital should not be closed by the government in 218 
days from now, most notably because it provides a very 
valuable service for the people of Regina and southern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now to this point the government has not indicated what use the 
facility will have if the government gets its way. But we’ve 
learned that negotiations have been taking place with SIAST 
(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology), 
and the administrative offices for SIAST will be located at the 
Plains on November 1. 
 
Mr. Premier, how serious are these talks? Has any final 



308 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 1998 

agreement been reached? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I want to advise the member 
and the House that in due course an announcement will be made 
with respect to the use of the facility now occupied as a hospital 
at the Plains Health Centre. 
 
All of the services at the Plains, as I said, will be provided in 
other facilities which are being rebuilt and have been being 
rebuilt, in the process of being rebuilt as state-of-the-art 
facilities, for quite some time. 
 
And I want to say to that member that those two new hospitals 
that are being built in Regina will be put to appropriate use — 
better use — providing better services. And the facility that now 
is occupied at the Plains will also be used to provide appropriate 
services to the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. That sounds about 
as close to an acknowledgement as I’ll get out of the minister 
here today. One has to seriously question the priorities of a 
government that places offices above the health care needs of its 
people. There’s a bed crisis in the city of Regina. The people of 
southern Saskatchewan need a trauma centre, yet you believe 
it’s more important that the Plains hospital be used for office 
space. 
 
Mr. Premier, it’s not too late for you to come to your senses. 
Try and remember what it was like to care — to care about 
health care, to care about the needs and the concerns of the 
people you’re supposed to represent. Open your eyes. 
Recognize that our health care system is in critical condition. 
 
You maintain you can’t afford to keep the Plains open. What is 
it going to take to prove that you can’t afford not to keep the 
Plains open? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, thank you very much. I 
want to begin by answering the member by reminding the 
member that it was my party, our party, the CCF (Co-operative 
Commonwealth Federation) that invented medicare for Canada 
and has made it our gift to Canada in 1962. And I might say we 
did so over the opposition of the Liberals and the Tories and the 
Keep Our Doctors committee. 
 
I want to tell the member opposite that we funded medicare $1 
for every dollar, out of provincial taxpayers for five years. And 
then when Ottawa came in, to Ottawa’s credit, 50 cents was 
given to help us fund medicare. 
 
Today under the Liberals in Ottawa they have reduced their 
portion of health care from 50 cents to under 13 cents to our 
province and to each and every province in Canada. 
 
And notwithstanding that, Mr. Speaker, we have back-filled 
every penny lost by Ottawa and added to the base, and are 
providing the best health care system that this country has, 
consistent with our history and our philosophy and our beliefs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Rural Health Care 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to hear 
we’re going to have the best health care than any other place in 
this country. However, I’m pleased to hear that promise made 
by the Premier, because the Leader of the Liberal Party and I 
were also in Lanigan last evening, where there were well over 
400 people to attend an emergency. The Living Sky Health 
District faces a one and a half million dollar deficit and the 
people in the district face substantial bed closures or cuts to 
front-line staff. 
 
Unlike a government that doesn’t care and the Tories who 
would privatize health care, the Liberal opposition believes that 
proper health care services are essential in urban and rural 
Saskatchewan. This meeting took place only three days after the 
Minister of Health told the media that further bed closures 
would be, and in his words, “inappropriate.” 
 
Mr. Premier, to the Premier, Mr. Speaker: what are you doing 
to, what are you going to do to honour this promise? And why, 
if you are spending $1.7 billion on health care, does the system 
continue to crumble, particularly rural Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as I already indicated in 
response to a question from the Conservative opposition, the 
Living Sky Health District has not made any decisions with 
respect to changes to their health care facilities in the area. 
They’re out there talking to the public, as they should be. 
They’re putting options out to the people about where they 
could go, as they should be. They haven’t made any decisions 
as of this time. 
 
And what they’re going to do, Mr. Speaker, is make some 
decisions with respect to the most appropriate way to meet the 
health care needs of the people in the communities that they 
serve. And that’s what they should do, Mr. Speaker. They 
should make choices that are appropriate to the needs of the 
people that live in those communities, Mr. Speaker. And that is 
what they will do. That is their job, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They will not be assisted in that job by the fearmongering that 
comes from the Liberals and the Conservatives in this House, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, if members of the government and 
the government members who represent those areas would be 
present to hear people pleading, they would know it’s not 
fearmongering. For more than two hours we heard presentations 
by people, by nurses; and the member who represents the area 
was not there. 
 
We heard more horror stories, the kind the Liberal opposition 
have been raising daily, on a daily basis in this House. We 
heard about the lack of beds; patients being shuttled around 
because of this bed crisis. This not only happening in Regina, 
but in Saskatoon. People were pleading with their local health 
care system because they know there are no extra beds in the 
cities should they require care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Premier today, I am pleading on behalf of 



March 27, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 309 

the people in the Living Sky Health District and in other 
districts who see their health care system continuing to be 
gutted. Step in; demonstrate there is still some compassion left 
in your government. The patient is critical, sir. What are you 
going to do to stop the bleeding? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know to which 
patients the Acting Leader of the Liberal Party refers, whether 
it’s the Liberal Party being in critical position and bleeding or 
whether he refers it to more . . . other specific examples. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Health care. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — The member opposite shouts across 
the floor at me that he talks about health care. I say that in 
Saskatchewan we have committed $1.7 billion, the highest . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Where is it? Where is it going? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Listen. The highest expenditure to 
health care in the history of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
What’s happening at Living Sky is, Living Sky directors of that 
health district board are in public consultation with the 
communities as to how best allocating their budget for their 
region. This is what they should be properly doing. 
 
I repeat again, as I said to the hon. member previous, to his 
partner asking the previous question, we have done this in 
Saskatchewan even though we have suffered a reduction in 
federal funds for health care from 50 cents to 13 cents. We 
back-filled on that dollar, every penny, and we’ve added to the 
base. We are as compassionate. We don’t need lessons from 
you, with the greatest respect, about compassion. 
 
We were on the side of medicare; you were against it. You’re 
still against it. The desk mate behind you wants two-tier, he 
wants private hospitals for profit. And your leader, Dr. 
Melenchuk . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Next question. 
 

Lanigan Hospital Closure 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, a further question to the minister, 
the Acting Minister of Health. Mr. Minister, in yesterday’s 
paper, both the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix and the Leader-Post, 
the administrator of the town of Lanigan talked about the effect 
of the closures of 12 acute care beds in Lanigan and Watrous 
and 17 long-term beds. He said, “. . . under both options, the 
Lanigan hospital would close and observation beds would be 
created.” And that was brought forward last night. 
 
Mr. Minister, a lot of solutions, positive solutions, were brought 
forward as well. People didn’t just criticize, they presented 
alternatives. Mr. Minister, one real alternative that would allow 
local boards to operate is to give them block funding rather than 
tying the hands of district boards. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you now move forward and allow for block 
funding so district boards can channel the funds into the areas 
that they see specific needs of in their districts? Will you do 
that? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well to again point out the absurdity of 
what the member says, Mr. Speaker. He quotes the 
administrator as saying that the hospital would be closed and 
left with observation beds. Well if the hospital closed, Mr. 
Speaker, who would be there to observe the beds that would be 
observation beds? It’s patently absurd. 
 
As I’ve indicated before, Mr. Speaker, the facilities are not 
going to close down. The district health board is engaged in the 
process of deciding what services should be provided in those 
facilities. 
 
But I want to say to the member, if the member’s asking for 
block funding to the health districts, I just want to say I hope it 
doesn’t turn out to be the same as the block funding from the 
federal government for health care, Mr. Speaker, because when 
that came in we went down to 13 cents on the dollar funding for 
health care, Mr. Speaker. So if that’s what the member’s 
suggesting, more Liberal and Conservative cut-backs to health 
care, I don’t think that’s the answer, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 742  The Protection of Children 
Involved in Prostitution Act 

 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I move the 
first reading of Bill No. 742, The Protection of Children 
Involved in Prostitution Act be read for the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the hon. member from Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker I rise 
pursuant to rule 46 to move a motion of urgent necessity. 
 
The Speaker: — The hon. member for Saltcoats wishes to 
introduce a motion under rule 46. I’ll ask him very briefly to 
describe why he feels it appropriate for the House to set aside 
its order of business, its ordinary business, on this matter of 
urgent and pressing necessity and to advise the House very 
briefly of the motion he wishes to introduce. 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 46 
 

Public Broadcast of Crown Corporations Committee 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a very short 
and simple motion. It would be easier just to read it: 
 

That this Assembly authorize the use of photography, 
audio and video recordings and broadcasting without 
restriction of the Standing Committee of Crown 
Corporations review of the circumstance surrounding the 
purchase of sale of Channel Lakes Petroleum Ltd. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



310 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 1998 

Leave not granted. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Not Debatable) 
 

The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. I will . . . Order, 
order. Now the . . . Order. I will ask all hon. members from both 
sides of the House to come to order. Order. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — . . . that the motion be converted to motions 
for returns (debatable). 
 
The Speaker: — Converted to motions for returns (debatable). 
 

MOTION 
 

Referral of the Estimates and Supplementary 
Estimates to the Committee of Finance 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
Premier: 
 

That His Honour’s message . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Now the Chair is unable to hear 
the motion being put by the Minister of Finance, and I will ask 
for the House to provide order so the Minister of Finance can be 
heard moving his motion. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
was saying, I move, seconded by the Premier: 
 

That His Honour’s message, the estimates and 
supplementary estimates be referred to the Committee of 
Finance. 

 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. I will ask all hon. 
members to come to order and permit the House to proceed 
with its business. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
indeed a pleasure to be part of the budget debate. It certainly 
has been a trying time to try to get the NDP government to 
finally allow us to look at the whole issue surrounding Channel 
Lake and the Crown corporations. And unfortunately it looks 
like we’re not going to be able to do that to the satisfaction of 
Saskatchewan taxpayers. 
 
The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? The 
House may want to come to order so then it understands the 
procedure that is before us. I suspect that the hon. members will 
find the proceedings much easier to follow if they can hear 
what’s happening. And so I . . . 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
Premier: 
 

That this Assembly now resolve itself into the Committee 
of Finance. 

 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I do 
apologize for being anxious to get at this. It seemed that after a 
week of having the NDP trying to avoid going to a full public 
inquiry, that it seemed like such an appropriate thing to get up 
and get at this budget debate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we did have the opportunity to speak briefly about 
the budget last week when it was introduced by way of a 
ministerial statement. And so, Mr. Speaker, I will only add 
some comments to that, and my colleagues will focus more 
specifically on their critic areas and do a much more in-depth 
analysis of their areas of responsibility. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s very appropriate that we set an 
overview of what really has gone on in this budget and really 
focus on the impact it’s going to likely have in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m mindful of one of the headings out of the 
Leader-Post on March 20 that said that Saskatchewan is 
number two. And you know, Mr. Speaker, I would probably be 
very happy with that if that had been referring to how well we 
had fared in our score testing on mathematical tests across 
Canada, where instead of finishing number two we finished 
dead last — 10 out of 10 — in this province. But that isn’t the 
kind of number that we’re looking at here. What we’re looking 
at is saying Saskatchewan’s income tax is number two in 
Canada. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, last year we were number one, so 
we really did have some reason to be proud, because we were 
collecting more income tax from Saskatchewan people than any 
province in Canada. And this year we missed it from the 
province of Newfoundland by some $38. And so, Mr. Speaker, 
we finished second only because Newfoundland is collecting 
$38 more income tax from their people than we are here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And that really is the whole problem that we’re facing in 
Saskatchewan, is that we are being taxed to death. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, one of the wonderful opportunities . . . 
 
(1100) 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Now I recognize that it’s Friday. 
But I also recognize that this is the beginning of a number of 
series of days that will be available to debate the budget and 
that members need not shout their comments across the floor. 
They’ll have plenty of opportunity to put them on the record 
formally and officially. 
 
And the Chair would appreciate the cooperation of the House so 
that members would put their comments on the record so that 
they can be heard and understood by those who follow the 
proceedings of debates of this House. I’ll ask for the 
cooperation of all members. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as I 



March 27, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 311 

was saying, this simple fact is what underlies one of the greatest 
problems that this province has, and under this government is 
going to continue to have, and that being that we are simply so 
taxed that people do not want to come to Saskatchewan, they 
don’t want to build businesses and opportunities in 
Saskatchewan, and indeed, Mr. Speaker, they don’t stay in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
People across this province are saying to us day after day, when 
is it going to change so that the taxation levels in this province, 
the attitude about people making a good living and be able to 
retain some of that income to be able to spend on their family 
and on their futures, when is that going to happen in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it may be easier to get away with it if we 
were on the east coast where the competition is Newfoundland 
next door who actually provides $38 more tax gouging from 
their people a year than we do here. 
 
But that isn’t the case, Mr. Speaker, we’re next to Alberta and 
Manitoba. Two provinces that are beginning . . . Manitoba 
beginning to really move forward aggressively, and Alberta 
who has left us in the dust a good number of years ago. And 
we’re desperately trying to keep even, never mind close the gap. 
 
Mr. Speaker, every holiday season we see the results of that. 
Every holiday season when we go home to celebrate with our 
families — and Easter is coming up fairly soon — I challenge 
the members opposite to go to their communities and go for a 
walk in the evening. And you’ll notice a lot of cars of our kids 
and our friends and relatives that are home for the holidays. 
And I challenge them to go and do a tally in their community 
across this province and keep track of where the licence plates 
are from, from those new cars in town. 
 
In Melfort, Saskatchewan, and Tisdale, Saskatchewan, and all 
across Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, the overwhelming answer to 
that challenge is, the licence plates are from Alberta. And 
there’s a reason for it. There’s a reason, Mr. Speaker, because 
we have failed to address the fundamental challenge of 
competing with our neighbour province who have got their act 
together a long time ago when we were too busy privatizing and 
nationalizing and all the rest of it. The NDP had to nationalize 
the potash industry. Why? The potash industry is thriving under 
its independence today because it didn’t have to have that done. 
 
So often we’ve gotten so wrapped up with socialists ideology 
that we could not find our way out of the dilemma of finding no 
other way to balance the books but taxing the devil out of 
Saskatchewan people. And so, Mr. Speaker, we’re losing our 
children, we’re losing our retirees. 
 
I met an individual three or four weeks ago who was retiring 
from a pretty good job in Regina. And he’s the kind of 
individual I think, he didn’t . . . He introduced himself but he 
didn’t . . . I don’t recall his name specifically. But he seemed to 
be the kind of meticulous sort of a fellow that would look at 
things and analyse them pretty carefully. 
 
And he and his wife were deciding where they were going to 
retire. And he went through the whole exercise of saying what 
income would he have and where would it have to be spent. He 

analysed what his health care premiums would be in 
Saskatchewan as compared to Alberta. He analysed what the 
impact was going to be on having no PST (provincial sales tax) 
in Alberta as compared to 7 per cent in Saskatchewan. He 
analysed the cost of licence plates. He analysed the cost of rent 
and utility charges and all of the things that were going to affect 
his situation. He analysed the situation of health care premiums. 
 
He put everything into the basket and he had to make a 
determination, he told me, about where would it be best for him 
and his wife to live — Regina or Medicine Hat. And he said 
that in the whole basket of all of the things taken cumulatively, 
he was going to be better off to retire in Alberta by something 
approaching $800 a month, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So guess where he’s living? He’s living in Medicine Hat and I 
don’t blame him. How could anybody blame him when you 
make that kind of a comparison? And I respect the individual’s 
commitment that he did that fairly and openly and honestly 
because he’s living there. If it wasn’t true why would he move 
there? Because he was living here. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, those are the kind of issues that are facing 
our people — that are facing the people of Saskatchewan, and 
we simply have to address it. 
 
In an article from the Leader-Post, Bruce Johnstone makes 
some comparisons, and he said that the Alberta advantage is 
getting bigger. And everyone knows about the Alberta 
advantage and he quotes some statistics, for example. And I 
quote: 
 

In a single income family with two children earning 
$30,000 a year, provincial income taxes in red neck 
Alberta will be a mere $470. In socialist Saskatchewan the 
bill for the same family comes close to a whopping $1900. 

 
I mean these are the kind of things that people see and people 
are concerned about, and they are leaving our province. 
 
And so we end up with a situation that even the provincial 
appointed public Action Committee on the Economy, PACE, 
points out — the offsetting effect of lower household charges 
diminishes as income increases. This higher income tax load 
creates a perceived and an actual problem for Saskatchewan 
since higher skilled and higher cost employees are less likely 
to move in or remain in Saskatchewan, the PACE report 
commented. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if you talk to business people in Saskatchewan 
who have to hire professionals for their businesses, if it’s in the 
oil and gas industry, or the forestry industry, or agricultural 
research, or the medical professions, or education professions, 
they tell us is that they have a very difficult time recruiting and 
getting people to move to Saskatchewan. How are we going to 
build an economic base if that continues to be true? 
 
Businesses tell us they have to pay a premium. If the going rate 
to hire somebody is $50,000 generally, they have to pay as 
much as a 30 to 35 per cent premium so the people will come 
and do the job in Saskatchewan, because it’s not what you gross 
that counts, it’s what you net. It’s what you get to take home in 
your pay packet to spend on your family and on your priorities. 



312 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 1998 

And so our Saskatchewan companies are telling us that they’re 
operating under substantial disadvantage compared to Alberta 
companies. And so we hear of companies that are leaving to 
locate their head office in Alberta so that they don’t face that. 
And that’s a great tragedy — that’s a great tragedy, Mr. 
Speaker, because what’s happening is we’re having a 
reallocation of individuals and resources out of this province 
because this government will not deal with meaningful tax 
relief for the people of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you know what happens is, we end up with a 
situation when we look at the budget, we look at a very, very 
tenuous situation. What we have is a situation is where we have 
dramatically backslid again into a have-not province. Last year 
there was so much expectation and hope that maybe we were 
going to get things together. The government had reduced the 
provincial sales tax by two percentage points and in the 
mid-term report it was indicated that we were moving in a very 
substantial way to actually becoming a have province. And 
what happened? The government’s policies have been such that 
we’re so vulnerable that we’ve now moved back so that we’re 
back on pogey from Ottawa to the tune of over $300 million, 
Mr. Speaker. That’s what it is; there’s no other way around it. 
We’re back into the have-not category big time. 
 
And so here we are instead of finding ways of growing our 
economy, of reducing the overhead costs to our businesses and 
our families and our workers by having some meaningful tax 
relief, we’ve backslid again big time, Mr. Speaker, and it’s 
difficult to see anything in this budget that shows a clear way 
forward in terms of changing that around and turning it around. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a number of years ago, the former Finance 
minister made the comment that she was very afraid of 
lowering tax because it would mean that we would lose 
equalization payments. Well, Mr. Speaker, it seems that we’ve 
got our way. We’re not removing tax in a substantial way and 
we’re back on the equalization welfare cheques. And I guess if 
that’s economic development in terms of this government, 
we’re going to have to live with that reality for a long time. Mr. 
Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, with leave, to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as I just 
noted just after question period a couple have joined us in your 
gallery, happen to be the parents one of the pages, Angela 
Smalley. So I would invite the members to welcome Mr. Eric 
Smalley and his wife Mary Anne to the Assembly this morning. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the minister on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — With leave, to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 

Hon. Mr. Scott: — Mr. Speaker, I too would like to welcome 
Eric and Mary Anne here today. Mary Anne grew up at Indian 
Head. Her mother and my mother live across the street from 
each other and it’s nice to see them and welcome them here. 
And they do have a very capable daughter here, working here, 
and we really appreciate the good job she’s doing. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
when you look at what the government did last year in reducing 
the PST two points, they said that each of these tax points was 
going to be approximately $60 million. And so, Mr. Speaker, 
the government took a leap of faith if you like, because I don’t 
think that they planned it very well ahead of time, but they took 
a leap of faith and saying, we need to reduce the PST in a 
meaningful way 2 percentage points, and they did that. And 
they potentially had to forego up to 120 to $140 million in tax 
revenue. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, when you look at what happened, in the final 
analysis if you look at what happened on that single move, 
which was probably the only decent thing that happened in that 
budget, when you look at what happened, Mr. Speaker, the 
actual reduction in tax revenue overall is something in the order 
of $30 million — less than $15 million per tax point. 
 
And the reason for that, Mr. Speaker, is because the economy 
responded to that incentive and there was a lot more 
transactions happening; people were buying purchases that 
they’d put off from. And indeed I believe people were buying 
things in Saskatchewan where they had formerly been going to 
Alberta to purchase those things. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when we called for meaningful tax reduction 
across the board in PST of one or possibly two further 
percentage points this year, there was absolutely nothing there 
— nothing at all, Mr. Speaker. And instead what we got is two 
points off the income tax. 
 
Now two points off the income tax sounds very good, but for 
this year it’s going to be about 60 bucks for families; $60 for 
families in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, will not even come 
close to making up the increased charges for natural gas, for 
telephones, for electricity, and everything else that’s gone up in 
the province. So there really has been no net benefit to 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
So where is the stimulation going to come from? Where is the 
economic activity going to come from, Mr. Speaker? It simply 
is not. It’s going to come from the fact we are now going to be 
content to sit there as a have-not province and complain that 
Ottawa’s cheque isn’t in the mail on a timely basis. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that is not what Saskatchewan people and 
Saskatchewan businesses need. What we need, Mr. Speaker, is 
meaningful tax relief, and we need it as soon as possible. And 
we need it with this budget, not with one somewhere in the 
future that the NDP is going to think about down the road. 
 



March 27, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 313 

(1115) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other area that is absolutely obvious, that 
needs a major change in focus is the whole issue of where 40 
per cent of the economic activity in this province comes from. 
And I speak about the Crown corporation sector, the CIC 
(Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) sector. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for years the Provincial Auditor has said, if the 
province is going to look at its resources, it has to look at them 
in their entirety. And what we have now is a government that is 
totally fixated on looking at the General Revenue Fund and 
using the Crown corporations to be the exclusive playground of 
patronage and inefficiency and bungled adventures that they 
want to undertake with very little accountability to the people of 
this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Provincial Auditor has been saying for years 
that that is totally unacceptable. And we have introduced a 
private members’ Bill that calls for the kind of scrutiny and 
accountability across the piece that the Provincial Auditor has 
been talking about — we call it An Act respecting Government 
Accountability. And what it demands is that the government 
looks at the entire activity of government and does the planning 
in its entirety. 
 
What we see in the budget is an arbitrary use of the CIC side of 
things to either hedge or fudge or whatever the numbers as the 
government sees fit. We see in the numbers that were tabled in 
this budget, that they have arbitrarily decided, instead of taking 
$50 million out of the Crowns, they’re going to take a hundred 
million dollars this year. No explanation of why except that’s 
what we need. There’s no planning, there’s no logic, no sorts of 
long-term commitments to it. 
 
We also see them taking a special dividend out of the sale of the 
Husky shares of another hundred million dollars. We see them 
taking $375 million out of Liquor and Gaming, Mr. Speaker. 
But there’s no long-term planning in that. It’s just an arbitrary 
number that seems to fit the bill and no one knows why or 
where or what kind of long-term plan that we have. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — If you can do it so arbitrarily just to balance 
the books, why can’t you do it to provide some meaningful tax 
relief? If you’re going to use it, why not make a plan so that the 
people of this province who do not only have to deal with 
government departments, who do not only have to deal with the 
fact that they have to pay tax, but also have to deal with the 
Crown corporations . . . They have to deal with the Crown 
corporations because there is no choice. Competition and 
deregulation is only beginning to have an effect for people in 
Saskatchewan. People are forced to buy power from 
SaskPower. There is no option. 
 
A number of years ago they invited co-generation proposals. A 
lot of individuals went through the exercise, paid a deposit to do 
the co-generation proposals, and they ended up with a slap in 
the face and were totally being ignored about any of those sorts 
of things. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important that this government 

accountability legislation that we’ve proposed is passed. 
Because if we’re going to truly look at the total financial picture 
of Saskatchewan and its people, you simply cannot continue to 
arbitrarily have these two pools that are running separate from 
each other except at the whim of the government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while I’m talking about the accountability of 
Crowns, I think I have to go a little further. Mr. Speaker, we 
end up with a situation in Saskatchewan, and it’s really the only 
jurisdiction in North America that has such a phoney sham of a 
rate review process. Mr. Speaker, everyone in this province 
understands that the review process that’s been put in place by 
this government is simply a joke. 
 
And so what the Crowns are able to do and get rubber-stamped 
by the cabinet is to charge whatever they see fit because there is 
going to be no true accountability. There’s going to be no true 
way that the people of Saskatchewan can question and see to it 
that their Crowns are doing the job that they should. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, we introduced a Bill called An Act 
respecting the rate review imposed by certain Crown 
corporations. And the whole thrust of that is to make sure that 
there’s a proper rate review commission, representative of the 
people of the province and the private sector, for the oversight 
of rate increases or rate changes. 
 
We also said it has to ensure that there is quality Crown 
corporation services and facilities that are there for the 
residents. They’re there to scrutinize the impact of Crown 
corporation investments and they’re there to review long-range 
plans and to make sure about the cost-effectiveness of service 
delivery. Those are the kinds of things that we need to put in 
place to build an economic climate where businesses are going 
to want to come to Saskatchewan. And if we don’t do it, it 
simply is not going to work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in addition to that, since the Crown corporations 
represent 40 per cent of the activity of government and that 
money can be transferred from these Crown corporations in an 
arbitrary way to the General Revenue Fund, we said that we 
also have to make sure that these Crown corporations operate 
within parameters that do not allow them to invest arbitrarily in 
investments outside of Canada. 
 
We simply cannot have this government wasting $1.4 million 
deciding not to invest in Guyana. Everybody in this Assembly 
and everybody in Saskatchewan should have been able to tell 
them that for a loonie. We could have saved a million and a half 
dollars on that one, simple decision-making process if we had 
listened to the people of the province. 
 
But no, it’s got to be another adventure that this government is 
prepared to undertake and head off on and only to find after 
much debate and a $1.4 million expenditure, that we simply 
shouldn’t have done it in the first time. 
 
And the reason cited? Because of political instability. Well it 
was political instability, Mr. Speaker. But not in Guyana — 
right here in Saskatchewan is why the Premier pulled the plug 
on that deal. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we need to have this private members’ Bill 



314 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 1998 

passed — An Act to amend The Crown Corporations Act, 
prohibiting foreign investments. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the final part of the piece that we’ve put in, 
in terms of private members’ Bills, is for Crowns to disclose 
when they’ve lost losses in excess of $100,000 within 60 days, 
and then we wouldn’t have had the mess that we’re now going 
through with the whole Channel Lake or the NST debacle; so 
that they’ve got to be much more transparent, much more 
accountable for what’s going on. 
 
And there has to be a mechanism to ensure that the people that 
are appointed to those positions, the patronage guys like Jack 
Messer, follow the terms and conditions of the board of 
directors and do not operate out of those terms of references, 
because, Mr. Speaker, that’s where this all goes off the rails. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, I firmly believe that what we have to 
do is get rid of the blatant political appointments on the Crown 
corporations. And it’s not just the Jack Messers or the Chings of 
the world, or the Nystuens— the guys right at the top. That’s 
blatantly wrong. But we’ve got to make sure that it isn’t 
happening at all the tiers of management, because that also is 
equally wrong and equally as troublesome. 
 
How can you be a career person working in any of the Crowns 
and you know that down the hallway is someone else that is 
there solely because of their political credentials, or there solely 
because of the fact of a political favour, who are earning equal 
or more money than you are and who are likely going to mess 
up any proper decision that you make. 
 
What does that do to the spirit of a corporation. What does that 
do to a professional civil service or people that actually believe 
that they’re doing a good job within their respective Crowns? It 
demoralizes them. It absolutely loses their reason for wanting to 
do the job properly. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I said certainly, I said certainly, Mr. Speaker, 
that it’s important that what we do is look at our Crowns, who 
operate 40 per cent of our economy, and we have to operate and 
look at what we’re doing about meaningful tax relief, Mr. 
Speaker, because we’re not doing it. And I think if we looked at 
it honestly and effectively, we could. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the budget takes a great deal of pride at saying 
that it’s going to spend $1.72 billion in health care. And, Mr. 
Speaker, for anybody, anywhere, that is an awful lot of money. 
And, Mr. Speaker, it’s a third, it’s approximately a third of our 
total budget. 
 
The question is, Mr. Speaker, are we spending it wisely? Are 
we spending it effectively? Is the result of putting more money 
at the problem going to result in lower waiting-lists. Is it going 
to result in more nurses to look after patients on the wards. Is it 
going to take the workload and the fear that nurses are feeling 
about mistakes are going to be made because they’re so 
overworked and there are so few of them to do the job . . . 
 
Is it going to address the issues of people having to stay in a 
Howard Johnson hotel in order to recover from surgery. Is it 
going to address the concerns of people having to be lined up in 
hospital corridors on gurneys in order to wait for a bed. Is it 

going to address the waiting-lists that are growing larger in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Is it going to address any of those fundamental issues? 
 
Well the answer is, Mr. Speaker, no one knows. And no one can 
say to the people of Saskatchewan with any certainty that 
putting more money and more money and more money at health 
care is going to make the situation better. There seems to be this 
panic that says we’ve got to do something, we’ve got to do 
something. And the only way we can look at it is to just throw 
more money at it. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, if you talk to the people that are elected on 
health boards, they say they’ve got a real problem because 
they’ve got a two-tiered health board system with appointed and 
elected people. Where is the mandate, where is the 
accountability, and where is the responsibility? To the people 
that elected them in the local communities? Or to the minister 
who appoints them? 
 
So you end up with health boards who are at odds just by the 
fundamental structure of the way they are brought to that 
decision-making process. And once they get there, what 
happens then? Well the Department of Health and all the 
bureaucrats fire volumes of paper at them to fill out. And you 
can take money from this pool and you can put it there but you 
can’t take it from that pool, can’t put it the other place. 
 
And so all of the decisions that this split local health board is 
supposed to make in good faith are destroyed because, number 
one, they don’t have a clear mandate and a clear understanding 
who they’re answerable to. And number two, because of the 
way the funding is channelled and directed from the 
government, they can’t make decisions. 
 
And so the health district that now is faced, in Wynyard, in 
Lanigan, in that whole area, about what are they going to do, 
they don’t have the tools or the mandate to deal with it, and the 
minister stands up in this House and pretends it’s their 
responsibility. Well that’s nonsense. And the result is, we’re 
spending more and more money in a greater and a greater 
inefficient way. And the health care service to people of this 
province is not improving. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I think that what needs to be done is you 
have to talk to the people. We have to talk to the nurses; we 
have to talk to the doctors; we have to talk to the people who 
are on the waiting-lists. And we have to talk to the local health 
boards and say, how can the system be made better. How can 
the $1.72 billion be spent in such a way that we have better 
services, better efficiency, and lower waiting-lists for our 
people. 
 
That’s the question that needs to be asked and it isn’t being 
asked. Instead, let’s just throw more money at it and in the 
meantime Plains hospital goes down, the Lanigan hospital is 
going down. Hospitals right across Saskatchewan have been 
closed and there is no apparent improvement in the health care 
delivery system to Saskatchewan, despite the fact we’re now 
spending a third of our budget on health care. That just doesn’t 
make sense, Mr. Speaker, and everyone in this province knows 
that. 



March 27, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 315 

The problem for people is, is that they’re sitting there and they 
are wondering what is the future going to hold for them. And so 
we have not only an economic uncertainty occurring for a lot of 
our people, we now have a service uncertainty. 
 
And so if you’re one of those people that is due for retirement 
and you’re making decisions about where you’re going to retire 
in terms of the cost of things, now you’ve also got to ask 
yourself, where do I go so I have some faint hope of assurance 
that I’m going to have the health services that I’m going to need 
as I grow older, and it’s likely that I am becoming more 
dependent on the system, in order to make sure they’re there in 
my moment of need. 
 
And so what happens? What’s that going to do to rural 
Saskatchewan? What’s that going to do to a community like 
Lanigan? What’s it’s going to do to a community like Wynyard 
who has an active business community with Plains Poultry 
there? What does it do to their ability to attract people to that 
community if a real cornerstone of services are in jeopardy — 
health care services. And it happens all across Saskatchewan. 
 
And so because of the fact that we’re not dealing with these 
issues, we are seeing a disproportionate erosion of people from 
rural Saskatchewan to Alberta; and it’s also happening from the 
urban centres, but more of the people are coming increasingly 
from those communities who see themselves vulnerable and at 
risk. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it also happens in education. It happens in 
municipal funding. It happens in agriculture. It’s happening 
across the piece, Mr. Speaker, and I want to leave the 
opportunities for my colleagues to speak to those details for 
themselves. Because I think, Mr. Speaker, the objective of what 
I’ve tried to say today, is to set the overview; to look at why this 
whole picture is not in focus; to understand, to have people 
understand, that unless we come together in a policy of true 
belief of dealing with the issues fundamentally, not out of the 
position of some ideology that’s 30 or 40 years old, but a 
pragmatic common sense approach to the challenges that face 
Saskatchewan into the 21st century, we are not going to 
survive. We are not going only keep up to our neighbours, 
we’re not, certainly not, going to get ahead. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have to. The government takes a great deal of 
pride about saying, oh gosh, we had maybe a thousand more 
people come into the province last year compared to the years 
before. Well, Mr. Speaker, I recall in one of the tours we had 
around this building, when they built it, and they built it so 
large and magnificent was because they believed in that time 
and place that Saskatchewan was going to become the dominant 
province in western Canada. They believed that we were going 
to be over 3 million people. 
 
But where are we? 1930 or thereabouts we had a million 
people. And here we are in 1998 and we still got a million 
people. That’s not progress, Mr. Speaker, it’s simply not 
progress, and the people of Saskatchewan increasingly are 
saying it’s simply not good enough. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move an amendment to the 
motion that’s before us, seconded by my colleague, the member 
from Cannington, that reads as follows: 

That all words after “Assembly” be deleted and the 
following substituted: 
 
regrets the continuing high taxation rates in the province; 
further regrets the damage done by theses taxes on the 
economy in the province and the quality of life of its 
residents; further regrets that the budget offers no 
meaningful relief from this burden for ordinary taxpayers; 
also regrets the increased property taxes that will result 
from the government’s failure to extend grants in lieu of 
taxes to municipalities; and further regrets that, in the 
absence of tax relief, this budget offers no substantive plan 
for improvements in health care, highways, or justice 
enforcement. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1130) 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it sounds like the 
members are ready to rumble. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at the outset of my remarks, I want to extend my 
greetings to you and to all of those who serve us in the 
Legislative Assembly and to wish you well in your important 
role that you have in this Assembly, and extend that to the 
Deputy Speakers, the Clerks at the Table, the Sergeant-at-Arms, 
the pages, and the Hansard staff who are here to serve us, and 
all those outside the Chamber who also help us in our 
deliberations, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I also want to, as other members have done, is to congratulate 
you on the school outreach program that you have undertaken. I 
think that this is important, not only that the children of 
Saskatchewan gain an understanding of how it is that this 
institution works, but I think even more importantly, that the 
children of Saskatchewan and the future citizens of 
Saskatchewan understand the importance of civilized, orderly, 
parliamentary debate and that we always look for words as the 
means to resolve our differences and that we don’t look for 
other means to do that. 
 
Whatever opinions it is that people might have of this Assembly 
and how we conduct our affairs — and some might have some 
misgivings having seen what has taken place here in the last 
few days — nevertheless we do have a peaceful means to 
resolve our differences. We do, as, I think it was the former 
Clerk of the House of Commons in London who visited us here 
one day, he said that parliament is in a sense the sublimation of 
civil war. 
 
And so we use words to resolve our differences, and so I want 
to commend you on the task that you have undertaken to 
explain this to the children of Saskatchewan because I think that 
it’s just so vital, so important, for our form of government. So 
thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I haven’t run across you 
yet in any of the classrooms in my constituency — and this is 
something that I’m sure will happen — but I would be remiss if 
I didn’t explain to the Assembly that I did run into Mr. Speaker 



316 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 1998 

at the Globe Theatre here in Regina one evening. 
 
And in particular there was the . . . I ran into him at the Globe 
production of a play called Speak. Now this production features 
a Saskatchewan MLA as the main character. And this MLA 
gets to speak whenever he wants, and this MLA gets to say 
whatever he wants. Now obviously this is not an MLA, Mr. 
Speaker, who has ever heard of a whip. This is not an MLA, 
Mr. Speaker, that has ever heard of a speaking order. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, after seeing the performance at the Globe, I 
have concluded that perhaps we should go to visit the Globe 
Theatre as well. Because after seeing the production at the 
Globe, I say that there is much that we could tell the Globe 
Theatre about parliamentary procedure. But given some of the 
dramatic performances that we’ve seen here in this Chamber, 
and especially in question period, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know 
that there is very much that they could tell us about drama or 
acting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to just take a couple of minutes, as 
other members have done, to say how proud I was — as all 
people in Saskatchewan and all people in Canada were — of the 
performances by . . . especially by some Saskatchewan athletes 
in the recent winter Olympics. The two gold medal winners 
stand out, or the two gold medal winning efforts stand out, by 
Catriona Le May Doan of Saskatoon and of course the Sandra 
Schmirler rink of Regina. I was one of those who stayed up 
until late at night to watch their performance. I thought it was 
just terrific. 
 
Mr. Speaker, also before beginning the material part of my 
remarks, I want to, if it’s permissible, to just go back to a 
previous debate that we had in this Chamber, not to dwell on 
the debate as such, but simply to make mention of two very 
excellent speeches that I saw. 
 
And I refer in particular to the speech by the member for 
Wascana Plains in moving adoption of the Speech from the 
Throne. I thought hers was an excellent contribution. I thought 
significantly, Mr. Speaker, she did something that we rarely do 
in this Chamber, and that is to talk about the values that she 
brings to this job in this Chamber. Rather than simply talking 
about issues, she talked about her values. 
 
And I think that’s so important, because it’s the values, Mr. 
Speaker, that will see us in good stead and that will serve us 
well in the years to come. And it’s the values that will always 
tell where it is that people are coming from. I thought hers was 
an excellent contribution. 
 
And also the member for Estevan, his contribution I think also 
shows his experience in municipal government. I thought it was 
also a very excellent and credible contribution, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what a year it’s been. When we last left here 
last spring at the conclusion of that session — and although we 
did have a brief session here in the fall, or a continuation of that 
session, to deal with the Calgary accord, which I’m happy to 
see that all members supported — but when we left here at the 
conclusion of the session last spring, the Liberals had 11 
members and they were the official opposition, Mr. Speaker. 
The PCs, the Tories, had five members, although I think one 

had been kicked out of their caucus — I’m not really clear if he 
had been kicked out of their caucus to that point — because of 
some legal difficulties. So whether it was four or five members 
officially at that point, nevertheless they were what we call the 
third party in this Chamber, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The official leader of the opposition, and that is the Leader of 
the Official Opposition, was the member for Canora-Pelly, as 
the Liberal leader in the House, as opposed to the official 
Liberal leader, who is Dr. Melenchuk, and as opposed to the . . . 
well, never mind, Mr. Speaker. I don’t want to get into that. We 
have a lot of Liberal leaders in and around this Legislative 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker, so I don’t want to get into that, except 
to say that the member for Canora-Pelly was the official Leader 
of the Opposition under the Liberals, and now he is still the 
official Leader of the Opposition under a different arrangement. 
I don’t think I’ve ever seen that before in parliamentary 
government. Now I stand to be corrected on that, and my 
education is probably not as complete as some of the members 
in this Chamber, but I would venture to say, Mr. Speaker, that 
never before in parliamentary government have we seen 
anything of that nature where a person one day is the official 
Leader of the Opposition and the next day is again the official 
Leader of the Opposition but under a different arrangement, 
under a different party name. 
 
And now he’s the official Leader of the Opposition as opposed 
to the member for Kindersley, who was the official Leader of 
the Third Party. Not that the member for Kindersley looks 
particularly unhappy about this state of affairs. On the contrary, 
Mr. Speaker, the member for Kindersley looks very happy these 
days with the new arrangement in the House. And wouldn’t you 
be happy, Mr. Speaker? Wouldn’t you be happy? 
 
Picture him a year ago. Although you’ve managed to stave off 
elimination as a political party, and which was a concern given 
the record of the previous Devine Tory-PC (Progressive 
Conservative) administration which . . . well I don’t know, the 
best way to characterize that would probably be to refer 
members to a line in The Globe and Mail which said that the 
Devine administration arguably — arguably — was the worst 
government ever in Canada — ever; of any province, the worst 
government ever. So although he’s managed to stave off 
elimination as a political party, he continued to be rocked, 
dogged by a succession of political scandals as Tory after Tory 
after Tory after Tory after Tory after Tory after Tory paraded 
before the courts, Mr. Speaker, dealing with a number of, as we 
all know, fraud cases. 
 
And then finally another Tory, one of his members, has to leave 
their caucus and sit as an independent because of his legal 
difficulties. So this was the Tory leader a year ago; the Tory 
leader last year was not a happy leader, Mr. Speaker, reduced to 
a rural, right-wing rump and losing yet another member. 
 
The prospects for growth and renewal on the part of that Tory 
Party were nil, Mr. Speaker, with the public memories of fraud 
being fresh in the minds of the public, Mr. Speaker. And it 
couldn’t be any bleaker for him at that point, pushed to the 
brink of extinction by fraud and criminality. 
 
(1145) 
 



March 27, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 317 

Now one year later, the former Tory leader is all smiles — all 
smiles, Mr. Speaker. And he’s not the only one who’s all 
smiles, Mr. Speaker. I note that the president of the youth 
association of the PC Party also was all smiles. In fact he said 
— and this is Rob Moss, the president for the youth association 
of the PC Party quoted in August of last year in the Observer — 
and he had this to say: “We are totally enthused. This is the new 
set of shoes that will take us places.” So we have a happy Tory 
leader now and we have a very enthusiastic and happy leader of 
the PC youth, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now we all know why there’s smiles all around, Mr. Speaker. 
With the simple expedient of changing their name, the Tories 
have in one stroke eliminated their past and have been able to 
attract new MLAs to their party. One year ago, four or five 
members and slipping badly; one year later, a change of name 
and attracting new MLAs to their party. Now they have, they 
say, a little wind in their sails. A new name, no more past to 
hold them back, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now the public might well ask, well hey, what about all those 
Tory guys in court? And the Saskatchewan Party will say, well 
it’s not us. And it’s almost like when you mention, in certain 
situations you mention PC or Tory or Progressive Conservative 
or Conservative, it’s kind of like a film comes over their eyes. 
It’s like there’s a collective amnesia. 
 
Tories? Who’s that? That’s not us. You know, the Devine 
administration. Hey, that’s not us; that’s somebody else. You 
know, we’re a different party, they say. We’re a new party. We 
have nothing to do with those guys. You know, we’re the 
Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Although I might say that there have been occasions in this 
Chamber, Mr. Speaker, when we note that they become very 
defensive about the Tory record of the ‘80s. And that if you do 
mention Tories, they begin to speak from their seats and to try 
and shout you down; but I’ll have more to say about that later, 
Mr. Speaker. But publicly they say, not only are we new, we’re 
bigger and bigger because MLAs, some other MLAs, decided to 
join them. 
 
Now we all know that four MLAs who were elected as Liberals 
decided to leave the Liberal Party and joined up with the Tories 
under this new Saskatchewan Tory Party name. Now as I 
understand it, these MLAs, based on their public utterances, 
have only one political goal — one political goal only — and 
that is to defeat the NDP. 
 
And when it looked like, after ’91, when the PC administration, 
the Devine administration, had been totally discredited and the 
Tories were sliding in public opinion in Saskatchewan and the 
Liberals were on the rise as the right in Saskatchewan, look for 
some other credible alternative that they might support, those 
people — those four Liberal MLAs — joined the Liberals and 
got themselves elected as Liberals, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But after ’91, after being elected as Liberals, when the Liberals 
in this House started to stumble — and which they did, major 
— you will all remember one of their first things they did was 
to get rid of the leader who had helped sort of elevate them to 
the status of official opposition in the House, they then joined 
the Tories, as soon as the Liberals started to stumble. That much 

is clear, Mr. Speaker. That much is very clear. What is also very 
clear, Mr. Speaker, that these are not people to be trusted. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — For them the end will always justify the 
means. For them it’s enough to be committed to the defeat of 
the NDP. That end will always justify expediency, that end will 
always justify breaking an oath of loyalty, and that end will 
always justify figuratively stabbing your colleagues in the back, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Remember, these are people who signed an oath of loyalty — 
loyalty to the Liberal Party — and then broke that oath. How 
can Saskatchewan people ever believe anything they say? 
They’re prepared to sign an oath of loyalty and then break that. 
 
Well here’s what they had to say when the first reports of a 
merger surfaced in 1996, Mr. Speaker. The member for 
Melfort-Tisdale, who is now seeking the leadership of this new 
Saskatchewan Tory party, he said no, absolutely no; not with 
the Tory Party or any other party; I am a Liberal member of the 
legislature from Melfort-Tisdale and that is what I will stay. 
That’s what the member from Melfort-Tisdale said. 
 
The member for Canora-Pelly, who’s now their leader and was 
the leader of the Liberal Party but is now the leader of the 
Saskatchewan Tory party, and I guess won’t be the leader any 
more, but he might be some other kind of leader, I don’t know, 
he said, when asked about crossing the floor, he said, it’s totally 
false and nothing but an attempt by the Tories to grab media 
attention; we have a signed document from all members and I 
can say unequivocally there is no truth to it. Well how can you 
trust the words of a person like that. 
 
And again when the member from Melfort-Tisdale said that, 
and he used his word absolutely again — I absolutely can say I 
have never, ever considered, never mind participating in any 
discussions across the floor. It’s almost too ridiculous to 
imagine. I was elected in Melfort-Tisdale as a Liberal and will 
continue to represent Melfort-Tisdale as a Liberal. None of our 
members have initiated or participated in any discussions with 
any party. Well you might ask the question, if you’ve never 
participated in any discussions, how is it that you managed to 
cross the floor to these people? 
 
The member for Saltcoats, another one who was elected as a 
Liberal and then jumped to this new Saskatchewan Tory party 
said, as ludicrous as these reports are, I want to assure you, the 
people of the Saltcoats constituency, that I remain committed to 
you, the Liberal Party, and my caucus colleagues. As a further 
sign of my loyalty and that of my colleagues, we have each 
signed a document in which we unequivocally deny any 
intentions of joining any other party. 
 
Now here’s something here. He says that, I remain committed 
to you, speaking to the people of Saltcoats constituency, and he 
says, I remain committed to the Liberal Party and caucus 
colleagues, all in one breath. The people of Saltcoats 
constituency might well ask that if you’ve broken your oath of 
loyalty and if the Liberal Party can’t trust you, how is it that we 
are able to trust you, Mr. Speaker. 
 



318 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 1998 

And finally there is the fourth member of the group of Liberals 
to jump to the Saskatchewan Tory Party, the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena, who says, I would like to inform the 
people of Saskatchewan, and particularly those in the Liberal 
constituencies, that we are continuing our loyalty and support to 
the cause of the Liberal Saskatchewan Party, the official 
opposition caucus, and to the people of Saskatchewan. We have 
not approached the Conservative Party or any other party with 
intention of crossing the floor. 
 
Well you know, we might sort of criticize the media a little bit 
for not being a little bit more specific in your questions. Perhaps 
the question ought not to have been, are you thinking of 
crossing the floor? Maybe the question should have been, are 
you thinking of crossing the aisle? That just goes to show you 
that the media have got to ask the right questions to get the right 
answers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But how can Saskatchewan people ever again believe a word 
they say? Now I expect their constituents will answer that 
question in the next election and send those four members 
packing, Mr. Speaker. That’s what I think will happen. 
 
Now there may well be a lot of people in those constituencies 
who share their commitment to the defeat of the NDP. There 
will always be right-wingers who will want to vote against the 
NDP, but I suspect, Mr. Speaker, that in the next election they 
will find that in addition to those people there will even be more 
people in those constituencies for whom trust is a more 
important commitment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, speaking of trust, one of the things that I’ve 
observed about the seating arrangement in this Assembly is that 
I’m not sure that the former Tories — now the Saskatchewan 
Tories if we can use that kind of description, former Tories and 
former Liberals, now all Saskatchewan Tories — that whether 
the former Tories really have a lot of trust in the former 
Liberals. Because if you look at the seating arrangement that 
they have in the Assembly, it kind of goes Liberal, Tory, 
Liberal, Tory, Liberal, Tory, Liberal, Tory. It’s almost like they 
want to make sure that these people don’t sit together and cook 
up some other palace coup, Mr. Speaker. So I say to the former 
Tories, you are wise in your seating arrangements, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I say to the former Liberals, Mr. Speaker, that I think that 
you will be defeated in the next election; that the people in your 
constituencies will say that we can’t trust you. 
 
But having said that, I don’t want you to think of that defeat as 
the end of the world — the political world maybe —but your 
defeat could also be an opportunity for you to tell your story, 
perhaps to write a book about your experiences. I as one person 
who reads, Mr. Speaker, I’ve always been . . . always favoured 
in fiction. I’ve always favoured the spy genre which is a genre 
in fiction, in literature, which has gone out of favour with the 
fall of the Soviet Union. And so we have writers like John 
LeCarré and others, Len Deighton, who are casting about for 
other subject material. 
 
And I say to those former Liberals, that you know you might 
want to write about your experiences because the spy genre had 
some of the following characteristics: the end always justifies 
the means; the public face belies the truth within; there are 

always wheels within wheels; secrecy is the modus operandi, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And surely those former Liberal members can relate to all of 
that, Mr. Speaker. Think of your rich experiences saying one 
thing and doing another. Meeting in clandestine ways with the 
Tories while publicly professing solidarity with your Liberal 
team-mates; moving around in the middle of the night from 
hotel room to hotel room, skulking. 
 
How did you do it? Did you wear, sort of, Groucho Marx 
glasses and mustaches to hide your identities? Did you slip 
yourself notes in the cafeteria line-up? How did you do it? 
 
Mr. Speaker, what a story they must have to tell, Mr. Speaker. I 
tell you after your defeat, write the story. I’ll be the first one to 
buy your book, Mr. Speaker, because a rich book it will be. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just want to deal for a minute here with the 
question of the change of name and the question of funding for 
the Saskatchewan Party as official opposition. And I want to 
explain to those who are watching us today what’s at stake here. 
The people in the Legislative Assembly know what’s at stake, 
but the people outside may not know. 
 
In our system of parliamentary government, the largest group in 
the Assembly forms the government, is asked by the . . . after an 
election the largest group is asked by Lieutenant Government to 
form the government. The largest group in opposition becomes 
the official opposition party, and then if there are other parties 
with members, they then become the third party or in some 
cases there might be independents and so on. 
 
Now to be recognized as the official opposition also means that 
you receive increased funding from the Legislative Assembly to 
be able to conduct your role as official opposition. And there's 
some prestige that goes with the title of official opposition 
leader as opposed to being the Leader of the Third Party. 
 
(1200) 
 
There’s also I believe some perks. I believe the Leader of the 
Opposition also receives the same pay as a cabinet minister, for 
example. The Leader of the Opposition also has a vehicle, the 
same as cabinet ministers do. So these are no small things — 
increased fundings and the stature and the prestige that goes 
with the job, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So it meant when the Liberals, those four Liberals, moved over, 
it meant the official Liberal opposition was then the smallest 
party in the House and that the new Saskatchewan Tory party 
was then the largest arrangement in the opposition benches. 
And there was quite a bit of public debate at that time, Mr. 
Speaker, about whether or not there should be funding for the 
Saskatchewan Party. And some advocated that the 
Saskatchewan Party should not receive funding and be 
recognized as the official opposition. 
 
Personally, my question would be, what’s all the fuss about? 
Just what is all the fuss about? What we’ve seen here is a 
simple change of name. It was a simple change of name. That’s 
all it was. Nothing else has really changed. 
 



March 27, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 319 

In fact I note, Mr. Speaker, that the very first press release 
issued by the Saskatchewan Party — and this will be of interest 
to the members here, Mr. Speaker — that the very first press 
release issued by the Saskatchewan Party . . . and it’s entitled, 
“Saskatchewan Party caucus chooses interim leader,” which we 
all know is the member for Canora-Pelly, who was the former 
leader of the opposition, or the House Leader for the opposition. 
And it says in this press release, Saskatchewan Party caucus 
chooses interim leader, and it goes on to explain what’s 
happened here. It says, on the bottom here it says, for further 
information . . . for further information, it says, contact the 
Saskatchewan Party caucus office, Regina, 787-5302 — 
787-5302. 
 
And when I looked in the government telephone directory, Mr. 
Speaker, it said that that number, 787-5302, was the number for 
the PC caucus office. So I say, Mr. Speaker, what’s the fuss? 
New name, same old number, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I say what is the fuss. People change their 
names all the time. It is still not uncommon. In fact I think it is 
still the practice for women to change their name to that of the 
husband when they get married. Although there are people now 
where the husbands will hyphenate their names and they both 
share the same name. 
 
Where else do people change their name? The member for 
North Battleford I thought made a very good point about the 
witness protection program and that people change their name 
on the witness protection programs. Even criminals on the lam, 
Mr. Speaker — and I don’t advocate this — will change their 
name to suit their purposes. 
 
The point is, Mr. Speaker, we had a simple change of name. 
Some Tories change their names but not their principles. Some 
Liberals change their names but not their limited principles, Mr. 
Speaker. Sure they’re elected as Liberals, but their switch won’t 
be much of a surprise to their supporters. 
 
I was in the town of Canora not too long ago and I talked to 
some people there about, well what do you think about your 
member sort of crossing the floor or going to this new party? 
They say, well we’re not really surprised because we remember 
in ’82 and ’86 he was there working for Grant Devine who was 
the Conservative, the Tory premier. 
 
So obviously his principles were such that he worked for the 
Conservatives in ’82 and ’86. And in ’91, when the 
Conservatives were no longer in good order, no longer in favour 
he decided, well I’ll just change my name and I’ll go over to the 
Liberal Party. I’ll get elected as a Liberal. But the fact that he’s 
changed his name and is now sitting with the Tories really 
doesn’t come as much of a surprise to the people in his 
constituency, at least the ones that I talked to. 
 
I think the member for Saltcoats always has taken a position 
that, well I’ve worked for the Tories in the past and my primary 
objective is to defeat the NDP. And it’s not to sit as a Liberal or 
anything but it’s to be here to defeat the NDP. So, that he would 
make the switch from the Liberals to the Tories really came as 
no surprise to me, and I would suspect didn’t come as much of 
a surprise for his constituents. The member for 
Kelvington-Wadena, her switch is no surprise. 

You know last year, last year during the session when we were 
listening to people speaking in response to the Speech from the 
Throne, the member for Kelvington-Wadena was speaking, and 
I closed my eyes. I closed my eyes because I wanted to 
concentrate on what it is that she was saying and I didn’t want 
to be distracted, because it seemed to me that as I listened to her 
I kept hearing Grant Devine. As I listened to the way her mind 
worked, at least as it exhibited itself in what she said in this 
Assembly, when I listened to her about how it is that 
government should be operating and running, I said, that’s 
Grant Devine. 
 
And I opened my eyes, and of course it wasn’t Grant Devine, it 
was the Liberal member — or at that time the Liberal member 
from Kelvington-Wadena. But I thought I heard Grant Devine. 
And I’m not making this up. I want the member for 
Saskatchewan rivers to know, and he’s looking very sceptical, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I’m making this up. Because I said as 
much last year. I said last year in March, the Liberal member 
for Kelvington-Wadena reminds me firmly of Grant Devine. So 
much so that if she would make the jump from the Liberal Party 
to this new Tory Party is absolutely no surprise to me, Mr. 
Speaker, that she would make that switch. 
 
So a simple change of name, in my opinion, Mr. Speaker, 
should not result in some differential treatment and a treatment 
other than that which we would normally do in this Legislative 
Assembly when it comes to recognition of parties, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I’m pleased to see, and I’m pleased to see that we didn’t do 
a differential treatment in this regard, and I see that as a sign of 
the strength of our democracy. And I see that as a testament to 
the strength of our institution, Mr. Speaker, that we would take, 
that we would take the inheritors — the inheritors, the Tories, 
the leftover Tories — from the worst provincial administration 
ever in Canada, take them and add to them a group of people of 
extremely dubious loyalty and give them public funding, give 
them the public funding to carry on to put forward their points 
of view in this Chamber and to represent, I suppose, a body of 
opinion in Saskatchewan. 
 
So I say it was simply a change of name and that we strengthen 
our democracy by funding this group of people who are the 
inheritors of the worst administration that we’ve ever seen in 
Canada, ever, and a group of people of extremely dubious 
loyalty, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, speaking of a change of name, a lot of 
people I talked to seemed quite upset that these people have 
appropriated the name Saskatchewan for their party. They say, 
well how can it be that these Tories, who we dislike so much 
because of what they did to Saskatchewan, would then take the 
Saskatchewan flag and wrap themselves in that Saskatchewan 
flag. And we don’t think that it’s right that they should take that 
party name, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I say it’s . . . Well they have the right to do that, I suppose. 
They’re not sort of setting up, you know, some kind of a 
honey-wagon service or something where I guess you’re 
prevented from using the name Saskatchewan. They’re setting 
up a political party; they should have the right to do that, 
although I don’t think it’s particularly original. They might 
have, Mr. Speaker, they might have gone to a more functional 



320 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 1998 

or descriptive name like the Saskatchewan knee-jerk party or 
something like that. 
 
But be that as it may, personally, Mr. Speaker, I am more 
concerned about a trend in Canada toward factionalism, 
regionalism. Mr. Speaker, a trend that seems to say that the 
most important thing is to represent our own narrow interests at 
the level that we represent; that we should not worry about the 
good of the nation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, most notably of course we see the Parti Québécois 
who promote separation as I think probably the only other party 
in Canada that bears the name of the provincial jurisdiction in 
which they’re located. So there we have the Parti Québécois 
who promote separation. They have a provincial name. And 
here we have the party Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, or the 
Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Now I don’t say that they promote separation but I am 
somewhat concerned that we have political parties forming in 
provinces throughout this country. And their primary objective, 
their only objective is, their only objective because they don’t 
have national ties — their number one goal is simply to 
promote provincial rights but never worry about what might be 
the best for the country as a whole, Mr. Speaker, you know. 
 
And our Saskatchewan Party with no national ties, Mr. Speaker, 
also in a sense promoting regionalism and provincialism. Is this 
good for Canada? And where will this lead, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it has been a momentous year. And I would 
like to ask myself, how will history record moments? And so I 
ask myself, how will history record what has happened here this 
last year with respect to the Saskatchewan Party? And I suspect 
the historians will say the Progressive Conservative Party, also 
known as the PCs or Tories, was pushed to the brink of 
extinction by a legacy of an extremely poor government while 
in power, and ongoing revelations of fraud and criminality. 
 
In a desperate bid to stave off extinction, they changed their 
name and thereby succeeding in attracting a group of 
disgruntled Liberals to join them under their new name. This, 
Mr. Speaker, came to be known as the great turncoat turnaround 
of ’97. 
 
Of course this is not the first time, Mr. Speaker, when the 
Liberals were down, in the 1970s after the Blakeney 
government was elected in 1971, I believe it was. And we have 
members of this House who will remember that. The Liberals 
went down in public opinion and there were Liberals at that 
point who were jumping ship to the Conservative Party, led at 
that point, I think, by the esteemed Dick Collver. And we won’t 
speak of his legal difficulties or his peculiar notions about 
Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But there were two Liberals who come to mind who jumped 
ship. One was Gary Lane and one was Colin Thatcher. They 
were quite a pair. Here we had the author of the greatest 
whopper ever in Saskatchewan history, and a person who came 
to be known, I say internationally known, for his criminal act, 
Mr. Speaker. But those people too were Liberals at that point 
and jumped over to the Conservative Party. So this is not 
something that’s new, what we’re seeing here today. 

We saw it at the federal scene too. Jean Charest who was the 
Progressive Conservative leader in Ottawa now making the 
jump to the Liberal Party in Quebec. And what is that old 
refrain, Mr. Speaker? Tory Liberal, Liberal Tory, same old 
story, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to just deal with some of the specifics of 
the budget speech. The theme is investing in people, building 
on momentum. I say that there is momentum in Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker. I think the government has got it right that there is 
momentum in Saskatchewan. I think people all around will tell 
you that there’s momentum. People all around are expressing 
hope and optimism about their future in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. More people than ever before are employed in 
Saskatchewan people You can’t go down the streets and roads 
of Saskatchewan and not be hopeful and optimistic about what 
is happening in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There has been a significant turnaround from 10 years ago. Ten 
years ago, in 1988, we had the most massive out-migration that 
we have ever seen from Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, with the 
possible exception of the 1930s under the Conservative 
administration of that time. We had what might charitably be 
called a depressed economy. The government of that day 
seemed totally incapable of dealing with the issues before us. A 
government that couldn’t govern. 
 
Which I guess if you look at sort of their philosophy of 
government shouldn’t be surprising because these are people 
always espouse less government or no government. Well how 
someone who espouses less or no government can take on the 
job of governing has always a bit of a mystery to me, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
This budget accomplishes three main things: one, there is a cut 
in taxes, Mr. Speaker. And that should be no surprise to anyone. 
I admit that this administration raised taxes in the early years of 
. . . when we were first elected; I think it was in 1992, early in 
its mandate. There was an increase in the provincial sales tax 
from 7 to 9 per cent. We put on what was called a debt surtax. 
And why did we do that and why did we also cut spending at 
that time? 
 
We did that to get our affairs in order, Mr. Speaker. We were 
spending more than we were bringing in. And I supported the 
government then and I continue to support the initiatives that 
we took at that point in terms of curtailing our spending, in 
terms of increasing taxes as a means of putting an end to the 
deficits that we had been seeing throughout the ‘80s, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Since then, Mr. Speaker, since that time we have cut the sales 
tax again. It’s gone back from 9 to 7 per cent, Mr. Speaker. We 
have cut the debt surtax, Mr. Speaker. And now we’ve cut the 
income tax. And there have been other tax cuts over the years, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to remind the public, and I want to remind especially the 
members opposite, that the first act of government, the first act 
of this government in 1991 when it was elected was to do away 
with the harmonization of the provincial sales tax with the 
goods and services tax in Ottawa. 
 



March 27, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 321 

There may be a few who will remember. There may be some 
who will remember that in 1991, after April 1, 1991 and until 
we were elected in the fall of that year, that when you went to a 
restaurant, when you went to a restaurant, you just didn’t pay 
the GST (goods and services tax) on your restaurant meal 
anymore at that point, you also started to pay the provincial 
sales tax on a restaurant meal at that point, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And our first act of government was to do away with that and a 
number of other areas where the provincial sales tax had been 
foisted on the people of Saskatchewan. Foisted on the people of 
Saskatchewan because that Tory administration thought it was 
in the best interests of Saskatchewan to harmonize our 
provincial sales tax with the federal goods and services tax. So 
our first act of government was to do away with that and to stop 
gouging the Saskatchewan public as the Tories were doing at 
that time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I say, Mr. Speaker, on balance we are moving in the right 
direction and we can be hopeful and optimistic that we will 
continue to move in that direction, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Secondly, the budget, importantly in my point of view, pays 
down debt. And now we have to ask ourselves where did this 
debt come from. You have to remember that in 1982 the total 
debt in the province was about $3 billion. And all of that was 
debt incurred by Crown corporations — debt that they might 
have incurred to improve telephone lines; debt that they might 
have to had to pay for expansion of power facilities; debt that 
they might have had to bring in new telephone sets, I don’t 
know — but debts incurred by Crown corporations, as any sort 
of corporation might do as a means of upgrading and 
improving, and debt that would then be paid for by those who 
take advantage of the service of that corporation — people who 
buy power; people who purchase telephone services, Mr. 
Speaker. It was what you call in business a self-liquidating debt. 
Is that what that is? It’s a debt that is paid for by the people who 
use the service. 
 
But there was no debt that had been run up by the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan — none whatsoever. There was no line in the 
provincial budget that said payment or government’s portion of 
the public debt, and to make payments on that. There wasn’t 
any — none whatsoever. And that one went from zero to 8.6 or 
almost $9 billion, Mr. Speaker. From zero to about $9 billion 
during the course of the Devine administration, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And incidentally the one on Crowns — and these are people 
that said, we don’t want Crowns, we don’t believe in Crown 
corporations, we shouldn’t be putting money into Crown 
corporations — the Crown corporation debt also jumped from 
$3 billion to $5 billion. And of course we had other debt in 
terms of liabilities that we took on, Mr. Speaker, giving us a 
total of about $15 billion. 
 
And I was interested to hear the previous Tory speaker, the 
member for Melfort-Tisdale. The member from 
Melfort-Tisdale, the would-be leader of the Saskatchewan Tory 
party, the former leader of the . . . or the former member of the 
Saskatchewan Liberal Party, and he’s going on and complaining 
about tax loads and everything in Saskatchewan and making 
these comparisons to Newfoundland. 
 

I’d like to make just one other little comparison to 
Newfoundland and Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, if I might. And 
that is that in 1991 when the NDP was elected, we discovered 
that the per capita debt in Saskatchewan — per capita debt as a 
result of Tory mismanagement, as a result of Tory bungling — 
the per capita debt in Saskatchewan was higher than that of 
Newfoundland, Mr. Speaker. This is something that he didn’t 
mention in his speech, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We all know that deficits are deferred taxes. Yes, you can 
borrow today, but at some point you have to pay back for that 
borrowing, Mr. Speaker. Is it any surprise, Mr. Speaker, that we 
are still paying for that debt today and we will pay for that debt 
for many, many years, if not decades to come, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now why should we concern ourselves about paying down the 
debt? And I might ask, are your children . . . are your children 
in a better position to pay that debt than you are? Should our 
children pay because we did not face up to the tough decisions 
in the 1980s? In the ‘80s we borrowed to make ends meet. 
Should future generations pay for that? So when people ask 
why is it that the government is paying down the debt, they 
should ask themselves those questions as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how are we paying down the debt? Well 
significantly, this will be done because of our sale of the 
interest in the Bi-Provincial upgrader, which we just sold, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I might point out that if we had listened to the opposition, 
if we had listened to the opposition . . . Because the public 
might remember, might remember, that shortly after we took 
office we were faced with this interest in the Bi-Provincial 
upgrader in Lloydminster. And at about that time the Tory 
government in Alberta and the Liberal government of Jean 
Chrétien shortly thereafter in 1993-94 said that we don’t want 
any more part, we don’t any more part of this upgrader, and 
we’re going to sell our share in that upgrader. 
 
But the Saskatchewan government said no, we’re not going to 
do that. We are hopeful. We are optimistic. We’ve checked our 
books. We think that this upgrader will continue to appreciate in 
value, that this upgrader will begin to turn profits on its 
operations, that this upgrader will become more valuable in the 
years to come. 
 
But what did the opposition say? They said oh no, you should 
do what Alberta has done. You should do what the federal 
Liberals have done. You should sell your share now. Get out 
while the going is good. Sell out, sell out, sell out at 10 cents on 
the dollar — get out while you can. 
 
And we said no, we’re going to stick with this. We had some 
faith. We had some optimism. More importantly, we’ve 
checked our numbers. Not that necessarily we want to own an 
upgrader, Mr. Speaker — obviously, we don’t; we just sold our 
share in it — not that we wanted to own an upgrader. But 
neither, Mr. Speaker, were we blinkered, blinkered like an old 
horse with blinkers on so he can’t see beside him. We weren’t 
blinkered like the Tories and Liberals were about the 
importance of maintaining and supporting public investment, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 



322 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 1998 

These people said, we don’t believe in it, sell it. Even if you 
lose your shirt, sell it. Well aren’t we sort of . . . What kind of 
position would we have been in today? Would we have the 
money to pay down in debt in this budget if we had listened to 
them? No, Mr. Speaker, wouldn’t have. 
 
Theirs is a privatization at any cost mentality. We saw this with 
respect to the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan — 
privatization at any cost — and we saw it with the upgrader, 
Mr. Speaker. It’s a good thing we didn’t listen because now we 
have some money to pay down on the debt, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the third aspect of our budget that I just want to 
touch on is the question of programs. This budget continues to 
support important public priorities. 
 
And on the right, Saskatchewan Party and people in 
Saskatchewan are doing a lot of hand-wringing about oh, you’re 
putting money into services and programs. We shouldn’t be 
putting more money into services and programs. We hear the 
song here today from the Saskatchewan Party — oh, we don’t 
know if we should be putting any more money into health care. 
We think we should have a review of the health care system. 
But the message is, we don’t want to spend more on health care, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Let me just say this about that. Budgets are about more than 
simply cutting taxes. Budgets are about supporting important 
public priorities. Saskatchewan has among the lowest, if not the 
lowest expenditure per capita when it comes to government in 
Canada — the lowest, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When you look at it and when you look at Saskatchewan and 
how unique it is in its rural character, you would say to yourself 
that given sort of the rural nature of Saskatchewan, we should 
probably have among the highest expenditures in Canada. 
Because it stands to reason that in a rural province like 
Saskatchewan, you can’t enjoy some of the economies of scale 
that people in other provinces enjoy, Mr. Speaker; so that those 
per capita expenditures should be higher. 
 
To have effective public services, there must be public 
commitment and public support, Mr. Speaker. It is a legitimate 
debate to question how much money goes in to support our 
public priorities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget, in a very important way, supports 
public priorities, Mr. Speaker. It supports investments in 
children and families; it doubles the funding for the 
Saskatchewan action plan for children; more money for 
improvements in day cares; measures to assist victims of child 
prostitutions and family violence; extends health benefits to 
children of low income working families; implementation of a 
Saskatchewan Child Benefit; implementation of a 
Saskatchewan employment supplement to provide low income 
working families with additional support to help them remain in 
the workforce. 
 
In the area of education and training, we’ve seen the federal 
Liberal government pull out of education and training in a 
massive way. We have responded to that. We have increased 
our investment in skills training and employment programs. We 
have increased our operating grants to universities and federated 

colleges, up $9 million. We have increased our capital 
investment. We have implemented a new Saskatchewan bursary 
plan, and that’s something, Mr. Speaker, I’m particularly proud 
of. 
 
(1230) 
 
As an immigrant to Canada, and immigrant parents who had 
limited opportunity to help their children, that in Canada I could 
find the opportunity to go to university, and in my particular 
case it was because I was able to live at home and my parents 
were able to support me. But that isn’t always the possibility. I 
think it is just so important that we provide support for young 
people who want to carry on and to get a university education, 
Mr. Speaker, as opposed to simply saying that that should be a 
function of the market-place. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, we are importantly . . . And I think that this 
is something that, although it’s not significant by itself, what we 
saw this year was that there was $384 million in operating 
grants for kindergarten to grade 12 education — up $21 million 
from the previous year. Now that doesn’t seem like a lot of 
money but what is significant, Mr. Speaker, is that is a 
turnaround, that is a turnaround in something we’re seeing, and 
I think we can be hopeful and optimistic about continued 
provincial support for education and training in the future. 
 
And you might ask these right-wingers that do all this 
hand-wringing about should we be putting more money into 
government just what it is that they propose to do. Where would 
money come from, if not from the taxpayers of the province, to 
support important public priorities? Private schools and only 
private schools — is that the answer? 
 
Mr. Speaker, also importantly, we’ve invested in health. 
There’s an increase of $88 million in this budget over last 
year’s budget for health care. Our $1.7 billion health care 
budget is the largest health care budget in our history. There’s 
increased funding to help districts, there’s increased funding for 
capital expenditures, for construction and renovation of health 
facilities, operating funding for diagnostic tools such as a new 
MRI in Regina and CT (computerized tomography) scanner in 
Prince Albert. 
 
Mr. Speaker, are there stresses and strains in our health care 
system? Yes, there are. Are we responding to those stresses and 
strains, Mr. Speaker? Yes, we are. Will we do more, Mr. 
Speaker? Yes, you bet we will, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Health has been and will continue to be a very important public 
priority. And I might underline that word “public,” Mr. 
Speaker. And I want to underline it again so that the members 
of the opposition can hear that — a public priority. Not a 
private priority, not a private expenditure, but a public priority, 
Mr. Speaker. We will not go the road that you advocate for 
Saskatchewan. We will not go the road of private health clinics. 
We will no go the American style of health care system that you 
advocate for us. That’s not the road we will go. We will 
continue to support health care because for us health care is an 
important public priority, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, significantly we are continuing to carry through 
on our commitment to spend significant funds in the area of 



March 27, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 323 

highways and transportation, to do the important work of 
making the repairs to those roads in Saskatchewan that are 
being chewed up by increased economic activity and also 
increased grain transportation because there are fewer railways, 
Mr. Speaker, and there are now fewer grain elevators, and so 
therefore more and more trucking is done. And also to support 
twinning of the Trans-Canada Highway, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the areas of jobs and economic growth, we are 
not content to simply say that we’ve done everything that can 
be done. We are continuing to provide support; we are doubling 
our support for the regional economic development authorities. 
We’re implementing tax incentives in the areas of research and 
development. There is a tax credit in the area of film 
production. There’s a tax rebate in the area of livestock and 
horticultural facilities. And there’s increased investment in 
agricultural research and development, Mr. Speaker. We are not 
standing still in the area of jobs and employment; we are 
continuing to support those important public priorities, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just want to say a further word about investment 
in jobs and that we are continuing with the approach we have 
taken, which is selected, strategic tax cuts to support important 
public priorities, which are strategic partnerships like with the 
regional economic development authorities. An approach which 
I might say — and this will come as a real shocker, this will 
come as a real shocker for the members of the Legislative 
Assembly — this is an approach that even the media has 
conceded is working. 
 
Now I know this comes as a very, very great shock. The media 
never says the government is doing something right because 
that wouldn’t be news. The only thing that’s news is when the 
government does something wrong. The media would never say 
the government is doing something right, but in this particular 
instance even the media is conceding that the government’s 
plan is working. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I don’t believe it. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well the member for Churchill Downs 
says, Regina Churchill Downs, says he doesn’t believe it. Well I 
believe it, Mr. Speaker, and why do I believe it? Because I read 
it, Mr. Speaker, in the Regina Leader-Post on Wednesday. And 
I just want to let the member for Churchill Downs know that it 
is true. 
 
I read this on Wednesday, January 14, 1998. Now maybe it was 
a New Year’s resolution because of being January 14, and 
maybe it was his first column of the year. This is the Murray 
Mandryk column in the Leader-Post, Mr. Speaker. Maybe it 
was a New Year’s resolution to say, and the title is, “May I take 
this time to admit that I was wrong.” 
 
And he goes on to say: “As painful as this is for me to admit . . . 
the NDP government’s job creation strategy is working, after 
all.” And then he goes on, you know, in his usual smarmy way 
to question and to talk about, well, you can’t rely on this and do 
that. And basically he criticizes even while he’s admitting that 
we’re right. “What indisputable evidence could bring on this 
unprecedented repentance, you ask?” He says you can “forget 
(about) the barrage of employment statistics . . .” And 

“percentage of unemployment . . .” because these things are 
“meaningless”. You can forget about the “increase or decrease 
in the number of people working for last month?” He says this 
is “meaningless.” He says: 
 

Increase or decrease of working people from the same 
month a year ago? . . . (that’s) just a monthly statistic and 
doesn’t offer much prospective. 
 
No, the only two numbers free of political manipulation are 
the ones telling us what our workforce averaged for the 
year and the other telling us how much more or less that 
average was than the year before. 

 
Well he might have mentioned that there’s one other little bit of 
indisputable evidence that he might have looked at, Mr. 
Speaker, which also came from the same paper, but came much 
before the article about Murray Mandryk, where he’s saying 
that he’s wrong, that the government is right and the 
government is doing the job that it said that it had been doing. 
 
And this was in The Leader-Post, Mr. Speaker. I noticed that 
every Saturday now, The Leader-Post publishes a special 
section called “Career Opportunities.” I have never seen that 
before. I’ve never seen that before, Mr. Speaker, up until this 
last year. Now all of a sudden we’ve got a special section on 
career opportunities. Doesn’t that tell you something about 
jobs? Doesn’t that tell you something about employment? 
Doesn’t that tell you something about the Saskatchewan 
economy, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Mr. Speaker, this just goes to show what we all know. If you 
really want to know what’s going on in a community, never 
mind the editorial staff, never mind the writers, never mind the 
columnists, Mr. Speaker, talk to the people who know. Talk to 
the people in advertising at the local paper. If there’s a trend in 
anything they’ll know, and they’ll know it much faster than 
Murray Mandryk, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is sensitive to the priorities of 
Saskatchewan people. We will continue to reflect their priorities 
no matter what picture of doom and gloom the opposition may 
. . . Well I don’t know if they can credibly say anything about 
doom and gloom. They really haven’t questioned that, Mr. 
Speaker. Even they know that Saskatchewan is doing well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if you listen to the people of Saskatchewan there’s 
a story of hope and optimism. There’s a story of people 
working. There’s a story of people planning their futures in 
Saskatchewan. It is perfect? No, it’s not, Mr. Speaker. Is the 
government responding? Yes, it is. 
 
You know, speaking about listening to people and speaking 
about being in touch, or being out of touch like the opposition 
are, I don’t that there was anything more sorry in this 
Legislative Assembly, Mr. Speaker, than the attempts by at 
least two opposition members to rewrite history. And these 
were the member for Moosomin and a member for Cypress 
Hills — both of them Tory members. Well except one is now 
called the Saskatchewan Tory and the other one is now called 
an independent, but they’re both Tory members. 
 
Both are trying to impress upon us the idea that although the 



324 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 1998 

Devine administration of the ‘80s made some mistakes, we 
should concede the notion that the Devine administration also 
made many good decisions and that we should dwell on those 
good decisions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now the member for Moosomin had this to say, “It’s 
unfortunate that the member fails to acknowledge that the ‘80s 
certainly were a difficult period.” I would like to ask him, if he 
was in government at that time, whether they would have been 
able to address a number of the questions any differently? Well 
yes, Mr. Speaker, if he’s asking, yes, there’s some things that 
we would have done very differently. 
 
But he goes on to say, “Let’s acknowledge that there were a 
number of issues, a number of decisions that were made, and a 
number of initiatives that the province is benefiting from.” Well 
I mean the law of averages would have you say that yes, there 
had to be some things you had to do right, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But even more interesting, even more interesting is a member 
for Cypress Hills and this is what he has to say: 
 

And I think that we have come to a point of time, Mr. 
Speaker, when it’s time to give some credit to the past 
administrations that did some good. I can think of some 
things I didn’t like about Tommy Douglas, but the man did 
a lot of good as well. So let’s remember the past as good 
things, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I can certainly understand, Mr. Speaker, that 
those who are associated with the previous Devine 
administration would want us to forget, but I think that in 
forgetting that we might start with an admission that we also did 
some things wrong, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You can’t take the position that we should be looking or taking 
an extremely balanced view of the past if you’re never prepared 
to admit that you’ve made major mistakes and mistakes that the 
people of Saskatchewan are still paying for, and will continue to 
pay for many decades to come, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This government, this government, when it makes mistakes, it’s 
prepared to admit its mistakes. Even the Liberal Party is 
prepared to admit that it made mistakes with respect to the 
handling of their former leader, Lynda Haverstock, Mr. 
Speaker. But will the Tories ever admit to any mistakes by the 
Devine administration? — no, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the reality is we cannot and must not forget. To 
forget is to risk making those mistakes again. And many 
philosophers have made that point much more eloquently than 
I, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some playwrights have also had some appropriate things to say 
about that, Mr. Speaker. Speaking of the Globe as we were 
earlier, those members might have gone to the Globe at one 
time. They might have listened to a Shakespeare play, in 
particular Julius Caesar, Mr. Speaker. And if I might paraphrase 
Shakespeare in Julius Caesar, Mr. Speaker, it might go 
something like this: Friends, Saskatchewanians, countrymen, 
lend me your ears. I come to bury the Devine Tories, not to 
praise them. The evil that men do lives after them; the good is 
oft interred with their bones. So let it be with the Devine Tories, 

Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now no one is suggesting that the Devine administration did 
not have some modest accomplishments. Again the balance is, 
Mr. Speaker, the law of averages is that they had to do some 
things right, Mr. Speaker. But, Mr. Speaker, it’s a long bow as 
the Saskatchewan member from Cypress Hills did, to go on to 
say that the Devine administration should be favourably 
compared to the Tommy Douglas administration, Mr. Speaker. 
That is bit of a long bow, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1245) 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, again we cannot, we must not forget. To 
forget is to deny the past. Should we forget? No, Mr. Speaker. 
Should we forget nine years of deficit budgets, driving 
Saskatchewan near to bankruptcy, Mr. Speaker? Should we 
forget their attempt to sell off SaskPower and SaskEnergy, Mr. 
Speaker? Should we forget their attempts to avoid public 
accountability, Mr. Speaker? Should we forget their attempts to 
divide Saskatchewan people? Should we forget their legacy of 
criminality and corruption, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Should we forget that the new Saskatchewan Party is the old 
Tory Party, Mr. Speaker? No, Mr. Speaker, we cannot. 
Whatever their names, whatever their name, can we ever again 
risk a Tory provincial government? No, Mr. Speaker. No, Tory 
members, we shall not forget. The people of Saskatchewan will 
not forget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I support the budget. I support the government’s 
direction. I support the leadership of the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. I will not support the amendment before us, and I 
will support the main motion. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
use this opportunity to say how pleased and privileged I am to 
rise and speak in support of a budget. 
 
I’d also like to congratulate you, Mr. Speaker, for the fine job 
that you are doing, and also the staff . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Now . . . Order! 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I would like 
to also congratulate the staff, not only here in the Chamber but 
throughout the building — those who work at Hansard into the 
wee hours of the morning — for the fine job that they do to 
make this institution run as effectively as it is. 
 
And I say that it is certainly an honour and pleasure to serve as 
a representative here in the Assembly and serve and work with 
the people of the Indian Head-Milestone constituency. 
 
The Indian Head-Milestone constituency is a very diverse 
constituency — a long farming history, Mr. Speaker, lots of 
small businesses, manufacturing, tourism in areas such as the 
Qu’Appelle Valley, and many other opportunities for economic 
development in the constituency. 



March 27, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 325 

Many people volunteer in various capacities. In recent years, for 
an example, Mr. Speaker, dinner theatre performances occur in 
Milestone, Edgeley, Sintaluta, Creelman, McLean, to mention a 
few. 
 
And I’d also like to mention that on April 18th weekend the 
Milestone rodeo will be performing again. I’m quite fortunate, 
at least the people in the Indian Head-Milestone constituency 
are fortunate, Mr. Speaker, in that there are three MLAs in the 
constituency. The member from Weyburn and also member 
from Melville live in Indian Head-Milestone constituency. I 
would like to remind the people in the constituency though that 
one MLA does most of the work for them. 
 
As I say, I’m very pleased to support this budget, Mr. Speaker, 
and I would like to congratulate the Minister of Finance for 
delivering a very good first budget and a very effective budget 
as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Also a special thanks to all of the people 
who work behind the scenes in the Department of Finance as 
well as throughout other government departments as they pull 
together these budgets involving about $5 billion, certainly no 
small task. This is a fifth balanced budget that we have brought 
forward in a row, Mr. Speaker, another great accomplishment 
for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
This budget does no only represent balance financially but in 
many other respects as well. In our usual tradition, we are 
putting money towards paying down our debt, cutting taxes, and 
putting more money into priority areas such as health, roads, 
and education. There is something for everyone in this budget, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I would like to touch on a few areas in no particular order here. 
One is the highways. We are very pleased to see a 10 per cent 
or a $20 million increase in our Highways budget. We will 
repair or resurface 3,600 kilometres of roads and highways in 
our province in the coming year and to put this in perspective, it 
is a distance from the city of Saskatoon to Quebec City, which 
certainly is a large, long distance of roads which will be 
receiving much needed attention in the coming year. 
 
We will also push ahead with work on the Trans-Canada 
Highway, Mr. Speaker, without federal support, but we are 
going ahead doing what we can on our own. This will include 
27 kilometres twinning the Trans-Canada Highway from Gull 
Lake to Tompkins, and another 21 kilometres from Indian Head 
to Wolseley. 
 
Now this is very good news for the people of Saskatchewan, 
and again we are living up to our commitment of completing 
the twinning of the Trans-Canada Highway, unfortunately on 
our own without federal money even though this is a 
Trans-Canada Highway. 
 
The cost of twinning their highway is roughly $400,000 a 
kilometre, Mr. Speaker, and that is why this task is so 
momentous. It’s just a horrendous task, but we are committed to 
completing this in the next few years. 
 

We have more roads in Saskatchewan than any other province. 
We have 25 per cent of the roads in Canada are found in 
Saskatchewan. And if they were all put end to end, it would 
circle the planet Earth four and a half times. So roads are 
certainly important. 
 
And again with deregulation of railways, railways 
abandonment, and such like, we are going to certainly see more 
stress on our roads. And roads are very important to everybody 
in this province and we are working together with 
municipalities and everyone else, the trucking industry as well, 
to try and accommodate the pressures on our roads and keep 
them up to par. 
 
Another area, Mr. Speaker, is taxes. Nobody likes taxes but 
they are a fact of life. And again, as in the past number of years, 
we are reducing the taxes that people pay. This year we will be 
reducing the Saskatchewan personal income tax rate by 2 per 
cent, lowering it from 50 to 48 per cent of the basic federal tax. 
This will put about $58 million into the pockets of 
Saskatchewan people, and again something that we are very 
proud to do and we are committed to do as trying to reduce our 
taxes as we bring in each particular budget. 
 
As I mentioned, this is the fifth balanced budget in a row and 
there’s many good things happening in Saskatchewan. Last year 
there was 13,000 new jobs in our province. We have a record 
number of people working. And we are also focusing attention 
on our young people in many ways — certainly through 
education. Job opportunities are very important. 
 
And we are also dealing, Mr. Speaker, with a fraction of a 
percentage of our young people who have got in trouble with 
the law for various reasons, and we certainly do not believe that 
throwing these young people, who got off the right track, into 
institutions and locking them up, throwing away the key. These 
are our young people. These are our future. We will be doing 
what we can to help these people as we want to help all young 
people. And we look forward to some major achievements in 
this during the coming year. 
 
Debt reduction is also very important to people. I know that 
people like my mother certainly doesn’t like to have any debt 
around, and this applies to many of our older people who 
scrimp and save to build this province into the great province 
that it is. And they did not do it by spending foolishly as has 
happened during the 1980s. But we are committed to reducing 
our debt. 
 
Last year we cut our debt by $700 million. We will be cutting 
our debt by another $500 million this year. And our debt is 
going down. In 1995, Mr. Speaker, our debt was about $15 
billion. We were paying $880 million in interest. About 19 
cents of every dollar that we took in went towards interest. 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this year our debt is down to $12 billion and 
our interest costs have been reduced to $725 million or 14 cents 
of every dollar that we take in. This is still far, far too much 
interest to be paying — $725 million. Our whole Highways 
budget is only $225 million. Just think what we could do in this 
province if we did not have our interest and our debt to deal 
with. 
 
One of the most important areas to everybody in this province, 



326 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 1998 

Mr. Speaker, is our health. And I am very pleased to see that 
again, as we have consistently done, we are increasing money 
in health care. Another $88 million will be spent in health care 
this coming year. A total of $1.7 billion or 38 per cent of our 
total operating budget is going to Health, and health is very 
important. 
 
And what we are doing with this, we will see the replacing or 
upgrading of 10 new health facilities including in communities 
such as Shaunavon, the Shaunavon Hospital, the Balcarres 
Health Centre, the Fort Qu’Appelle Indian Hospital, and the 
Regina General and Pasqua hospitals, Athabasca Health Centre, 
Davidson Health Centre, Meadow Lake Hospital, Saskatoon 
Sherbrooke Long-term Care Centre, and the Unity hospital all 
will be getting new money, new facilities, or certainly major 
improvements on their facilities. 
 
We assume and trust there will be other capital expenditures 
announced in the coming year on additional health facilities. 
We have an MRI machine coming to Regina; we are recruiting 
more doctors for rural Saskatchewan, with financial incentives; 
and we have increased the funding for health care districts by 
$35 million. And every health care district in the province will 
be getting a portion of this $35 million. 
 
So as you can see, Mr. Speaker, health care is a priority. And 
we will continue to make health care a priority. Can we use 
more money? We always can use more money. But we are 
doing what we can. 
 
We can assure the people of Saskatchewan that we will 
continue to provide additional money for health care as at the 
same time the federal government keeps cutting back health 
care dollars. At one time when medicare was brought in, 50 per 
cent of the health care dollar came from the federal government. 
That has dropped to 13 per cent. Who picked up the other 37 
per cent? We did, the people of Saskatchewan. And I guess we 
will have to continue to do that as long as Ottawa does not view 
health care as an important issue. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I have a number of other things that I would 
like to comment on, but in light of the time, I would like to at 
this time move adjournment of debate and continue on in the 
next sitting. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:56 p.m. 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................301 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................301 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................301 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................301 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................301 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................301 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................301 
  Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................301 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................301 
  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................302 
  Goohsen .....................................................................................................................................................................................302 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ..........................................................................................................................................................................................302 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................302 
  Goohsen .....................................................................................................................................................................................302 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Bradley.......................................................................................................................................................................................302 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................302 
  Johnson ......................................................................................................................................................................................302 
  Scott ...................................................................................................................................................................................302, 312 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................312 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Saskatchewan Party Membership 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................303 
 Good News Headlines 
  Stanger .......................................................................................................................................................................................303 
 Compensation for Hepatitis C Victims 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................303 
 Religion is a Journey 
  Murray.......................................................................................................................................................................................303 
 Compensation for Hepatitis C Victims 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................304 
 Interest Paid on Public Debt 
  Johnson ......................................................................................................................................................................................304 
 Health Care Crisis in Regina 
  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................304 
 First Nations Waterways Project 
  Flavel..........................................................................................................................................................................................304 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Inquiry into Channel Lake 
  Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................305 
  Lingenfelter ...............................................................................................................................................................................305 
 Regina Hospital Bed Shortage 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................305 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................306 
 Lanigan Hospital Closure 
  Toth ....................................................................................................................................................................................307, 309 
  Cline ...................................................................................................................................................................................307, 309 
 Plains Health Centre Closure 
  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................307 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................307 
  Romanow ...................................................................................................................................................................................308 
 Rural Health Care 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................308 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................308 
  Romanow ...................................................................................................................................................................................309 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 742  The Protection of Children Involved in Prostitution Act 
  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................309 
 



 

MOTION UNDER RULE 46 
 Public Broadcast of Crown Corporations Committee 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................309 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Not Debatable) 
  Kowalsky ...................................................................................................................................................................................310 
MOTION 
 Referral of the Estimates and Supplementary Estimates to the Committee of Finance 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................310 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................310 
MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................310 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................310 
  Van Mulligen.............................................................................................................................................................................315 
  Scott ...........................................................................................................................................................................................324 
 
 


