





























































Hansard: March 26, 1998


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 273 
 March 26, 1998 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have 
a petition on behalf of residents of Saskatchewan. The prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from the 
community of Lampman. I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present today: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions come from my constituency, Mr. Speaker, the 
town of Lampman. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a petition to 
present to this Assembly. I’ll read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find out 
all the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this petition is signed by individuals from the Arcola, 
Manor, Kisbey, and Carlyle area. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 

 
And as is in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The communities involved, Mr. Speaker, are Wawota, Kisbey, 

Estevan, and Arcola. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
a petition, and I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that you Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will every pray. 

 
And these come from the good people in Redvers, Alida, 
Carievale, Gainsborough. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to 
present a petition. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake’s fiasco. 

 
Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from Bienfait, 
Estevan, and Arcola. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
to present today: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Oxbow, 
Arcola, and Kisbey. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I as well have a petition 
this afternoon to present on behalf of residents of 
Saskatchewan. The petition is surrounding the whole Jack 
Messer, Channel Lake situation, and I’m pleased to present on 
their behalf. 
 
The petitioners come from the areas of Arcola, Carlyle, and 
Kenosee Lake, Mr. Speaker, and I’m pleased to present on their 
behalf. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present a petition also 
on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 



274 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 1998 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
And the signatures on this petition are primarily from the 
Coronach area. Mr. Speaker, I so present. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I also present petitions 
concerning the Plains Health Centre. 
 

Your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. Assembly 
may be pleased to save the Plains hospital by enacting 
legislation to prevent its closure, and by providing 
adequate funding to the Regina Health District so that 
essential services provided at the Plains may be continued. 
 

Your petitioners come from Glenbain, Estevan, and Bienfait. I 
so present. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also bring 
forward petitions regarding the Plains hospital. The prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains hospital by 
enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The people who have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
the Swift Current, Stuart Valley, Success areas. I so present. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
petitions on behalf of Saskatchewan citizens concerned about 
the closure, or imminent closure, of the Plains hospital. And the 
prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise to 
present a petition. The prayers reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Gravelbourg, they are from Woodrow, they are from 

Hodgeville, and they are from all throughout the land. And I so 
present. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today too to 
present a petition on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains hospital 
may be continued. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks out at 
Coronach and Bengough. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am happy today 
to present the following petition: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reach necessary agreements with other levels of 
government to fund the twinning of the Trans-Canada 
Highway in Saskatchewan so that work can begin in 1998, 
and to set out a time frame for the ultimate completion of 
the project with or without federal assistance. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these all come from the community of Fox 
Valley in my constituency, and I’m happy to present them 
today. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order, four petitions regarding the 
Public Accounts Committee presented on March 25 have 
been reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are found to 
be irregular and therefore cannot be read and received. 
 
According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and are hereby read and received. 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 
demand the chairperson of the Public Accounts Committee 
call a meeting to enquire into Channel Lake; of citizens 
petitioning the Assembly regarding the funding of the 
twinning of the Trans-Canada Highway; and petitions 
regarding cancelling of severance payments to Jack Messer 
and an independent inquiry into Channel Lake. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 19 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Agriculture: how many farmers in 
Saskatchewan are presently ruled not eligible to participate 
in the Canada-Saskatchewan crop insurance program; how 
many of these farmers are ruled ineligible as a result of 
negotiated settlements resulting from the GRIP (gross 
revenue insurance program) wind-up; does the statute of 
limitations now apply on outstanding GRIP accounts; how 



March 26, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 275 

many farmers have not settled the repayment in the GRIP 
program as required by Crop Insurance; and how many 
farmers are eligible to carry crop insurance? 
 

I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to introduce two gentlemen to you and to the members of 
the House, seated in your gallery — two individuals from the 
constituency of Wood River. I’d liked to introduce Yogi 
Huyghebaert and Murray Cheesman. Yogi of course is a 
candidate for the leadership of the Saskatchewan Party. Please 
welcome these two gentlemen. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, while I obviously 
respect the great contribution that Mr. Huyghebaert has 
performed for Canadians in the military and the like, I’m not 
going to introduce him. I think he even must be getting tired of 
being introduced so many times in the House. 
 
Rather, Mr. Speaker, I have the pleasure to introduce two others 
who have travelled some distance to be here with you today in 
your gallery. And I’d ask them to stand as I introduce them. 
 
Marion Schultz has travelled from Saskatoon, which isn’t all 
that far but still fairly far — welcome, Ms. Schultz — with her 
niece, Maria Bettina Bonuccelli, who has travelled really indeed 
a long distance, from Argentina. Maria is in Saskatchewan to 
learn English at the University of Saskatchewan. She’s a 
graduate of political science, and she’s here today to observe 
our Assembly and the government in action. 
 
I must say that I visited Argentina with the Prime Minister’s 
Team Canada trip a few months ago, a few weeks ago now. It’s 
a very beautiful country, a growing economy, and a warm, 
generous, gracious people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all members to extend warm greetings to 
Ms. Schultz, and in particular, to Ms. Bonuccelli and wish her 
well in her studies. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
join with other members here today in welcoming Yogi and 
Murray to the House. It’s great to have them here to watch the 
proceedings and view the caucus that he would like to be part of 
for the short time that they are going to be here with us, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I just want to follow up on 
the introduction of the Premier of Ms. Schultz and Ms. 
Bonuccelli. I had the pleasure of spending a half an hour with 
them just before the House convened today. I want to tell you, 
Mr. Speaker, that she already has a great command of the 
English language, so the improvement that will take place at the 
U of S (University of Saskatchewan) is not going to be that 

marked. 
 
She is a very interested, very intelligent, young woman and was 
anxious to learn about political life in Saskatchewan. I, of 
course, was able to brief her on it in my usual non-partisan 
manner and I do appreciate the members welcoming her here 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
introduce three business people who are seated today in the 
west gallery. First of all, I want to introduce Terry Kuzma, who 
is the woodlands manager of Carriere Lumber from Prince 
George, B.C. (British Columbia). Carriere Lumber have been 
very active in our northern forests, salvaging the wood after the 
big fire, over the last three winters. 
 
With him is Mark Hislop, owner, manager, and CEO (chief 
executive officer) of a small business in Prince Albert — CLIO 
communications. And with them is another business person, the 
owner of a Buns Master, Don Cody, who is also better known 
in the city of Prince Albert as our mayor, and who is probably 
even better known to the legislators here as a former MLA 
(Member of the Legislative Assembly) for Kinistino. And I 
welcome them all here to the legislature today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Strength of the Saskatchewan Economy 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
budget which the opposition refuses to debate is about jobs. I 
have risen here today to give the Assembly yet another example 
of the strength of Saskatchewan’s economy. 
 
Robert Cameron of New Brunswick and Richard Dunbar of 
Nova Scotia have recently come to Saskatoon after being 
named the final selections from over 100 applicants to work at 
the Hitachi plant. Cameron and Dunbar are both skilled steel 
workers. Joe Vidal, general manager of Hitachi, explained that 
there is a shortage of skilled workers in the booming industrial 
sector of the province right now. 
 
He predicts this will be somewhat alleviated as the Alberta oil 
industry slows down and workers from Alberta migrate to 
Saskatchewan to find employment. Dunbar and Cameron are 
both excited by the prospect of having stable, well-paying jobs, 
Mr. Speaker. This shouldn’t be difficult as, in its nearly 10 
years of operation, Hitachi of Saskatoon has never laid off a 
worker. 
 
I also heard on the radio this morning, Mr. Speaker, that the 
telephone company in Manitoba is laying off more of its staff as 
it cuts costs. The union that represents the workers say some 
may find employment here in Saskatchewan with SaskTel. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people are moving to this province from across 
the country in order to find stable, well-paying jobs. That’s why 
workers from across the country are coming to Saskatchewan, 
because we have low unemployment and a good quality of life. 



276 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 1998 

No wonder, Mr. Speaker, the opposition does not want to 
debate the budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Public Accounts Meeting Scheduled 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the official opposition has been 
calling for a public inquiry into the NDP’s (New Democratic 
Party) mismanagement of Channel Lake. Although our call for 
a public inquiry is supported by the vast majority of 
Saskatchewan people, it has been resisted at every turn by the 
NDP and their puppets in the Liberal opposition. 
 
Yesterday the NDP played another procedural game to avoid a 
full public inquiry. It is now clear that the NDP has no interest 
in getting to the bottom of this matter through a public inquiry 
so we have to go to the second best option, the Public Accounts 
Committee. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m tabling letters calling for a Public Accounts 
Committee to be convened this Monday, March 30, at 9 a.m. 
On March 18 the Premier made the following commitment to 
this House. He said: subpoena anybody that you think is 
relevant at Public Accounts. We have given our assurance they 
will be honoured. We say the people will be allowed to be 
questioned. Documents, as appropriate and where available, 
will be there. 
 
In response to the Premier’s commitment, I have taken the 
liberty of attaching a list of over 60 witnesses and hundreds of 
documents that we would like to call before the committee. The 
list includes the Premier and the Deputy Premier. We are 
calling for the investigation to have a broad mandate. 
 
In addition to Channel Lake, it should consider the termination 
and subsequent severance to Jack Messer, and we are also 
calling for all evidence gathered to be turned over to the RCMP 
(Royal Canadian Mounted Police) for criminal investigations, 
and to an independent lawyer to determine where the lawsuits 
are warranted. 
 
I look forward to seeing all of my committee colleagues on 
Monday morning. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Children’s Television Series to be Made in Saskatchewan 
 

Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Tuesday evening 
the Minister of Municipal Government and the Minister of 
Post-Secondary Education, the member from Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley, and I, attended the filming of the 
“Maximum Dimension” and the reception to honour that 
filming, sir. This educational series heightens the viewers’ 
interest in science and math through the extraordinary talent of 
Max Maven, and he’s joined by an emerging Saskatchewan 
actor, Chris Ross. 
 
Congratulations were given to Stephen Onda of Heartland 
Motion Pictures and Annabel Slaight of Owl/SDA Productions 
on their partnership to produce a quality children’s series for 
television that can be enjoyed by both young and the young at 

heart. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are proud of the progress of our film and video 
industry. It’s very satisfying to see a Saskatchewan company 
team up with one of the country’s leading film companies in 
this joint venture. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. Order. I will ask 
the cooperation of the House. The Chair is unable to hear the 
hon. member from Wascana making the members’ statement. 
And I would ask for the cooperation of the House to enable her 
to be heard. 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we 
have confidence in the future of our film and video industry in 
Saskatchewan, identified as a strategic sector of our economy. 
That is why in our recent budget, which the members opposite 
are refusing to debate, we have introduced a film employment 
tax credit to assist industry development. 
 
We already knew that the film and video industry was the 
fastest growing industry in Saskatchewan. The launching of the 
“Maximum Dimension” demonstrates how competitive 
Saskatchewan really is. With our new tax credit we’ll be even 
more able to compete. 
 
Congratulations to all involved in this fine program and 
production. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Photo Radar 
 

Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A little on the lighter 
side, I’d like to talk on the issue of photo radar. This 
government says they are hesitant about introducing it. Well 
quite frankly, people don’t buy it. 
 
The NDP said they were reluctant about VLTs (video lottery 
terminal). Now we have VLTs in every corner of the province. 
They said no bed closures, but every day we hear of more beds 
being shut. But of course the famous trust-me line of all was 
Conservative Prime Minister Robert Borden promising that 
income tax was only a temporary measure. 
 
If safety is the issue, then let’s deal with safety in high traffic 
areas. When governments get their hands on a revenue 
generator like photo radar, it will become nothing but a cash 
cow. That’s the concern. 
 
This government’s political cousins in Ontario and B.C. 
hesitated and then introduced it and the people said no to it. The 
people of this province are tired of having governments dip into 
their pockets. Do we want to pay $40,000 a year to police 
officers to sit in a car and take pictures? Do we want police 
officers taking pictures of speeders, or dealing with the rising 
rates in breaking and entering and car theft? 
 
Does the government realize the bureaucracy that it will take to 
administer this? Photo radar will just mean bureaucrats, and that 
more tickets must be given to cost the administration costs. 
Mailing someone a picture of their speeding car and then asking 
them to pay for it is unacceptable and unenforceable. To 



March 26, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 277 

enforce a ticket it must be served on the owner of the vehicle, 
who now is on the hook for something they may not have done. 
 
This government has proven it can’t be trusted with tax dollars. 
Mr. Speaker, if they send out a photo radar ticket, then . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. The hon. member’s time has 
expired. 
 

Lakeland Citizens of the Year 
 
Mr. Langford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Bob and Gwen 
Hutchison have recently been named this year’s Lakeland 
Citizen of the Year. 
 
For 31 years Bob worked for the Saskatoon School Board and 
Gwen ran a coffee shop. Since their retirement in 1991, they 
have lived in Emma Lake, where they are now giving of their 
time. They are involved in the Lions Club and the Anglican 
Church. Bob and Gwen are so giving that they were even out 
volunteering when the announcement was made that they were 
named citizens of the year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is because of people like Bob and Gwen that I 
am proud to serve as an MLA. I ask all members to help me 
extend congratulations to the Hutchisons, and people like them, 
for giving their spirit. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Call for Channel Lake Independent Public Inquiry 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, in the past two weeks, debate in the 
Legislative Assembly regarding the most effective and 
responsible way of disclosing all pertinent information 
surrounding the Channel Lake issue has been interesting, to say 
the least. Mr. Speaker, three ways of disclosure have been 
introduced and debated in this Assembly: the Public Accounts 
Committee, an independent public inquiry, the Crown 
Corporations Committee. 
 
But what is important to remember is that we are accountable to 
disclose all information to the people of Saskatchewan as it is 
their money that has been mismanaged and wasted. It would be 
wonderful to use the vehicle of the Public Accounts or the 
Crown Corporations Committee if we could indeed trust that all 
legal documents would be open to scrutiny. However, there is 
no guarantee of that because the minister responsible has 
indicated that solicitor-client confidentiality must be protected. 
 
Well this begs the question, Mr. Speaker, who is the client? The 
client is not SaskPower nor the Channel Lake board. We all 
need a reminder of that. The client is the people of 
Saskatchewan who are in fact and truth the owners and 
shareholders of SaskPower. 
 
And if the Premier and the minister responsible and the 
government realize that very important fact, it follows that, on 
behalf of the citizens of this province, an independent public 
inquiry must take place in order to get at the truth of this matter 
and to give the people of Saskatchewan the respect due them. 
The people . . . 
 

The Speaker: — Order. The member’s time has expired. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Public Accountability 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s prime 
minister, John Diefenbaker, said this of the Liberals of his day: 
“They are the flying saucers of politics. No one can make head 
nor tail of them, and they are never seen in the same place.” 
 
I quote the Chief because, by extension, he was saying that you 
can always find the Tories in the same place, regardless of how 
times change. I know now, Mr. Speaker, that this is true. 
 
I have served for five years in opposition and for six years in 
government and I thought, Mr. Speaker, that I had seen 
everything about the operations of this Assembly. I thought that 
I knew where I could find both opposition parties on just about 
any issue — the Liberals where the wind is blowing and the 
Tories to the right of that. 
 
I remember when the Tories were in government, that they did 
everything possible to block and then to interfere with the 
Public Accounts Committee — reports not released on time, 
members not available for meeting. In short, playing games 
with public accountability. 
 
Public accountability was not part of their vocabulary. When 
the voters chastised them, I thought they had learned a lesson. 
They even flirted with the word “accountability” as long as it 
applied to the government of course, but it was too hard for 
them to swallow. Like Dief said, they’re still in the same place; 
they’re still playing games. Roll over, Dief, roll over. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Inquiry into Channel Lake 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
questions this afternoon are for the Premier. Mr. Premier, for 
two weeks the NDP has been accusing us of not being willing 
to do the work in Public Accounts. Mr. Premier, we’ve always 
been ready to do the work. The question is, are you willing to 
let us do the work — that’s the question. Or is this whole thing 
going to be just one more NDP whitewash, like the Crown 
Corporations Committee proposal the NDP put forward 
yesterday? 
 
Mr. Premier, we have called a Public Accounts meeting, and we 
have tabled a list; we tabled a list of over 60 witnesses and 
hundreds of documents we want to have before the committee. 
Mr. Premier, will you provide all the documents we have 
requested, or is this going to be just one more NDP whitewash? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, you don’t know 
whether to laugh or cry when that member gets on his feet. But 
I say to him clearly that there will be an inquiry into this issue, 
that begins here in this building, and it will happen on March 31 
at Crown Corporations Committee. 
 



278 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 1998 

Why are we doing that? Because for two weeks you have said 
that Public Accounts Committee did not have the credibility. 
Your Chair called it a kangaroo court, and I find that shameful. 
And today, when trapped into coming to another committee of 
the legislature, you now say no, isn’t no; after saying no means 
no for two weeks without saying no means maybe. I tell you, 
you don’t have any credibility. 
 
What should happen here, what should happen here is you 
should get your notes together and appear at the Crown 
Corporations Committee, and ask the questions as other 
members of the Assembly will be doing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, on March 
18 in this House, you made the following commitment to this 
legislature: we say subpoena anybody that you think is relevant 
at Public Accounts. We have given our assurance that this will 
be honoured. We say that the people will be allowed to be 
questioned; documents, as appropriate and where available, will 
be there. 
 
You should be careful what you ask for, Mr. Premier — you 
might get it. 
 
Mr. Premier, you said call on anybody — call on anybody. Well 
we’re calling on you. You are going to be the first witness, Mr. 
Premier, and we think that you know a whole lot more about 
this Channel Lake affair than anybody else in your government. 
And we think you’re the one that has kept stepping in to save 
Jack Messer from this whole . . . from getting fired. Mr. 
Premier, do you intend to honour your word? Will you come to 
Public Accounts or will we have to drag you in there with a 
subpoena? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is the 
member who last week drew the line in the sand, as he said. He 
was going to shut the House down until he got his way. 
 
Well let’s see how he stands up to that now that a committee 
with credibility, huge credibility, supported by members of the 
opposition and government members, start to inquire into the 
issue surrounding Channel Lake on March 31 here in this 
building in Crown Corporations Committee. 
 
Let’s see how you draw the line in the sand, sir, when you made 
the commitment that you weren’t going to back down, when 
you said no meant no; and today you say that what you call a 
kangaroo court is now going to do the work of the Assembly. 
Where in fact is your credibility? Where’s the credibility of the 
Chair of that committee today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well there it is. The 
great Premier won’t come to Public Accounts. You said you’ll 
be there — not going to be there. We’re calling on you, Mr. 
Premier, and all of a sudden you and your government are 
singing a different tune. 
 

We know, we know that you stepped in to save Jack Messer. 
April 14, 1994 — does that date ring a bell, sir? We know that. 
Jack Messer didn’t get his severance because SaskPower owed 
it to him; Jack Messer got his severance because you owed it to 
him. You know a lot more than you’ve been saying so far and 
the only way, the only way, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to get the 
truth out of this Premier is under oath at the Public Accounts 
meeting. 
 
Why won’t you show up, Mr. Premier? Will you give the 
assurance to the legislature and the people of Saskatchewan that 
you will attend Public Accounts and you will, under oath, 
testify to your involvement in this whole Channel Lake affair? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, what I want to ask the 
member from Kindersley is whether or not he has talked to his 
colleague, his desk mate, and asked whether or not her opinion 
of the Public Accounts Committee — that it’s a kangaroo court 
— still is maintained when you’re talking about now wanting to 
use it. 
 
Which is true? Which is true? That this is a committee, that this 
is a committee that can be used or are you maintaining, as you 
were days ago, that this committee that you chair is a kangaroo 
court. When did no not mean no, and when did you decide that 
no meant maybe if you get certain conditions — when did that 
change? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. For two weeks all 
we’ve heard from this government is, call Public Accounts, call 
Public Accounts and everyone will be there; that’s what you 
said — everyone will be there. Well I guess the Premier thinks 
he’s not included in everyone. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order. Order, order. Now I think 
all hon. members will recognize that so far during question 
period it’s been a little difficult to hear the question being put 
and it’s been difficult to hear the answer being provided. And I 
will ask for the cooperation from members on both sides of the 
House in order to permit the question to be heard and the 
answer to be heard as well. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Everyone will be there — that’s what you said to 
this legislature. 
 
Well I guess the Premier doesn’t include himself in everyone. I 
think the Premier thinks he doesn’t have to testify. I think the 
Premier thinks he’s above the law in Saskatchewan. Well, Mr. 
Premier, we don’t think you are and I don’t think the people of 
Saskatchewan think you’re above the law. You have all kinds of 
relevant information about this sorry mess and you should 
answer questions just like everyone else in your government 
will have to provide information. 
 
We know now, after what we’ve seen today, Mr. Speaker, that 
the only way we’re going to get information out of this Premier 
is under oath with a subpoena, and that’s what will be provided 
to him. 
 



March 26, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 279 

Mr. Premier, are you going to be man enough and show up or 
are you going to hide behind this whole affair, just like you’ve 
done right from the very outset, and not provide any 
information, not provide any answers for the taxpayers of this 
province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, after two weeks of 
saying they won’t use the committee because they believed it 
didn’t have credibility, I have two letters here today. One from 
the member from Kelvington-Wadena, the former Liberal, the 
person who was elected as a Liberal from that constituency, to 
another member, elected as a Liberal, now running for the 
leader of the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
So you have two Liberals writing to each other from the 
benches of the Saskatchewan Party; the Chair who has said the 
committee has no credibility, asking each other whether they 
should have a committee meeting. And guess what they said? 
And guess what they said? Guess what they wrote back to each 
other? Guess what they wrote back to each other? They said, 
after two weeks of protesting, this committee has no credibility. 
 
Now we’re going to have a meeting. And they wrote letters and 
they wrote them one day on the same day. They wrote the letter, 
got the letter back. Why don’t you just at a caucus meeting 
make up your minds whether you’re a Liberal, whether you’re a 
Tory, whether you’re a Saskatchewan Party, whether you 
believe in parliament. Quit playing the games, come to Crown 
Corporations Committee, and ask the questions that you want 
answers to. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Compensation for Hepatitis C Victims 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
questions are for the Minister of Health. Mr. Minister, yesterday 
we learned that a committee of provincial Health ministers, 
which you chair, agreed on a compensation package for victims 
of hepatitis C infected by tainted blood. 
 
Mr. Minister, so far your only comment on the hepatitis C is 
that the package is fair. There is only one problem with that, 
Mr. Minister, the package isn’t fair. Reports show that as many 
as 95,000 people were infected by tainted blood through no 
fault of their own and yet only 22,000 of those innocent victims 
will receive compensation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister says the bottom line is that the 
compensation package is fair; however we say it ignores a 
number of innocent victims. Mr. Minister, will you confirm 
today that the compensation package excludes at least 70,000 
victims, and would you explain to those innocent hepatitis C 
victims why you think that the package is indeed fair? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Health, along 
with his federal and provincial counterparts, will be announcing 
details of the financial assistance package in the very, very near 
future. It would be inappropriate to provide comment at this 
time on leaked media reports and speculation by the member or 
others. But I am confident that the Minister of Health and 

Health ministers from across the country will be announcing a 
package that will be viewed by the majority of Canadians as fair 
and reasonable. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, a further question to the minister. 
Mr. Minister, you’ve said you believe this inadequate 
compensation package for hepatitis C victims will remove the 
need for a class action suit. But the Hepatitis C Society of 
Canada begs to differ. They say they won’t give up the fight 
until all victims of tainted blood are compensated. Mr. Minister, 
you and your colleagues have turned your back on at least 
70,000 hepatitis C victims and yet you think there is no longer a 
need for legal action. 
 
Mr. Minister, what is your plan for those 70,000 victims that 
were left out in the cold in this compensation deal? Is it your 
plan to manage the legal actions that will surely be launched 
against you by attrition, or are you simply banking on the 
simple, tragic certainty that most of the hepatitis C victims you 
have turned you back on will die before they take you to court? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve already indicated to the 
member that details of the compensation package will be 
announced in the very near future by the Minister of Health and 
his colleagues. 
 
But I would also add, for the information of the member and the 
House, Mr. Speaker, that whatever the package is, Mr. Speaker, 
it certainly will not be taking away whatever legal rights any 
unfortunate victims of hepatitis C may have to recourse through 
the courts, Mr. Speaker. Whatever rights people have, people 
will continue to have, Mr. Speaker, regardless of whatever 
package is announced. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well it appears the 
government are the only ones who don’t understand the 
incidence of the hepatitis C survey that’s been done and 
released. 
 
Mr. Minister, yesterday I spoke with Richard Dumont of 
Welwyn, someone who has contracted hepatitis C from a blood 
transfusion in 1982. And therefore of course he doesn’t fall into 
the arbitrary guidelines that the government has set on their 
committee chaired by this Minister of Health. 
 
In a letter Mr. Dumont writes that: 
 

Governments see victims as dollar signs and they wish that 
we would go away. If these government think for a minute 
they are going to get away with compensating only a select 
few, then they are in for a rude awakening. 

 
Mr. Dumont is now examining the possibility of launching a 
class action suit on behalf of himself and the other victims. 
 
Mr. Minister, why are these people who have contacted 
hepatitis C through no fault of their own, why are they having 



280 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 1998 

to go to court to receive compensation from your government 
who cares nothing about their interests? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Let me say firstly, Mr. Speaker, that this 
government, all members of the House from all sides, all 
governments in Canada — and I’m sure the federal government 
— care deeply about the people that have been infected by 
hepatitis C through some very unfortunate events in the blood 
system, Mr. Speaker. That is something we are all concerned 
about. 
 
And the federal Health minister, the provincial ministers of 
Health, are trying to come up with a package to compensate 
people for some wrongs that have been done for which they are 
prepared to assume responsibility. And they will be announcing 
the details of that package very soon, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I want to say to the member that if there is anyone that has 
any right to take legal recourse because someone has committed 
a wrong, those rights will not be removed by any package that 
the governments bring forward, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In his 
correspondence, Richard Dumont writes that he is very 
disappointed and bitterly disillusioned by the NDP’s stance on 
this issue. He writes, and I quote: 
 

I have always voted for the NDP and although it pains me 
to turn my back on the party, I have no other choice. I . . . 

 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Now I’ll ask for the 
cooperation on the part of members of the government and the 
official opposition to allow the hon. member’s question to be 
heard. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Dumont writes, 
and I quote: 
 

I have always voted for the NDP and although it pains me 
to turn my back on the party, I have no other choice. I can’t 
relate to a government that is so insensitive to all the 
suffering of its citizens. Obviously the NDP has lost its 
way and turned into Tories. 

 
Mr. Minister, Mr. Dumont is right. You have lost your way. 
 
Yesterday, Mr. Speaker, we heard a government member state 
in this House that it was a proud day for the New Democratic 
Party. Well today is a sad day, Mr. Speaker, for hepatitis C 
victims who are being cast aside by this government. 
 
Mr. Minister, why are you putting a price on compassion? Why 
are you abandoning those who are suffering in this province? 
And, Mr. Minister, won’t you accept your moral responsibility 
and look after these people? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I think it’s unfortunate that 
that member over there wishes to play partisan politics with a 
very serious issue. The member gets up and talks about the 

NDP doing this and the NDP doing that. Well I want to say to 
the member that the package that will be announced tomorrow 
is with the agreement of the federal Minister of Health, who 
happens to be a Liberal, with Conservative ministers of Health 
around the country, and with New Democrat ministers of 
Health also, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is not a political issue. This is a serious issue about the 
health of Canadians. It’s a serious issue about a very tragic 
situation. It’s an issue with respect to which all the governments 
of Canada are going to try to grapple with in a fair and 
reasonable way. It is not an issue to play politics with, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Health Care Funding 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This morning the 
Premier unveiled the NDP government’s plan to redesign social 
assistance. He noted how important it is to monitor, assess, and 
tackle problems and I agree. 
 
But why doesn’t this same philosophy apply to health care? 
This government will spend $1.7 billion on health care this 
year, yet we still have waiting-lists that are at all-time highs. 
We have stretchers halfway down the hallways. There are days 
when there is not a single bed available in the city of Regina. 
And virtually all of our health districts are now in the process of 
designing more cut-backs to deal with their deficits. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you tell this House what you are going to do 
about the fact our health care system is in crisis? Why is the 
money not going to the needs of the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, last Thursday a budget was 
introduced in this House which commits this government to 
providing more money for health care than ever before in the 
history of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Eighty-eight million dollars more this year 
than last. And I want to say to the member opposite and to the 
House, Mr. Speaker, that it doesn’t really matter what this 
government does in terms of funding health care because no 
matter what we do, that member and that party over there will 
get up and say it’s not enough. And it doesn’t matter what we 
do, they’ll complain about it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I want to ask that member this: why is it all right for the 
federal Liberals to take money out of health care and not put 
one cent into the health care system, Mr. Speaker, not one cent 
of new money? And the member for Melville gets up and says 
there’s nothing to complain about in terms of the federal 
budget, but there’s no recognition, Mr. Speaker, of the biggest 
single health care expenditure in the history of our country, 
which comes from our budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



March 26, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 281 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, the minister has the nerve, the 
temerity, to mention his budget in this House. He told us last 
week there’s 88 million more in health and of course his own 
figures say it’s 39. He takes credit for an MRI (magnetic 
resonance imaging) he didn’t put one red cent into. I’m amazed 
he’s got the nerve to even mention that budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last week the Saskatoon Health District told us 
they’re facing a $5 million shortfall this year. It could be as 
high as 13 million next year. Regina Health District, $5 million 
deficit; the sky is falling in on Living Sky District where our 
leader is visiting tonight. Today I can tell this House that my 
own district, the Battlefords, faces a $1 million deficit and the 
board there is struggling with where the axe will have to fall. 
 
Mr. Minister, health care fires are blazing across the province. 
How are you going to put them out besides pedalling your 
bogus figures out of the budget? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, as I indicated to the member, 
we will be putting more money into the Health budget this year 
than ever before in the history of our province. The fact is, 
whether the member wants to admit it or not, that there is a total 
of $30 million new money this year going to the health districts. 
Overall we have committed $1.72 billion to the health system 
this year, Mr. Speaker — $1.72 billion. These numbers, Mr. 
Speaker, mean that in Saskatchewan we have committed 38 per 
cent of our operating dollars to health care. 
 
Now there’s always more money you could spend, Mr. Speaker, 
there’s no question about that. But are we doing more this year? 
Yes we are. For Saskatoon Health District, Living Sky Health 
District, The Battlefords, and every other health district, Mr. 
Speaker. Are we doing more? Yes. Are the Liberals doing 
more? No. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Investigation of Gemma House 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
November a constituent had contacted me about serious 
problems at Gemma House in Regina. She also wrote to the 
Minister of Social Services on November 12 of 1997 will 
allegations of a high percentage of staff not being qualified, the 
degrading of clients, clients being physically assaulted, and 
racist remarks, and other problems too numerous to mention 
here. 
 
On January 5 I wrote the minister asking about the status of his 
investigation into those very serious allegations. He responded 
on January 21, and I quote: 
 

The department is anticipating that the investigation will be 
completed by mid-February 1998, at which time my 
officials will present the results and any recommendations 
to the Salvation Army. 
 

My question to the minister is, has the investigation been 
completed, and if so what are the results? 
 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
am not, in the public forum of the legislature, I’m not going to 
be discussing the implications of the inquiry at the Gemma 
House. I can assure that member that we’ve taken the 
allegations that have been made very seriously; that the 
department has been working with Gemma House and the 
Salvation Army. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do want to say this though. Let there be . . . lest 
there be any misunderstanding, the Salvation Army, as with 
many other community-based organizations, are providing 
some very, very valuable services to the people of our province 
and I would want no implication out of the member’s question 
to reflect upon the Salvation Army or the good work they are 
doing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question was precisely about what was happening at Gemma 
House, and certainly there were no allegations on my part of the 
Salvation Army not functioning well. 
 
I want to know whether this investigation has been completed, 
and that is what I’ve asked the minister. He has stated that it 
would be completed by mid-February. In the meantime, the 
report is now a month overdue, and in the meantime there are 
children in the minister’s care who may be at physical and 
emotional risk. 
 
So I again ask the minister, when do you expect the 
investigation to be completed, and will you provide the 
Assembly with its results at your very earliest opportunity? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I will be consulting with 
the department. Any information that is appropriate to be 
released publicly, I am confident will be released publicly. Mr. 
Speaker, the member raises the very, very important issue of the 
care of children within the Department of Social Services; the 
care of children across this province. 
 
This morning, Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity, with the 
Premier of our province, to announce perhaps the most 
fundamental set of initiatives we have seen in this province in 
30 years, directed precisely — precisely — towards caring for 
the children of our province, investing in the children of our 
province, investing in their families because, Mr. Speaker, I 
know, we know, that an investment in those children and 
families is a real investment in our future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this has been a very proud day for this government 
in terms of the “building independence” initiatives that we were 
able to announce this morning. We were joined by a wide group 
of community organizations who applaud us on this initiative. I 
applaud them for partnering with us. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would ask 
the minister to get back to the question at hand. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people have resigned from Gemma House because 
of these very serious problems in order to retain their own 



282 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 1998 

integrity. I would like to know from the minister, in the interim, 
have any interim measures been taken or implemented to 
alleviate the situation at Gemma House, so that we can ensure 
that the children and the young people there are being 
protected? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I want to report to the 
member and to all members of the House, I have much 
confidence in the officials of the Department of Social Services 
who are at work in this situation. I’ve assured that member that 
if there is information that is appropriate to be released publicly, 
we’ll be doing that. And I want to assure her that the officials of 
this department, sincere and caring individuals, are working 
with this situation. 
 
That is one situation, Mr. Speaker, we’re concerned about. But 
equally we are concerned about the well-being of all children in 
our province — children particularly at risk and children in low 
income families. 
 
And I repeat, Mr. Speaker, this is a proud day for the province 
of Saskatchewan, when today as the only province in Canada, 
we can announce the kind of initiatives through the “building 
independence” program that we’ve been able to announce 
today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

"Building Independence: Investing in Families" 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Let me make this statement. Mr. 
Speaker, I rise in this legislature to make a statement of vital 
importance to Saskatchewan children and families. Today we’re 
announcing the details of a major new series of initiatives called 
“building independence: investing in families.” 
 
These measures represent a huge step towards ensuring that 
every Saskatchewan child can build a productive life on the 
solid foundations of a secure childhood. These measures 
represent the helping hand to Saskatchewan parents who are 
working to give their children the very best start in life that it is 
possible for them to give. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have often spoken of the Catholic bishops of 
Canada, who said that, quote, “the social blight of child poverty 
is an indictment of our rich society.” To me, that statement was 
a challenge to all of us. We have made progress in meeting that 
challenge in the past with initiatives like award-winning 
Saskatchewan action plan for children. We are very proud of 
that. 
 
But we are challenged to do more, Mr. Speaker, and today I’m 
announcing that our hard-won financial freedom and the hard 
work and dedication of many people in Saskatchewan means 
that we will do more for Saskatchewan children and families. 
 
I stand here today privileged to be able to announce these 
initiatives. They stem from our basic Saskatchewan values of 
caring, community, and cooperation, and from a desire of 
Saskatchewan people to give the best possible to their children 
— every child in this great province. 

Mr. Speaker, our program for “building independence: 
investing in families” contains six components, all aimed at 
helping Saskatchewan children and families. 
 
First, the Saskatchewan employment supplement will be 
available to provide assistance to 19,000 families to help low 
income working parents stay in the workforce. This supplement 
will ensure that their children are better off when their parents 
are working rather than on welfare. 
 
Second, the Saskatchewan Child Benefit, part of the first new 
national social program in Canada in 30 years, will provide help 
to 80,000 children in 40,000 families. This child benefit will 
help parents provide their children with a decent shelter and 
good food, the foundations for future success. 
 
For each of these 80,000 children, the child benefit will help fill 
childhood with good memories, and more importantly I hope, 
opportunities to grow into their best and fullest potential. 
 
Third, we’re extending additional health benefits to another 
23,000 families — that’s 46,000 children. Right now the sad 
reality is that if parents leave welfare, even to enter the 
workplace, their children lose health benefits. No more, Mr. 
Speaker. No longer will parents be forced to stay on welfare in 
order to ensure that their children can receive the dental care or 
eyeglasses that they need. 
 
These three new initiatives build on the good work already 
begun with three others. One, the provincial training allowance 
which provides assistance to nearly 3,000 people enrolled in 
adult basic education; two, the Youth Futures pilot project in 
Prince Albert, linking youth to education and employment 
opportunities; and finally, strengthened program accountability 
measures targeting resources to those most in need. 
 
Mr. Speaker, “building independence: investing in families,” is 
all about helping tens of thousands of Saskatchewan children. 
It’s about helping tens of thousand families break the grip of 
welfare’s cycle of dependency and freeing them to build good, 
productive lives. It’s about helping tens of thousand 
Saskatchewan parents to support their children through the 
labour of their hands, and the keenness of their minds, and the 
spirit in their hearts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in short, it’s about caring and it’s about sharing 
and it’s about cooperation and it’s about compassion, and above 
all it’s about Saskatchewan and Canada. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, just a few comments in regards to 
the statement just made by the Premier today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when you look at the action plan that’s been 
announced by the government today, I certainly want to 
acknowledge that I believe there are some good points that have 
been brought forward. In fact I think the Minister of Social 
Services, plus the former minister who is now working in other 
fields, will acknowledge that we’ve discussed a number of these 
issues. 
 



March 26, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 283 

Certainly the plan of dealing with low income families and the 
fact that low income families in many cases on many occasions, 
rather than taking a job opportunity that may be available, were 
forced back onto welfare because they couldn’t afford the 
system; they couldn’t keep up in the system. And so in that 
regard, I commend the government for some of the steps they 
have taken. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, there are some things we need to be 
careful of when we’re offering our congratulations and 
commending the government. This is an issue that the 
government has spoken about since 1991. On almost every 
throne speech they talked about addressing a number of these 
concerns, and what we’ve seen is we’ve basically moved 
through eight years or seven years of throne speeches. We 
really haven’t seen a lot of action. 
 
So I guess what we will be doing, we will be sitting back — 
while we recognize a lot of positive moves — we will be sitting 
back and seeing whether or not this is another area of rhetoric or 
indeed we’re going to see some real action. 
 
Now I guess a couple of concerns arise out of this delivery of 
meeting the needs of families. And as I see it today, I think the 
positive parts are supplementing low income, certainly child 
benefit programs. I see in that basically a means test for 
individuals with regards whether you qualify. And it’s 
unfortunate the government removed the pension plan, 
Saskatchewan Pension Plan. I see the move to family health 
benefits. I think that is positive. 
 
The government also announced a training program, but here’s 
one area that I really have a problem with. Earlier this afternoon 
in a member’s statement, the member from Regina — I just 
don’t remember, was it Lakeview? — Wascana Plains talked 
about employment opportunities in this province. And we look 
at Hitachi and you have to ask, Mr. Minister, or Mr. Speaker, 
where did Hitachi come from? How did it come to this 
province? 
 
I think there are some problems here when you look at job 
training. You can provide all the job training in the world, but if 
you’ve got a negative job employment opportunities program 
— as we have in this province when you see the red tape, 
labour standards codes, Workers’ Comp, Crown tendering — 
people may get job training, but where are they going to go to 
apply the trade at the end of the day? Is there really real 
meaningful job employment? Those are some concerns. 
 
(1430) 
 
So while we say, Mr. Speaker, there are some positive things, 
there are some issues and benefits that I think are certainly 
lacking, the public of Saskatchewan will look at, and I guess at 
the end of the day, the proof will be in the pudding. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We in the Liberal 
opposition are hopeful that the government’s announcement 
here this afternoon with respect to redesigning the social 
assistance is a true step forward because action has been long 
overdue. 

Mr. Speaker, the headline in the Moose Jaw paper here this 
afternoon is one of “Need for Food Bank Increases.” You 
know, if we don’t need that sort of a proof that action is needed 
to fight poverty, there’s also the tens of thousands of families 
on welfare and children that are going hungry across this 
province. 
 
The announcement that the province is cooperating with the 
federal government to introduce a child benefit while also 
introducing their own health and employment benefits for the 
working poor, is a sign that the NDP is trying to regain its 
ability to care for the average person in this province. 
 
That being said, Mr. Speaker, I found it interesting to listen to 
the remarks from the member from Moosomin here this 
afternoon. He should get together with the member from 
Canora-Pelly, because his remarks in the House on March 11 
with respect to this very program were that these efforts to help 
the poor were just nothing more than, I quote, “expensive 
programs with,” I quote again, “ill-defined goals.” And I think 
that’s a sure sign that they don’t care about average people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are hopeful about the announcement by the 
Minister of Social Services earlier and the Premier here this 
afternoon with the assistance of the federal government. We 
look forward to examining the details of the programs, and we 
do intend to keep a watchful eye to see that they are indeed 
providing the hope and helping to eliminate child poverty as 
well as the many burdens that are now facing the working poor 
in this province, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 741 — The Tory Bell Ringing Expenses 
Indemnification Act (Who’s Tory Now at $28,000 per day?) 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move first reading 
of a Bill No. 741, An Act respecting Taxpayer Indemnification 
for Obstructionist Parliamentary Tactics. I move it be now 
introduced and read a first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Before orders of the day, I would like to ask 
leave to move a motion pursuant to Rule 46. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Kindersley requests leave to 
introduce a motion under Rule 46. I’ll ask the hon. member 
from Kindersley to very, very briefly describe why he feels the 
matter is of urgent and pressing necessity and then to advise the 
House very briefly of the nature of the motion he wishes to 
introduce. 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 46 
 

Channel Lake Inquiry 
 

Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, it is clear that a thorough public 
investigation of the NDP’s mismanagement of Channel Lake is 
needed and efforts have been blocked to have a public inquiry; 



284 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 1998 

so the second best route is all we have available — the Public 
Accounts Committee. 
 
On March 18, the NDP House Leader issued a news release 
calling for an open, televised session of Public Accounts. The 
rules, Mr. Speaker, state that this can only be done through a 
motion of the Assembly. Therefore I move the following 
motion: 
 

That this Assembly authorizes the use of photography, 
audio, and video recordings and broadcasting without 
restriction, of the Standing Committee of Public Account’s 
review of the circumstances surrounding the purchase and 
sale of Channel Lake Petroleum Ltd. 
 

The Speaker: — The hon. member for Kindersley has advised 
the House of the reason for his request that it set aside its 
ordinary business to debate this motion that he advises the 
House of. Leave is required. Is leave granted? 
 
Leave not granted. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. Order. I will ask 
all hon. members on both sides of the House. Order. Written 
Questions. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — I am pleased, Mr. Speaker, to supply the 
answer to question 1 and with leave, in order to save time at the 
same time, I would like also to table the answers to questions 2, 
3, 4, 5, 6, and 7. 
 
The Speaker: — The answer to question 1 is provided. The 
Government Whip requests leave to simultaneously provide the 
answers to items 2 through 7. Is leave granted? Leave is granted 
and the answer is provided for all of those questions. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, we request conversion of 
question no. 8 to orders for return . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Now I can’t hear the whip 
providing the information to the House as to what’s happening 
with the answer. And I will ask both sides of the House — 
order! — I’ll ask both sides of the House to enable the Chair to 
be able to hear the House do its business. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request that 
question no. 8 be converted to orders for return (debatable). 
 
The Speaker: — Question no. 8 is converted to motions for 
return (debatable). 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to submit the 
answer to question no. 9, and with leave, to submit the answer 
to question no. 10 as well. 
 
The Speaker: — The answer to question no. 9 is provided, and 
leave is requested to simultaneously provide the answer to 
question 10. Is leave granted? 
 

Leave is granted and the answer to no. 10 is provided as well. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Ms. Hamilton, seconded by Mr. 
Ward. 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Mr. Speaker, it’s with great pride that I rise 
after a week or so to speak on behalf of my constituents in 
Regina Sherwood in the throne speech debate. 
 
As my hon. colleagues and the members of this House may 
recall, I started in my address and remarks on the throne speech 
debate, I was talking about the six major areas that were 
outlined in the throne speech debate, being this government’s 
commitment to invest in families, invest in health care, 
transportation, education and training, maintaining fiscal 
integrity, and jobs. 
 
My Ottawa colleagues may also recall, Mr. Speaker, that I did 
manage to conclude my remarks on our investing in families 
portion of the throne speech debate. And I’m also proud, Mr. 
Speaker, to acknowledge that this was again covered off in this 
very important announcement made by the Premier this 
afternoon of this government’s commitment to investing in 
families. 
 
And I’ll say no more about that after that was so eloquently 
stated by the Premier earlier this afternoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to return to the other initiatives 
outlined in the throne speech debate, and next go to health care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d first of all like to take a couple minutes to talk 
about the accomplishments of our government in investing in 
health care in the last year. Mr. Speaker, it’s important to point 
out that from 1991 to 1996, home care services increased by 38 
per cent here in the province of Saskatchewan. Home palliative 
care service increased by 130 per cent and respite beds 
increased by over 40 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
According to national experts, seniors in Saskatchewan 
received better quality home care services that anywhere else in 
the country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1997-98, the current fiscal year, an additional 
56 million was added to the health care budget over and above a 
complete back-filling of sums that were withdrawn by the 
federal Liberal government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, health districts are now funded to provide 24-hour 
access to home care services. Strategies to improve weekend 
on-call services and physician recruitment in rural areas are also 
being implemented, Mr. Speaker. 
 
A new vaccine for whooping cough is now available. Plans are 
in place for Saskatchewan Health Information Network, which 
can make health professionals throughout the province also 



March 26, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 285 

engage in telemedicine pilot projects. Mr. Speaker, an expanded 
role for the nurses in primary care is being developed through 
our pilot projects. 
 
The province has provided operational funding for an MRI unit 
in Regina to serve all of southern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
And that will be available this fall. 
 
Mr. Speaker, increased funding for cancer treatment, 
neurosurgery, and other vital programs have been provided for 
in the current budget. An additional 1 million over three years 
has been targeted to improve programs relevant to spinal cord 
injury. 
 
As well, an additional aircraft has been purchased by Lifeguard, 
Saskatchewan’s internationally recognized air ambulance 
service. 
 
Funding has also been provided to the Saskatchewan Institute 
on Prevention of Handicaps for a project to prevent fetal 
alcohol syndrome, which is a very major problem that we are 
facing these days. 
 
In May of 1997, Mr. Speaker, an additional $187,000 was 
awarded to 28 non-profit organizations under the wellness grant 
program. Grants are provided all across the province for 
projects that address the various issues affecting health of our 
citizens. 
 
There are nearly 3,000 more professionals working in the health 
sector in rural Saskatchewan than there were in 1991, Mr. 
Speaker. Almost 80 per cent of health funding still goes . . . 
Although at the same time we must recognize that 80 per cent 
of health funding still goes to hospitals and nursing homes. 
 
Saskatchewan is the first province to provide coverage for both 
MS (multiple sclerosis) drugs that are on the market today — 
Betaseron and Copaxone. Mr. Speaker, renal dialysis services 
has further been expanded into rural Saskatchewan, reducing 
travel to Saskatoon and Regina. And just the other day in a 
member’s statement — I think it was my colleague, the hon. 
member for Carrot River Valley — talked about the expansion 
of renal dialysis services in Tisdale, I think it was. 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the throne speech, as I indicated before, addressed 
six major issues. I’ve had a chance to discuss two of these 
areas. That is, investing in families, which we heard more about 
early this afternoon, and also investing in health. And I’d like to 
quote a portion from the throne speech debate which says, and I 
quote: 
 

My government will work with its many partners to move 
health care and provision of services forward. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the throne speech outlines how this government 
will continue to build on a partnership with health care 
providers, ensuring modern, effective health care facilities, and 
investing in the future through technologies like SHIN, the 
Saskatchewan Health Information Network, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is doing a lot. And the throne 

speech debate outlines our continued commitment to providing 
premier health services in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like maybe now to turn to the next major thrust 
covered off in the throne speech, and this was the investing in 
transportation segment of the throne speech read by His Honour 
a little over two weeks ago. And also I’d like to introduce my 
remarks in this area by talking about some of the commitments 
and actions taken by our government during the current fiscal 
year in the area of transportation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s important to realize that we in Saskatchewan 
have over 26,100 kilometres of provincial roads, highways, and 
highways to maintain and upgrade. We also have almost 
160,000 kilometres of municipal roads. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our system has 800 bridges and 12 river crossings 
served by ferry operations. Six per cent of our total network 
carries 70 per cent of total traffic. Mr. Speaker, it costs between 
200,000 and $350,000 per kilometre to construct a primary 
highway and approximately $2,500 per kilometre on annual 
maintenance. 
 
In 1972, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan had 14,500 kilometres of 
rail lines and 900 grain delivery points. To date, 3,400 
kilometres of these rail lines have been abandoned with another 
1,140 kilometres to be identified for abandonment in the near 
future. Mr. Speaker, there are 450 delivery points that are left 
from those 900 delivery points of 25 years ago and more are 
disappearing every year. Neither the railway companies, Mr. 
Speaker, nor the grain companies contribute to the construction 
and maintenance of our road system under the damage being 
caused. 
 
In light of this, Mr. Speaker, during this current fiscal year our 
government has committed $198 million in its budget to the 
Department of Highways and Transportation — a 30 million 
increase from last year. We have committed 2.5 billion over the 
next 10 years to build and upgrade the highway transportation 
system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have committed to complete the twinning of 
Highways No. 1 and 16 from Battleford to Lloydminster within 
the next 15 years. And, Mr. Speaker, I would like to point out 
that if federal costs were available or if we could participate in a 
federal cost-sharing program, the length of time for getting this 
done could be much, much sooner. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have been urging the federal government to 
continue to work with the provinces — not continue — to start 
working with the provinces in creating a national highways 
program, Mr. Speaker. We are also urging the federal 
government to come up with a modern transportation policy. 
 
An additional $10 million, Mr. Speaker, was invested in 
highways this summer and fall, over and above what was 
announced in the spring of last year. Mr. Speaker, the throne 
speech, and the budget as well, outline our government’s 
continued progress in working on the priority of investing in 
transportation for all the people in all areas of Saskatchewan. 
Mr. Speaker, the throne speech also indicates that this 
government will continue to speak up for Saskatchewan on the 
need for a national transportation policy. 



286 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 1998 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to turn next to the initiatives in the throne 
speech that talked about investing in education and skills 
training. Mr. Speaker, I first of all maybe would like to give a 
little background and outline some of the accomplishments that 
this government has underdone . . . undertaken in the last year. 
 
I’d like to point out that in terms of the educational 
infrastructure in the current fiscal year that this government has 
provided 363 million in operating grants to K to 12 schools, and 
369 million will be provided in the next year — an increase of 
$22 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have given 163 million to operating grants for the two 
universities, replacing every dollar withdrawn by the federal 
government, and more was announced in the recent budget 
from last week. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are putting $131 million in the current budget 
towards the Saskatchewan training strategy that’s entitled 
Bridges to Employment. This training strategy, Mr. Speaker, 
was created to repair the federal government’s abandonment of 
training programs and its withdrawal from the job training 
sector — $47 million taken out by the federal government, Mr. 
Speaker, has been put back in by our government. 
 
We have expanded the JobStart and Future Skills training 
program. There are now 8,500 places in training and 
employment services with the goal of creating a relevant, 
skilled workforce that is needed by our burgeoning economy, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have also merged the New Careers 
Corporation with regional colleges and the strengthened SIAST 
(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology) 
role in post-secondary education. Mr. Speaker, nearly 500 
certificate and diploma learning opportunities exist through the 
Saskatchewan institute of arts, sciences and technology. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan training strategy has 
established nine sector partnerships and in 1997 created 500 
apprenticeship positions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have also implemented a provincial training 
allowance which provides income support for low income 
adults to further their basic education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, post-secondary education and skills training was 
another major important plank of the throne speech and one 
which has been expanded upon further in the budget which we 
will be debating in the days to come. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the throne speech outlines this government’s 
continued commitment to strengthen our continuing 
partnerships with teachers, with parents, and others for a 
high-quality kindergarten to grade 12 public education. And 
also, Mr. Speaker, a commitment to provide partnerships in 
other lifelong learning situations identified in our provincial 
training strategy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the throne speech goes on to explain that full 
provincial control of workforce training comes into effect this 
year and outlines our government’s commitment and plans to 
build upon our Saskatchewan training strategy, to strengthen 

our universities and post-secondary institutions, to further 
expand our successful JobStart and Future Skills initiative, and 
build upon the multi-party training plan. And also, Mr. Speaker, 
to broaden our apprenticeship training program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this throne speech had lots . . . explained very well 
our government’s continuing commitment to invest in 
post-secondary education and skills training. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the last two areas outlined by the throne speech 
dealt with fiscal integrity and with job training — sorry, with 
the creation of jobs. Mr. Speaker, it’s important to note that we 
must as a government and a province maintain the hard-fought 
fiscal integrity and hard-won fiscal integrity gained in recent 
years. 
 
I’d maybe like to take a couple minutes and talk about what our 
government has also accomplished in this area. Mr. Speaker, we 
have achieved, with the announcement of last week’s budget, 
five consecutive balanced budgets. The first time, Mr. Speaker, 
since the government . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Mr. Speaker, this is the first time that this 
has happened in the province of Saskatchewan since the 
government of Allan Blakeney in the 1970s. We have reduced 
total provincial debt from slightly over $14 billion, which there 
was in 1996, to a little under $13 billion. It now stands at $12.9 
billion in the year 1997. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the total government debt at the percentage of 
GDP (gross domestic product) was 47 per cent on March 31, 
1997, down from 70 per cent just four years earlier. Mr. 
Speaker, that’s a drop of almost . . . of a little over 20 per cent 
in the percentage of debt to GDP here in the provincial 
economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have established a plan whereby total debt will 
be eliminated as quickly as possible in light of the priorities of 
this government in the area of investing in people and preparing 
Saskatchewan for the 21st century. We have committed all 
future government surpluses to be divided three ways, Mr. 
Speaker: debt reduction and relief, sustainable tax reductions, 
and program enhancement. And, Mr. Speaker, this was 
accomplished in the budget announced by our Minister of 
Finance just last week which this House and myself look 
forward to debating in much greater detail in the days and 
weeks to come. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1997 total government expenditures were down 
$17 million from a year earlier. Our 1997 government revenues 
were $158 million higher than estimated because of our thriving 
and burgeoning economy. 
 
A reduction in debt immediately reduces the interest we spend 
each year on debt, and these interest costs, Mr. Speaker, are 
going down gradually. Interest costs have already fallen from 
882 million two years ago to 750 million in the current fiscal 
year that’s just ending. And, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of 
Finance in his budget address announced even lower payments 
on our debt for the coming fiscal year. 
 



March 26, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 287 

Mr. Speaker, it’s important that the people of Saskatchewan 
understand that money saved from lower interest costs can be 
used to invest in important public services and to lower taxes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Mr. Speaker, the throne speech outlines our 
government’s continued commitment to maintain 
Saskatchewan’s hard won fiscal freedom. And, Mr. Speaker, at 
this point I’d like to turn to the final major area of the throne 
speech and talk about jobs and job creation and the economy 
here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the area of most importance and one of the 
most important and relevant areas to our young people and 
indeed all citizens of Saskatchewan. And again, I’d like to 
maybe start and somewhat preface my remarks by going over 
some of the accomplishments this government has made in the 
last fiscal year and in the very recent past. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for the fifth month in a row here in Saskatchewan, 
there is a record number of people in our workforce. Our 
unemployment rate consistently is among the lowest in Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s important to also note that in the 15- to 
24-year age category, 98,800 youth were working in the month 
of August 1997, an increase of 5,100 jobs from the year 
previous. This, Mr. Speaker, in an area which has been a source 
of problems in our economy in the past, the employment for 
those aged 15 to 24. Mr. Speaker, this is a great, great progress 
in the area of job employment for Saskatchewan people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Mr. Speaker, it’s also important to point out 
that over 1,000 new Northerners are working in the year from 
August ’96 to ’97. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s important to point out 
that this government is on target to achieve 30,000 new jobs in 
our economy as outlined during the 1995 election campaign. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to talk about some of the economic 
indicators and their performance in the past year. Mr. Speaker, 
last year retail sales have increased 9 per cent during the first 
nine months of 1997 over 1996. In 1997, farm cash receipts are 
at a near record $5.4 billion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, $33 million total expenditures on mineral 
exploration was carried out over and above what was done in 
1996. In the oil sector the value of crude oil sales jumped 33 per 
cent in 1997 over 1996. 
 
Oil and gas activity, Mr. Speaker, is increasing at a very, very 
good rate and trends seem to indicate that this will continue. 
Crude oil production was up 9.9 per cent for the first four 
months of 1997 over the 1996 period. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, manufacturing shipments increased 
almost $500 million than January 1997, which is up from 350 
million, an almost $150 million increase in manufacturing sales 
in Saskatchewan from January 1996 to January 1997. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there was other good news in the economic 
indicators. Motor vehicle sales were up 14 per cent in the first 

four months of 1997 over the same period in 1996. And urban 
housing starts were up 10 per cent in the first seven months of 
the year 1997. The population of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 
now approaches 1,025,000 and has been experiencing constant 
and steady growth since 1991. 
 
Mr. Speaker, during 1997 in Saskatchewan there existed 22 
regional economic development authorities, or REDAs, that 
were in operation. And Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance in 
the budget announced last week, announced our continuing 
commitment to expand and support this regional economic 
development authority network here in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are other examples of significant 
economic development in 1997. A $1.1 billion enhanced oil 
recovery project was announced in the Weyburn area, in the 
Weyburn-Midale oilfields. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there were 728 infrastructure projects 
worth almost $45 million that were carried out in Saskatchewan 
during the past year. Sixty-eight call centres now operate in the 
province employing a total of 2,268 people. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there were 53 agricultural research and 
development projects in 1997 worth $5.1 million that were 
funded by the Agricultural Development Fund. An additional 
5.5 million from the Agri-Food Innovation Fund was also 
invested on sustainable agricultural activities in the province of 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Deputy Speaker, there was also $6 million 
that was expended by a strategic initiatives fund to enhance 
agricultural and value-added sectors of our economy. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, production budgets for films 
produced here in Saskatchewan increased 500 per cent between 
the period 1991 to ’96. And, Mr. Speaker, with the 
announcements of our Minister of Finance in last week’s 
budget, we anticipate this to grow even more. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this province is starting to . . . the economy of this 
province is starting to burgeon. It is doing very, very well, and 
we feel that this will continue in the years ahead. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the throne speech outlines our government’s 
support and plans for continuing program activity in the job 
sector. The throne speech outlines this government’s continued 
support to research and development. It plans to invest in the 
innovation and security of farm producers. It also is promoting 
job creation in rural Saskatchewan through a sustainable 
resource development initiative. And we have a continuing 
commitment, Mr. Speaker, to renewing our Crown 
corporations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many of these initiatives were further clarified 
during the Speech from the Throne — or sorry, during the 
budget speech — and I think they demonstrate very well our 
government’s continued commitment to the investing in people 
strategy that was outlined a little over a year ago, and was 
further outlined in this past Speech from the Throne. 
 
On the line of . . . I might like to take a minute and talk a little 



288 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 1998 

bit about the importance of Crowns — it’s something that 
we’ve talked a little bit about in this legislature in recent days 
— and go to the positive side of what our Crown corporations 
mean to the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s important to know that our major Crowns and 
the major public investments that are held by the Crown 
Investments Corporation account for 17 per cent — that is $4.2 
billion — of the gross domestic product in the province of 
Saskatchewan. It also — the Crown sector and our investments 
by CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) — 
also account for 9 per cent of total employment here in the 
province of Saskatchewan. That is over 43,500 jobs, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
A little bit more about our Crown corporations, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Even with rates among the lowest in Canada, our 
Crown corporations earn profits that are about the same as 
privately owned utilities in other provinces. About half the 
profits of our Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker, are reinvested 
to pay for capital expenditures and needed to provide service to 
Saskatchewan residents in all parts of the province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Crown corporations pay about half of their 
profits to the Crown Investments Corporation as a dividend. 
This represents a normal rate of return on money that CIC, on 
behalf of the people of Saskatchewan, has invested in those 
Crowns. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, CIC uses this money in turn to continue to 
fund the remaining costs of many megaprojects that were 
embarked upon during the Devine years here in this province in 
the 1980s. This drain of money has been slowly but steadily 
declining as a result of the re-negotiation of many of these 
deals. 
 
The remainder of Crown dividends, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 
turned over to the government to pay for our much needed 
services in health, education and in highways. 
 
And I’d like to talk a little bit about rates of our Crown 
corporations, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Even with the recent local 
rate increase, SaskTel’s local rates are the second lowest in the 
country, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The increase was the first . . . the 
recent increase was the first local rate increase here in 
Saskatchewan since 1993. Over the past five years 
long-distance rates have also dropped by over 50 per cent. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, with SGI Auto, the residents of 
Saskatchewan experience the lowest insurance rates in Canada. 
Until this year’s rate increase, rates have been frozen since 
1993. And it should be pointed out, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
the recent rate increase was required to pay for the increasing 
costs of repairing automobiles. 
 
Regarding SaskEnergy, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it should be 
pointed out that we experience the second lowest natural gas 
rates in the province — or sorry, in the country. The rates go up 
and down in relation to the price of natural gas, a price 
fluctuation which we have no control over and does reflect rates 
in that very volatile market. 
 

But it’s important to remember, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we 
experience the second lowest rates, energy rates in Canada. The 
average cost of heating a home is lower today than it was in 
1994. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, on SaskPower. Saskatchewan has 
competitive power rates. The last rate increase was 1995, and 
power rates are frozen till the year 2000. Mr. Speaker, I would 
argue that these Crown corporations have served the citizens of 
Saskatchewan well. They continue to serve us very well. 
 
It’s important to remember that these rates are among the 
lowest in the land in all sectors, except perhaps power where 
we’re in the medium range across the land. And this cannot be 
overlooked, their importance cannot be overlooked in our 
provincial economy. As I had pointed out before, over 43,000 
jobs are involved in our Crown sector, and in the area of 
investments held by CIC, representing a significant part of our 
gross domestic product, almost 18 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with those remarks I maybe will conclude my 
remarks because I’m looking forward to getting back into the 
budget debate when we get around to that. 
 
In conclusion I would like to say that on behalf of the good 
citizens and my constituents of Regina Sherwood, that I will be 
very much in full support of the throne speech by the motion 
from my hon. colleague, the member for Wascana Plains, which 
was seconded by my colleague, the member for Estevan. And 
with those remarks I’ll take my place. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am very, very pleased to be 
able to stand in the House this afternoon in support of the 
Speech from the Throne as read by His Honour the Lieutenant 
Governor. And I want to just make a very few points about why 
I support this speech and will be voting for it in a matter of 
some minutes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I support this speech on a very fundamental 
question. I support it because I believe this speech very well 
reflects the spirit of Saskatchewan, the spirit of the people of 
Saskatchewan, 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I want to take just a couple 
of minutes to, from my own point of view, describe what I like 
to call the spirit of the people of Saskatchewan — the spirit of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I thought that spirit was well 
reflected in an article which appeared in the Toronto Globe and 
Mail in the sports section, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on February 17 
of this year. Now I ask you to note the date because the date is 
important. February 17, 1998 you will recall, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and other members will recall that the Olympics, the 
winter Olympics were happening in Nagano just at that time. 
 
This was an article appeared in the Globe and Mail on February 
17 and I want to quote from it, Mr. Speaker, because I believe it 
illustrates something about the Saskatchewan spirit. 
 



March 26, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 289 

The headline of this article is “There’s a new Olympic bully” 
and it is subtitled, “The new, red menace.” It’s written by Geoff 
Calkins for the Scripps Howard News Service and so it 
appeared across the United States, in journals and papers across 
the United States. This is what Geoff Calkins writes: 
 

Break up Canada. 
 
No, not the hockey team. (Break up) The country. 
 
Saskatchewan, one place. 
 
Ontario, another. 
 
British Columbia, a third. 
 
How else (are we) to stop the Canadians? How else (are 
we) to end the new red menace? 
 
Canada defeated the United States in men’s hockey 
Monday 4-1. It wasn’t that close. Canada led 4-0 until 
Brett Hull scored a goal for the Americans. (But) Hull was 
born in Belleville, Ont. He’s about as American as Alex 
Trebek. 
 
But if this were only about hockey, it would be easier to 
take. If this were only about curling and hockey, it would 
be easier to take. It’s not. It’s about the entire Olympics. 
 
Canada is cleaning up. 
 
Here’s the up-to-date medal count: (February 17) Canada 
9, United States 7. 
 
Here’s the up-to-date gold medal count. Canada 4, United 
States 2. 
 
Canada over the United States. In something other than 
that map on your wall. Who would have imagined that? 

 
Now listen to this, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 
 

As you might expect, the Canadian people are having 
great fun with this. One Toronto reporter . . . pointed out 
that the United States now has exactly as many gold 
medals as Saskatchewan. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — “And Saskatchewan still has Theoren 
Fluery.” 
 

(Now) Canada wasn’t always so ambitious of course. It 
used to be that the two countries had a deal. Canada would 
give the United States hockey players and beer. The United 
States would give Canada acid rain and Doug Flutie. (And) 
Then we’d knock Canada into the next week during the 
Olympics. 

 
Canada has never wound up with more medals than the 
United States. Not in the summer. Not in the winter. Not in 
their wildest Olympic dreams . . .  
 

Now it appears all bets are off. Maybe we should have 
been suspicious when they returned Flutie . . .  

 
So now we’re faced with a new threat to athletic 
supremacy. And boy, is it ever humiliating. Losing to 
Russia is one thing. Losing to Canada is a red of a different 
colour. 
 
Canada is Michael J. Fox and Gordon Lightfoot. Canada is 
Peter Jennings and Bryan Adams. Canada is North Dakota 
with French subtitles, Montana with the metric system . . .  
 
So that’s it for Canada, time to treat it like the Soviet 
Union, break it into seven or eight pieces. And once that 
happens, we’ll only have one problem (left). 
 
We’ll still have to deal with Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, we saw at the Nagano Olympics and we identified 
it in the throne speech read by His Honour — the performance 
of Saskatchewan individuals in that athletic competition. I 
would wager, Mr. Speaker, that there are more Saskatchewan 
residents wearing medals as a result of those Olympics than in 
any other jurisdiction of a million people in all the world. 
 
We have excelled as Saskatchewan people in athletics. But it’s 
not just in athletics, Mr. Speaker. You will know that 
Saskatchewan writers have earned more Governor General 
Awards for literature than from any other province per capita. 
You will find Saskatchewan people in the board rooms of every 
major corporation in this nation. You will find them in lecture 
halls. You will find them per capita more represented in almost 
every field of endeavour than from any other province. 
 
(1515) 
 
I picked up a little article again from the Globe & Mail talking 
about the scholars nests, written by Robert Sheppard. He’s 
talking about the universities in Saskatchewan. What does he 
say? 
 

It is a fact, little appreciated in this country, that 
Saskatchewan is a hotbed of scholarship. Since 1960, the U 
of S(the University of Saskatchewan) has produced 
something like 11 Rhodes Scholars, second only to McGill 
and the University of Toronto, two vastly larger 
institutions. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe there is a spirit of the people of 
Saskatchewan that has made this a very, very special place to 
call home. And I’m not just saying this. I’m not just saying this. 
The United Nations said it. You will know and all members will 
know that for the past four out of five years the United Nations 
has determined Canada to be the best place, the best nation on 
earth in which to make a home — the best nation on earth. And 
when those criteria as set out by the United Nations are applied 
to the provinces and territories of Canada, each and every time 
Saskatchewan has been described as the best jurisdiction within 
this country to make a home. 
 
And so here we are, Mr. Speaker, here we are living in the best 
province in the best nation in the whole world as determined by 
the United Nations. It is due, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is due to 



290 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 1998 

the spirit of Saskatchewan people. We are a special people and 
we’ve created a very special place to live on this globe. 
 
I ask myself sometimes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what is it that has 
made us special? What is it that crafted on this prairie and in 
this parkland and in this forest, what has crafted this speciality 
of Saskatchewan people and our spirit? It may be our climate. It 
may be long, hard winters; sometimes dry, hot summers. 
 
We’ve had to be tough. We’ve had to do things differently. 
We’ve had to pioneer, we’ve had to be creative, we’ve had to be 
smart, and that goes right from our first-born aboriginal people 
to every immigrant that has come to this place. 
 
Perhaps it is because in this province, unlike any other province 
in Canada, neither of Canada’s official linguistic groups forms 
the majority. We are truly the multicultural province reflected in 
our throne speech, reflected in our provincial motto, from many 
peoples comes strength, perhaps because we have had to live 
together and learn to work together as Saskatchewan people. 
 
I truly believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that part of the answer that 
makes this province special is that from our very beginning we 
have never been a people frozen in time, we have never been a 
people who have been frozen in time. We have always been 
willing to look at new ideas, take on new challenges, to do 
things in our province differently — differently than we’ve 
done them before and differently than any other province or 
jurisdiction in Canada. 
 
We have never been a province frozen in time, and that, Mr. 
Speaker, again, is reflected in this throne speech. This is not a 
throne speech that freezes us in some past time, it is a throne 
speech that turns corners towards the next century. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — So in this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
as you well know, we have an abundance of rich land; we have 
an abundance of mineral; we have an abundance of forest. But 
above all we have an abundance of creative, caring, and 
compassionate people whose spirit has been forged by our 
history; whose spirit is unique in all the world; whose spirit has 
shown itself to all the world. And that, Mr. Speaker, is at the 
basis of this throne speech. 
 
And my time is limited this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, and I hope 
I have other opportunity, but I cannot pass this opportunity, 
given the day, to lift from this throne speech one initiative 
which is identified as central to this throne speech. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in this throne speech our Lieutenant 
Governor said, and I quote: “As communities are the bedrock of 
Saskatchewan, our families are the bedrock of communities.” 
Mr. Speaker, we as government believe that sincerely. The 
bedrock of the community of Saskatchewan are the families, the 
households, the parents and children of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was very proud to stand this morning beside the 
Premier of this province to announce a brand new-initiative to 
assist, to build, and to strengthen the families of our province — 
an initiative we have called “building independence: investing 
in families.” 

Mr. Speaker, we have put together a significant number of new 
dollars. From the federal government’s input into the National 
Child Benefit, we will be saving some $15 million from 
welfare. In addition, Mr. Speaker, to that $15 million being 
redirected, we are adding in these programs thirty-seven and a 
half million new dollars — our dollars, Saskatchewan dollars. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And as my colleague points out, we are 
the only province to make this kind of new investment in 
families and children, Mr. Speaker. 
 
These programs, Mr. Speaker, we know over time — short-, 
medium-, and long-term — will accomplish some important 
goals. They will strengthen Saskatchewan families. They will 
begin to lift children out of poverty. In this circumstance where 
we have too many children living in poverty, these programs 
will begin to lift children and their families out of the poverty 
cycle. 
 
For families receiving welfare in Saskatchewan today, Mr. 
Speaker, these programs will turn the welfare system on its 
head; they will tear down the barriers. They will ensure that 
families are better off working than on welfare. Mr. Speaker, 
these programs will invest in the health of our children. Well 
beyond those children who now receive social assistance, we 
will be investing in the health of children in all sorts of low 
income families, among what are sometimes called the working 
poor. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the last 30 years in this province and in fact in 
this nation, we have not seen this kind of social policy initiative. 
We are stepping again, as Saskatchewan people always have, 
into new territory. We are not frozen in time, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, we are moving forward and we are doing so to 
strengthen Saskatchewan families. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I will take my place but let 
me just, if I may, reflect on the role of two leaders of the social 
democratic movement in our province. I speak first of the 
Premier of our province. 
 
It was by, if I may say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the political will of 
this Premier that we have turned the fortunes, the economic and 
fiscal fortunes of this province around. This Premier has 
provided the leadership that has taken us from the dark, deficit 
days of pre-1991 to a circumstance of fiscal balance today and 
fiscal freedom to begin to craft and create programs for people. 
 
It is the political will of this Premier that has moved these 
initiatives — to strengthen families through government. And if 
I may say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is the political wisdom and 
will of this Premier that has taken the agenda of children and 
families from this province and made it the agenda of this 
nation. 
 
Another leader of our political movement, some many years 
ago, J.S. Woodsworth, once said these words in a prayer, Mr. 
Speaker. He said, what we wish for ourselves we desire for all. 
 



March 26, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 291 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we who are privileged to be parents wish 
for the very best for our children. What we wish for our 
children, what we desire for our children, we desire for all 
children of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And we, Mr. Deputy Speaker, who’ve 
had the privilege of public education in this province; who have 
known a strong health care system into which we have grown 
up; we who have had the talents and the abilities to share with 
our community; we who have had those opportunities to be 
active members of our communities — what we desire for 
ourselves, we wish for all. We want to make those same 
opportunities available to every Saskatchewan family. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, today in Saskatchewan we took a new step 
forward towards that vision. That is the vision of the throne 
speech, Mr. Deputy Speaker; it is an investment in people. And 
for that reason, to stand with a government who will invest in 
its people is a proud moment for myself and all members of this 
government. I will be supporting the throne speech. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today in Saskatchewan 
we’ve seen, in the last week or so, we’ve seen a lot of 
developments — the throne speech, the budget, the whole affair 
surrounding Channel Lake, how this government moves on 
every occasion to thwart the will of the people of 
Saskatchewan. We hear the member standing up and praising 
this government up and down and saying that they are 
essentially doing the work of the Lord before the people of 
Saskatchewan; that somehow or another they like to set 
themselves apart and say that they are the only ones in 
Saskatchewan that are going to protect the people of this 
province. 
 
And at the same time, at the same time they get up and talk 
about the past. They always want to refer to the past and all the 
great things that they’ve done, all of the great things that 
they’ve done. Yes, they always want to talk about previous 
administrations or the federal government, whomever else they 
can decide to throw some blame on today to try and somehow 
or another absolve themselves of whatever responsibility they 
feel that they should be taking for actions of their own. 
 
In the 1980s when there was debt run up . . . yes, there was debt 
and there was plenty of debt run up. Everyone knows that, Mr. 
Speaker, everyone knows that. And at the same time, at the 
same time that that debt was being run up in this province, what 
were the members opposite saying at that time? What were you 
people saying at that time? What was the member from 
Rosetown-Biggar saying at that time? What were those people 
saying on the front bench at that time? What were they saying? 
 
They were saying spend more. Spend more — more on 
education. The Premier says if anybody tells you that it isn’t 
more for education, they are wrong. If there isn’t more for 
agriculture, they are wrong. If there isn’t more for health, they 
are wrong. When there was a 2 or 3 per cent budget increase in 
any one of those departments, this government today wants to 
absolve any responsibility for that. But at the same time when 

they were sitting in the opposition benches during the 1980s, 
each and every one of them on that side of the House would 
say, spend more, spend more, spend more. 
 
And even to the point of in the 1986 election campaign, the 
Allan Blakeney administration at that time promoted a 7-7-7 
plan. I can’t even remember the details of exactly how it 
worked, but it seems to me it was something like a $70,000 
mortgage at 7 per cent for 7 years. Independent observers say it 
would have been a billion and a half dollars to what would have 
been involved in that kind of a promise. 
 
In addition to all of the promises that they were making in that 
election campaign, every time they spoke, every time they 
spoke they said spend more, spend more, spend more. And 
today we’re supposed to believe they’re some kind of virgins 
when it comes to not suggesting that debt be run up during 
those years. 
 
Well I’ll tell you, you people know everything there is to know 
about spending. You know everything there is to know about 
making promises. No one can take any lessons from you people 
about those kinds of things. Everyone fully is understanding 
about what you said during those same time frames. And today 
everyone is supposed to believe you have absolutely no 
responsibility in this whatsoever, even though at the time you 
were saying exactly the opposite. 
 
But that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is exactly the one characteristic 
that an NDP has that sets them apart from everybody else. On 
one hand they say one thing and on the other hand they do 
exactly the opposite and argue that they never said anything 
about it in the past at all. That’s the thing that sets them apart 
from every other political party in Canadian history. If it’s good 
enough today, it may not be good enough tomorrow; if it was 
good enough yesterday, it may not be good enough tomorrow. 
 
That’s the difference between the NDP and anyone else. That’s 
the difference between anyone else and the NDP — always has 
been, always will be. Say one thing, do exactly the opposite, 
and argue till they’re blue in the face, till they’re blue in the 
face that they didn’t say what they said before. That they didn’t 
say what they said before. And today, in the last few days, 
we’ve witnessed it again. We’ve witnessed exactly that same 
sort of hypocrisy that the NDP is so famous for. 
 
On one occasion back a few days ago the Premier of this 
province got up in his place and he says, we will have Public 
Accounts and we’ll drag you in there kicking and screaming, 
and if we have to subpoena each and every single one of you to 
come to that committee, that’s what we’ll do. And today what 
does he say? What did he say to the media today? I’m not going 
to Public Accounts; I’m different. That’s what he’s saying, in 
essence. I’m different than anyone else. 
 
(1530) 
 
When he says everybody, that does not include himself. He 
does not believe in that kind of democracy. He believes in NDP 
democracy — say one thing today, do the exact opposite 
tomorrow. That’s what he believes in. 
 
Democracy suffered a huge blow in Saskatchewan in the last 



292 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 1998 

few days. The will of the public has been thwarted — a public 
inquiry. And in the hearts in each and every one of those 
members opposite knows what’s clearly the way to get to the 
bottom of this whole Channel Lake affair — was the only way 
to get to the bottom of this Channel Lake affair. 
 
Who was on the opposite side of this issue? Who was on the 
opposite side of this issue? The NDP, every step of the way of 
the way, said no, no, no, we don’t want to get to the bottom of 
this thing. We want it whitewashed over in some smooth little 
fashion so that no one else knows what went on in this whole 
thing. 
 
It’s been quite a little exercise that the public has witnessed 
here. I don’t think we’ve seen the decline of a government in 
terms of its credibility in such a fashion as we’ve seen in the 
last few days in this legislature. Thwarting the will of people, 
ruining democracy, doing everything they can to try and 
somehow or another again absolve themselves of any 
responsibility for their actions. Absolve themselves once again 
for their actions. 
 
And we know, we know because some of the people around this 
province that have dealings with this government are beginning 
to talk. Remember when you people all used to get the phone 
calls when a government is about to change? Remember how 
the law firms, remember how the accounting firms, remember 
how the people within Crown departments, whether they were 
in CIC, started calling and started sending documents. 
Remember when that was all happening? 
 
Well the shoe is on the other foot now, my friends. The shoe is 
on the other foot now and the calls are coming here. They’re 
saying to us, this government has to be stopped. This cannot go 
on. 
 
And I think even some of the members in the NDP are 
beginning to wonder about this. We know very well that the 
Finance minister was on the other side of this issue. We know 
very well that the member — one of the Regina seats in the 
front row here; I forget his constituency — was on the other 
side of this issue. 
 
We know very well that the Deputy Premier is on the other side 
of this issue in cabinet. And I suspect there’s a lot of 
back-benchers on the other side of this issue. I suspect there’s a 
lot of back-benchers that are the other side of this issue. 
 
And we know now that Jack Messer is on the other side of this 
issue. The NDP is going to do the old two-step, just like they 
always do. They’re going to get into committee and then they’re 
going to pin the blame, pin the blame on some poor, 
unsuspecting soul. 
 
And it’s going to be either Jack Messer, because Jack rolled 
over on you, and I think he’s probably a pretty good candidate. 
They’re going to pin the blame on Jack Messer if they can. And 
if they can’t do it to him they’re going to pin the blame on, 
possibly Portigal. And if they can’t pin the blame on him it’ll be 
DEML (Direct Energy Marketing Limited). Or if they can’t 
blame it on them, they’re going to blame it on SaskPower 
officials. They’re going to blame it on everybody but 
themselves. 

And at the same time we have a member here sitting in the 
legislature from Rosetown-Biggar that sat at the table. We have 
a member from Athabasca, I believe it is — pardon me, 
Cumberland — that was sitting at the table. We have a member 
from P.A. (Prince Albert) that was sitting at the table. We have 
current Deputy Premier that was sitting at the table. We have all 
of these people sitting at the table, all with the full knowledge 
of what went on, all with the full knowledge of what went on 
and none of them — absolutely none of them — have the 
courage to stand up and take responsibility for their actions. 
 
This was a government that was elected on the promise of 
accountability — opening the books, opening the books — 
opening the books and accountability. Opening the books, yes, 
and jailing the crooks. Well look who the crooks are today. 
Look who the crooks are today. Look who, after this Channel 
Lake affair gets finished, look who is going to be dragged 
through the courts. 
 
I predict that the people of Saskatchewan will rise up. I predict 
that the people of Saskatchewan will rise up in the next election 
campaign and say no to the NDP. They will say no to a 
government that wants to try and whitewash this thing away. 
They will say no to a government that is intent on keeping the 
details of this away from the public of Saskatchewan. 
 
On one occasion the Premier of this province says one thing and 
does exactly the opposite. And on another occasion the former 
Finance minister does exactly the same. You saw it today in the 
legislature, Mr. Speaker, us moving . . . the official opposition 
moving a motion, and I want to read it into the record one more 
time: 
 

That this Assembly authorizes the use of photography, 
audio and video recordings in broadcasting without 
restriction, of the Standing Committee on Public Accounts 
review of the circumstances surrounding the purchase and 
sale of Channel Lake Petroleum Ltd. 
 

I’ll tell you why we did that. Because we believe, even though 
it appears now that this government is going to use its mass 
majority to thwart the will of the opposition and the people of 
this province from having a public inquiry, we believe that the 
only available tool left to us is to go to Public Accounts. 
 
Yes, you beat us on that. Yes you did. We admit it, we have no 
problem admitting it. We fully understood right from the very 
outset that eventually the government would find a way, find a 
way to get by opposition to this whole thing and stymie the will 
of the people of this province and hide the facts, and hide the 
information, and do everything they can to keep the people of 
Saskatchewan from getting to the bottom of this and knowing 
exactly what went wrong, who benefited from this, all of those 
kinds of things. 
 
So we asked, we asked today, Mr. Speaker, that this not happen 
in Public Accounts. We wanted a full and open opportunity for 
the people of Saskatchewan to go before Public Accounts and 
view the proceedings, the media to view the proceedings, the 
media to report on the proceedings from within so that they 
would have opportunity to report to the people of Saskatchewan 
what kind of whitewash this government wants to present. 
 



March 26, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 293 

And what happened here this afternoon? No, again the 
government uses its massive majority to vote down the wishes 
of Saskatchewan even though, even though on March 18 a press 
release from the Saskatchewan New Democratic caucus 
services over the signature of the Government House Leader, 
the Government House Leader, said that they would allow a full 
and open hearing. That they would allow anyone to attend, that 
they would allow, that they would allow . . . and here’s the 
direct quote: “On March 31, 1998 at approximately 9 a.m. the 
government members of the Public Accounts Committee will 
attend.” 
 
She’s made that commitment that they will attend in addition to 
the Premier’s commitment to attend; she made the commitment 
that they will attend. Public Accounts Committee will attend the 
meeting in the Legislative Building in an open televised 
session. We hope opposition members will join us at that time 
to begin the work of Public Accounts Committee. 
 
And today, today the chairman of that committee has said all 
right, all right, we’re going to have this meeting then. We’ve 
got no choice here. The government is using every procedural 
method possible to thwart the will of the people so we’re going 
to have to go ahead with this meeting even though a public 
inquiry clearly is the only way to get to the bottom of this. Even 
though a public inquiry is clearly the way to get to the bottom 
of this, we will attend Public Accounts. 
 
Yes, and the first order of business will be to start setting out 
the agenda, and starting down the numerous witnesses that we 
want to call forward, and asking for the documents. 
 
The documents are very, very important in this situation, Mr. 
Speaker. The documents are very, very, very important in this 
situation because they outline the options that the NDP had. 
Outlined the options. And the Premier knows all about this and 
that’s why we want to call him as the first witness. 
 
I think it will be the first time in the history of this province, 
probably the first time in the history of Canada — we haven’t 
researched that but I suspect it’s very likely — that the 
committee will have the Premier of Saskatchewan go before 
them and have to raise his right hand and say that he does 
solemnly swear to tell the whole truth and nothing but the truth 
so help him God. 
 
And I think he’s going to need the help of the Lord because I 
think there’s some vague questions going to be asked of that 
Premier. I think there’s going to be questions like, Mr. Premier, 
did you in April 1996 personally intervene, did you in April 
1996 personally intervene even though, even though there was a 
unanimous decision of the board of SaskPower to fire Jack 
Messer, did you personally intervene to stop that from 
happening? 
 
That will be one of the first series of questions. And I think the 
answer to it will be a little difficult for Mr. Premier because 
under oath he realizes he has very few options. And I’d suggest 
to him that telling the truth would be a pretty good start, a pretty 
good start. And when he gets to that, when he gets to that truth, 
we’re also going to call in people that can call into question 
whether or not he is telling the truth. Every single board 
member, current and past, at SaskPower is on the list of people 

that we want to speak to. 
 
Every Crown employee that has anything to do with this whole 
thing is on that list. Every minister that has anything to do with 
this whole thing is on that list. And the member from 
Cumberland better start thinking about preparing some answers 
for that committee because he’ll be asked to come before that 
committee. 
 
And the member from Rosetown . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
No, you’re a small fry in this, unfortunately. I don’t think you 
know anything about it. Other than what you’ve been told by 
the Premier and caucus, I don’t think you really know anything 
about this, sir. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order, order. Now I know 
the hon. member from Kindersley will recognize immediately 
two things. One is that the normal procedure for debate is to 
direct the debate through the Chair; and secondly, that we are 
on the debate on the Speech from the Throne and that he’ll . . . 
although it is a wide-ranging debate, I’m sure that he’ll want to 
tie his remarks in some way to the subject which is before us 
and to help the Chair understand how this relates to the Speech 
from the Throne. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, of course when you talk about the 
Speech from the Throne, it is a very wide-ranging debate and 
we do know that. And part of the purview of a government is 
Crown corporations. And within the Crown corporations, 
there’s a lot of questions that need to be asked. 
 
And the people of Saskatchewan, as a result of the throne 
speech, I think are asking those very, very important questions 
about Crown corporations and that’s why Channel Lake is on 
the table these days. That’s why Channel Lake is on the minds 
of people these days. That’s why Channel Lake is being talked 
about in the coffee-shops around Saskatchewan today and in the 
hockey rinks and in the curling rinks and in the banquet halls 
and the restaurants and the hotels and everywhere else. 
 
Any place you go in Saskatchewan today, if you want to strike 
up a conversation with anybody, just ask them what they think 
of Jack Messer; ask them what they think of $300,000; ask 
them what they think of a Premier that wants to try and stand up 
for his old buddy; ask them what they think about all of that and 
see what their response is. 
 
Ask them to just see what their response is. They think this deal 
is dirty! They think this government is in a lot of trouble, Mr. 
Speaker. They think this government’s got a huge problem in 
terms of credibility. They think this government is out of 
control. They think this government is arrogant. They think this 
government is attempting to whitewash this whole thing 
through. They think this government has no intention of telling 
the truth when it comes before the Public Accounts Committee. 
They think this government is going to do everything they 
possibly can not to hold a public inquiry. 
 
What they want to hold, what they want to hold is some sort of 
committee meeting where they can control the agenda, first of 
all. And I predict, Mr. Speaker, that when we get to Public 
Accounts, either they’re going to try and control that committee 
with the majority of members that they have on that to sit . . . 



294 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 1998 

Couple of things — first of all, time allocation, so that you and 
we as opposition members will not have an opportunity to ask 
all of the questions. We think they’re also going to put in place 
some sort of almost a witness protection plan so that this 
government does not have to bring its Premier, or this 
government does not have to have its ministers come before 
them. We think that’s another strong possibility that’s going to 
happen. 
 
And we also think that this committee is going to try and — 
almost in the dark of night — slip this thing through so that no 
one knows what is happening in this whole Channel Lake affair. 
 
An Hon. Member: — The damage has been done. 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Exactly. The damage has been done. What we’re 
going to see in these committees, whether it is unfortunately 
Crown Corporations or whether the government will use its 
majority of committee members in Public Accounts, we’re 
going to end up with an NDP jury; we’re going to end up with 
an NDP judge; and we’re going to end up with a bunch of NDP 
defendants. 
 
And at the end of the day, does anyone in Saskatchewan really 
believe that an NDP jury and an NDP judge is going to convict, 
convict NDP defendants? I don’t think so. I don’t think anyone 
believes that. 
 
That’s why the judicial system and a public inquiry was the 
right way to go, Mr. Speaker. That’s why people want 
independence. That’s why we have independence like a Speaker 
in the legislature. That’s why, in a judge’s chambers, you swear 
before a judge that you’re telling the whole truth and nothing 
but the truth. That’s why people have to have confidence in a 
system, in a democracy. Ultimately the rule of law is what is 
above everything else. And that’s the confidence that people 
have to have. And they don’t have it in this, I’ll tell the 
members opposite. 
 
They don’t have any confidence that the members on this 
committee are going to do what is asked of them in this 
committee. The member from Regina has already said, we will 
review this situation, and we’ll bring forward the pertinent 
information that we feel is relevant. And we will also, if it 
affects the competitive position of SaskPower, we will not bring 
any additional information forward. 
 
How can the public of Saskatchewan possibly have any 
confidence in this committee when those are the parameters that 
have already been set by the Deputy Chair of that committee. 
How can anybody possibly believe that we’re going to get to 
the bottom of this? 
 
That is why, that is why ultimately, Mr. Speaker, we won’t have 
a public inquiry. That is why the people of Saskatchewan will 
not know the truth about this deal. That is why the people of 
Saskatchewan do not believe that this government has 
credibility on this issue any longer. And that is why I believe 
that in the next election campaign, the NDP will be defeated, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Because the people of Saskatchewan, even 
though up to this point — and I will give you this — up till this 
point, they have had a trust in you, they have had a trust in you 
because you have demonstrated that you deserve a trust, in this 
whole thing, you have demonstrated anything but a trust for the 
people of Saskatchewan. They don’t believe you on this issue. I 
don’t believe you on this issue. None of the opposition, the 
official opposition, believes you on this issue. 
 
The Liberals opposite are another story. The Liberals opposite 
are another story, Mr. Speaker. The Liberals’ position can be 
summed up in one word, as one of the political observers of 
Saskatchewan has said: duh. They just don’t get it. They just 
don’t get it. 
 
They bought into this NDP argument that somehow or another, 
somehow or another when the member from North Battleford 
gets to the committee that, because he’s a prosecuting attorney 
or has been in the past, or a lawyer — he’s been involved in the 
law at some point, I understand — that they have convinced 
that member, they have convinced that member that somehow 
or another he’s going to be able to demonstrate to the people of 
Saskatchewan that he has some knowledge in this area. If he 
had some knowledge in this area he would know full well how 
this committee works. He would know full well that the 
majority on that committee are some of the most NDP-partisan 
people in Saskatchewan because they occupy the MLA position 
in this legislature. 
 
They would know full well that these people are not going to 
convict any NDP defendants. They would know full well that 
this committee is not going to be independent. They would 
know full well that this committee is not going to want to get to 
the bottom of this issue, and that they would know full well at 
the end of the day that the people of Saskatchewan will not 
have the answers to the questions that they are asking. All 
across Saskatchewan they’re asking these questions and that’s 
why we’re asking for the Premier first. The Premier of 
Saskatchewan first. 
 
And we’ve spoken to some folks over in SaskPower and they’re 
starting to get a little worried some of them, let me tell you. 
They’re starting to give us those anonymous phone calls. And 
they’re starting to give us those brown envelopes just as the 
people at CIC are beginning to do. Because you know why? 
You know why they’re beginning to do that? Because they are 
so concerned, so worried, so concerned about their professional 
reputation because they realize fully that this government is in 
the biggest political jam it’s ever been in. They realize that. 
They realize that and they also realize that this is the 
government that has no qualms whatsoever about pinning the 
blame on whoever is out there as long as they can’t be 
somehow or another associated with the NDP. 
 
I would suggest that Larry Kram and Christensen over at 
SaskPower better be concerned, because I think they’re kind of 
up on the list of people that are going to be pinned with this 
blame. I think Jack Messer’s way up on the list. I think he’s 
number one. If they can’t pin old Jack to the wall, somebody 
else is going to get it. 
 



March 26, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 295 

And the next one down the list is probably Lawrie Portigal. 
He’s out in Calgary. He’s out in Calgary right now. He just 
finished putting together a pretty good deal for his company — 
$5 million off the purchase price. It’s like he got a discount 
coupon courtesy of the NDP guys that are on the board of 
SaskPower — a $5.2 million discount coupon. 
 
So he marched back out to Calgary and he told the people that 
he’s associated with out there, have I just run into a deal. You 
won’t believe this — $5.2 million they’re going to give me as a 
discount and our company as a discount coupon. We can go 
back to Saskatchewan and buy up this Channel Lake company, 
buy it up and hang on to it for a little while, Mr. Speaker. And 
we can flip this thing and we can make ourselves a cool five 
mill for hip national. That’s what he went back to them and 
said. 
 
And then they got thinking about it a little bit further. They got 
thinking about it a little bit further, Mr. Speaker, and they said, 
you know, you know what’s happening here. This is a rush job. 
You know what happens in rush jobs, Mr. Speaker, there’s 
mistakes made. You know what happens when there’s mistakes 
made, people also start thinking of how can I take even more 
advantage of these people. 
 
They’ve got a situation here where on March 31 they’ve got to 
close the books on this thing. They’ve got some huge losses in 
unauthorized trading — we’ll get to that a little bit later. I had 
asked one of my colleagues to make me a note about that 
because that’s interesting in itself. They had some huge losses 
in terms of unauthorized trading of gas contracts — huge losses 
in that area. 
 
So they wanted to close the books off on this thing by March 
31, hoping that if they can show even some kind of modest 
profit in this thing, somewhere along the line they can hide 
those losses, unauthorized losses, that they entered into 
SaskPower without the knowledge of anybody, it appears. And 
then they can come out of this thing and show maybe a modest 
profit, a modest loss. Nobody would ever know the difference. 
 
But of course these guys that they were dealing with out in 
Calgary, they just didn’t exactly fall off the wagon the other day 
either. They didn’t fall off a turnip truck. These guys didn’t get 
rich because they are stupid. These guys got rich because they 
know business. And they know when someone comes a-calling 
and they’re desperate. They know when someone’s desperate 
like that that they’ll make desperate-type moves. They’ll do 
anything they possibly can to hide the facts; so they know at the 
other end of the deal, let’s just squeeze them a little more and 
see how much juice comes out. Let’s squeeze them a little bit 
harder. We’ve got them right where we want them. We got 
them right where we want them. 
 
So what did they say? Well you know this is a pretty good deal 
even though they realize they got a $5.2 million discount 
coupon right here. They know that, but they say to themselves, 
let’s squeeze them a little harder. Let’s see if we can not only 
that, get this deal out of them, but let’s see if we can get a gas 
contract out of them on top of it. 
 
An Hon. Member: — And guess what. 
 

Mr. Boyd: — And guess what, exactly, as my colleague says, 
and guess what. They say to them . . . I wonder what the 
opening bargaining positions were. It would have been 
interesting to be in the room. And you get talking 2, $300 
million, it must be a little bit of a rush, I’m sure. I’ve never been 
involved in that big of a deal, but I’m sure it’s a little bit of a 
rush when someone says 2 or $300 million. Probably they 
started it higher because they thought well, you know, what 
have we got to lose. Let’s start at half a billion; we’ll negotiate 
down from there. These guys are over the barrel. So they say, 
oh I don’t know, half a billion dollars. 
 
You can just imagine Lawrie Portigal and his negotiating team. 
The buttons on their shirts must have just been popping open 
when they presented that $500 million. You can almost hear 
Archie Bunker saying, I tell you, $500 million. So then of 
course the guys on the other side — man alive, we can’t 
possibly go for that number. So they’re sitting there thinking to 
themselves, I wonder, where do you think these guys will saw 
off that? So they say, how about 300 million. 
 
When you pop out and say 500 million, I don’t think in 
anybody, probably not in the biggest financiers’ wildest dreams, 
would you think anyone would go for 500 million; but I’ll bet 
you they also didn’t think they’d get 300 million. But what did 
they get? Three hundred million dollar untendered deal. Have 
you ever heard anything like it, Mr. Speaker? Have you ever 
heard anything like it? 
 
These guys opposite used to accuse people of writing deals on 
the back of envelopes. There isn’t enough room for $300 
million on the back of an envelope — to write the figure. That’s 
the deal that they were able to extract out of the desperate 
moves and desperation of a government that was intent on 
covering this thing up. That’s what they got. A 10-year 
exclusive contract, sort of like a cost-plus contract. 
 
Anybody that’s ever been in business knows what cost-plus 
contracts are. It’s like saying — the member from 
Melfort-Tisdale, who runs a catering business — it’s like me 
going to him and saying, we got a bit of a function here and 
we’re in a bit of a jam; can you help me out. Can you help me 
out here; we got a thousand people coming to this thing and we 
forgot to order dinner. We forgot to order dinner; can you help 
me out here? 
 
He’s saying, oh man, these things get expensive, Bill, these 
things get . . . Mr. Member, these things get a little expensive. 
These things get a little expensive, and I’m saying, look, no 
problem — I got the taxpayers’ cheque-book in my pocket. 
Don’t worry about a thing; whatever it costs, just send me the 
bill and send the cost-plus contract along with it. And if I get 
time, if I get time, I’ll even read it. If I get time, I’ll even read it. 
But so he says, he just thinks to himself, the normal going . . . 
the normal going rate is 10 bucks a plate, sort of, for these kinds 
of things. But the government’s doing this one, and the 
government’s in a jam — they forgot to order dinner. So well, 
Jack, you’re up to . . . well, Jack, you’re up to 30 bucks a plate. 
That seems reasonable. Every one of us have had $30-a-plate 
meals. So they write down the deal on a piece of paper and they 
get her done. 
 
It’s exactly the same sort of situation, exactly the same sort of 



296 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 1998 

situation, Mr. Speaker. Cost-plus deals — every contractor in 
the entire world will tell you — those are the sweetheartest 
deals you’ll ever find because you build in every cost you 
possibly can. You build it in at every cost you possibly can; and 
in this case it isn’t just for dinner, it’s for 10 years of dinner, 10 
years of dinner — all courtesy of the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan, all courtesy of the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 
 
I bet those guys, I’ll bet those guys flew out here, Mr. Speaker, 
on a commercial flight and bought a Lear jet to get home with 
because, man can they afford it now. $300 million, $300 million 
— will the member from Saskatoon Northwest ever be involved 
in a $300 million deal? I doubt it, I doubt it, I doubt it. Unless 
he finally bails in with Cargill — maybe then, maybe then. 
 
But anyway, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan 
unfortunately are the loser in all of this. I can make all the fun I 
want of the deal — and we have been — but it’s a serious issue. 
It’s a serious concern. It goes to the heart of accountability. This 
Premier promised opening the books, jailing the crooks, and 
accountability. He was elected two times with that same 
message. And he deserved to be elected two times with that 
message because he was accountable. 
 
(1600) 
 
I don’t think he is any more. I don’t think the people of 
Saskatchewan believe he’s accountable any longer. And the 
days that have gone by in this legislature, the last few days, 
clearly show, clearly show that this government is no longer 
accountable and they have something serious — serious — to 
cover up. And they’re attempting to do it every step of the way. 
 
And it’s very, very unfortunate because we have now . . . going 
to experience continued problems with the Crown corporations. 
We’re going to see continued escalation of prices for natural gas 
because they just give away the farm — the biggest farm you 
could ever imagine — they just give her away to some guys 
from Calgary that knew they had this government over the 
barrel. And it’s unfortunate. 
 
They were involved in something called arbitrage. As I 
understand it, they were involved in it in an unauthorized 
fashion. It’s buying, on the spot market, gas contracts and then, 
on a razor-thin margin these things trade, trading on the other 
hand and picking up a few dollars here and there, on those kinds 
of things. Speculative? Yes. Risky? Unbelievably risky. 
Anybody that’s involved in commodity trading will tell you this 
is the most risky possible speculation that you can be involved 
in. 
 
The NDP opposite will tell you that that’s the most risky thing 
you can be involved in. Because they know full well that that is 
extremely volatile. Gas prices go up and down. We see in the 
last few days, oil prices bouncing all over the place, Mr. 
Speaker, in reaction to news out of the Middle East that there 
may be some curtailing of production in those areas. A buck 
and half a day is not unusual on crude prices these days, Mr. 
Speaker, a barrel. Huge fluctuations. You’ve got to know what 
you’re doing. You’ve got to really know what you’re doing. 
 
We’re seeing right now in the world scene, we’re seeing banks 
in Japan and other places going down all over the place because 

they’ve been involved in these kinds of things and they’re 
extremely risky. 
 
Who would have thought a couple of years ago that the 
Japanese economy and the Taiwanese economy and many other 
of the eastern economies would be in trouble like they are 
today. Who would have thought that a couple of years ago, 
when everybody was buying the mutual funds that were pouring 
literally billions of dollars into those economies . . . 
 
And what happened with that money? They were involved in 
the same sort of thing that this government was involved in — 
speculative, the most highly speculative kinds of thing you can 
be involved in. You think buying penny stocks on the 
Vancouver exchange is speculative, this makes it pale in 
comparison to it. Huge opportunities for gain, yes. Huge 
opportunity for loss. 
 
Now what we have here is SaskPower deciding — Jack Messer 
and the boys over there deciding — why don’t we have a little 
fun. We got big-time cash. It’s only taxpayers’ money. We have 
the authority to raise and lower gas prices and power rates, all 
those kinds of things. Let’s take a little bit of a flyer and see if 
we can’t make some big cash for the province. 
 
So they get involved in this thing. And I guess from all accounts 
it was working pretty good for awhile, making some money, 
making some good money. So if a little is good, more has got to 
be better. 
 
So what do they do? They jump in with both feet and then they 
take for the Saskatchewan taxpayer a big bath, a big bath. And 
so what do they do then? They decide, we’ve got to cover this 
thing up; there’s going to be some people find out about this 
deal. There’s going to be some people asking some very 
difficult questions about this deal. And that’s how this whole 
Channel Lake thing started. 
 
And you want to know, Mr. Speaker, one other thing, one other 
thing. I think the guy that presented the discount coupon is an 
old NDP hack. I think he’s an old NDP member, and I think 
he’ll be one of the people — and I think he’ll be one of the 
people — that are prominently featured, prominently featured 
when this whole thing breaks open, as it inevitably will break 
open. He’ll be called up before the people of Saskatchewan and 
asked to account for how much money did he make on this 
thing. 
 
And that is why, contained within our letter to the people of 
Saskatchewan in our news release, we are calling for a number 
of things to be included in Public Accounts. We think this has 
to be an absolute, the broadest investigation, the broadest 
mandate, that there can possibly be so we can get to the bottom 
of this situation. 
 
We think that there is all kinds of relevant witnesses and 
documents that have to be called forward. We have a list that is 
just started at 60 people, hundreds of documents that need to be 
provided so we can have a thorough investigation of this 
situation. The list starts with the Premier, the Deputy Premier, 
the former minister of SaskPower, the current minister of 
SaskPower, and all the other NDP members of the board at the 
time. We’re going to be calling the former board, the current 



March 26, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 297 

board, anybody that’s had anything to do with this thing right 
from start to finish, and asking them what possibly went on in 
this deal. We think that it is extremely important. 
 
We believe, Mr. Speaker, that there is the possibility of civil 
action as the result of an investigation, and we also believe that 
there is a strong possibility of an RCMP investigation. This file 
is up and running and it is active. The people of this province 
have a right to know. 
 
The one thing that this government in its arrogance has 
forgotten is it is not their dollars that they are working with 
here. It is not their money that they are working with, it is not 
CIC’s, it is not SaskPower’s, it is not anybody other than the 
working men and women that they like to talk about every time 
they get up on their feet in this legislature. 
 
It is none other that those people that you like to champion the 
cause of every time you get up in this legislature. It is none 
other that the children of this province that you just finished 
moments ago, a few hours ago, saying that you were going to 
be doing everything you possibly could to help. It is those 
people that you just took money out of their pockets and 
somehow now, and somehow now do not want to come across, 
come clean and say why. 
 
That is the question that everybody is asking, Mr. Speaker. That 
is the kind of concern that everybody is talking about in 
Saskatchewan these days. Everybody wants to know, everybody 
wants to know about what went on in this situation. 
 
Last night, Mr. Speaker, last night, Mr. Speaker, I attended a 
hockey game here in town. A friend of mine has a son that 
plays hockey out at Notre Dame — or pardon me, goes to 
school out at Notre Dame. He’s on one of the hockey teams out 
there and they were playing in Regina. They were playing over 
at the Al Ritchie rink. You’re probably familiar with it. They 
were playing over there and I went over to the game to watch 
my friend’s son play hockey. I was talking to four people there 
over the course of the hockey game. 
 
One of them used to be a deputy minister in this government. 
One of them used to be a deputy minister in this government. 
He knows a lot of stuff about what went on in Saskatchewan in 
the last number of years and he was saying, I don’t think I’ve 
ever seen a kind of a bunker mentality that has set in like this 
government has set in on. He said, I don’t think . . . You 
wouldn’t believe the kind of gag orders that are coming down 
all across Saskatchewan these days. If people saw me even 
talking to you within government circles, my job probably 
would be in jeopardy. That’s the kind of thing that people are 
afraid of from this government. That’s the kind of thing that 
people are afraid of from this government. 
 
In addition to that gentleman, I talked to three other folks. One 
of them was the . . . I believe he was the coach of the Regina 
team. He came up to me after the game; I guess he recognized 
me. He came up and he said to me, you keep up what you’re 
doing in the legislature, you people in the Saskatchewan Party. 
You keep at this government. You don’t let these people off the 
hook because I, along with everybody else in Saskatchewan, 
thinks something’s gone wrong here. This guy was about, I 
would estimate him at 45, 50 years old. 

Then I was talking . . . After him I was talking to the two young 
coaches of the Notre Dame team. These guys are young. Like 
they’re teachers out there, but they must be just barely out of 
university, because these guys looked to me like they were 
about 21 years old. And they said to me, this is bad. What we 
have seen here is unbelievable. What we see here is a 
government that doesn’t want to come clean on this issue — 
and you hold them accountable. You hold their feet to the fire 
on this situation. You ask the kind of questions the public is 
demanding the answers to it. And even though the member 
from Saskatoon Eastview, is it? — no, the committee Chair of 
the Crown Corporations, even though . . . Southeast — even 
though she is going to try and whitewash this thing over, hold 
these people accountable. Hold these people accountable. 
 
Does anyone actually believe that one of the most partisan 
members — and I am one of the most partisan, I’m proud to 
admit, and I think she is as well one of the most partisan 
members in this Assembly — does anyone possibly believe that 
she would be impartial in this situation? I don’t. Those young 
fellows from Notre Dame didn’t. They didn’t believe it for a 
moment. 
 
A little while after that, a little while after that I was talking and 
another gentleman came up. This fellow and his wife, they 
were, I would say they were 75. They were getting up in years. 
They came up to me . . . I had never met any of these people 
before last night, never other than they — pardon me — other 
than the deputy minister, I’ve met him on a few occasions in 
this legislature. Other than him, those other folks I’d never met 
before in my life. This older couple comes up to me and said 
exactly the same thing. 
 
What does that tell you, Mr. Speaker? People you don’t have a 
clue who they are; people you have never met before in your 
life; people who have seen I guess some of us, all of us 
probably in the media at some point, and recognize you as a 
political figure in Saskatchewan. People coming up to you and 
saying completely without prompting, with no knowledge of 
what you might say to them, or whether you even wanted to talk 
to them or not, coming up to you and saying that this situation 
demands a public inquiry. 
 
I would ask some of the back-benchers in this government, 
when people are coming up to you in the last days, what are you 
possibly saying to them? What are you saying to them? We’re 
going to have a committee at the legislature look at this thing, 
knowing full well that it’s unlikely that they know what that 
even is; knowing full well that they don’t know that this is a 
committee made up of the majority of NDP members on there. 
 
How do you possibly . . . how do you possibly believe that the 
people of Saskatchewan are going to go for that bill of goods? I 
don’t; the people of Saskatchewan, the folks that I met at the 
hockey game last night, people all across this province, 
editorialists, political columnists, opposition party — in one 
case not in another case, independent members one after 
another saying the same thing. The former Liberal leader saying 
that there should be a public inquiry; the member from 
Humboldt saying that there should be a public inquiry. 
 
Morris Bodnar, former MP (Member of Parliament), has had 
experience in terms of legislative experience in the House of 



298 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 1998 

Commons in Ottawa. He knows what committee work is all 
about. He knows about the law because he’s a lawyer. He also 
knows about public inquiries because I understand he’s been 
involved in them as a legal representation at some point. He 
knows all of the machinations of a legislative calendar plus all 
of what goes on in terms of legislative committees. He’s sat on 
both sides of the fence. 
 
When he says, people who had experience like he has, when he 
says that’s the only way the people of Saskatchewan are ever 
going to get to the bottom of this situation, I think the people of 
Saskatchewan believe him. I think they listen to him and I think 
they know that that’s the truth. 
 
(1615) 
 
An Hon. Member: — Even Jack Messer. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Yes, my colleague mentions even Jack Messer. 
That was a surprise to all, I’m sure. Monday morning . . . 
wasn’t it Monday? I believe it was Monday in this legislature 
when we got news that Jack Messer appears like he’s going to 
roll over on this government. I’ll bet you there were some 
people on the opposite side of this House that were surprised, 
shocked, and scared to death about what Jack Messer is going 
to say. 
 
Jack Messer knows everything. Jack Messer knows about how 
all of this has been put together. Jack Messer knows the whole 
situation. And what did Jack Messer say? Jack Messer said 
there should be a public inquiry. 
 
Jack Messer realizes that even though he got $300,000 — even 
though he got $300,000; he won the NDP’s lottery — even 
though he just finished winning the NDP lottery, he knows that 
this is a government that doesn’t care about past loyalties, 
doesn’t care about anything like that. They are going to hang 
him out. 
 
He understands that. He’s seen it before. He’s probably 
participated in it before. He knows full well that he’s on the 
chopping block. So I think he decided, I better get out of this 
process. I better try and do whatever I can to protect what little 
is left of his professional reputation and try and salvage 
something. 
 
Do you recall, Mr. Speaker, reading the letter, or reading the 
news release? He talked about things like his personal 
reputation, his personal credibility, his family’s personal 
reputations and credibility, his personal health, his well-being. 
What possible pressure . . . I don’t think we can even imagine 
the kind of pressure that this man must be under these days, 
because he knows full well he’s on the chopping block. He’s on 
the NDP chopping block. And he’s worried. He is worried to 
death about what people are going to be saying. 
 
So what did he do? I think he thought to himself, now do I want 
an NDP jury and an NDP judge and me being an NDP 
defendant to be out there with the full knowledge that these 
people got to pin this thing on some poor unsuspecting victim? I 
think he said to himself, the only way I’m possibly going to get 
any kind of impartial hearing in this, any possibility for an 
impartial hearing, is not have NDP lawyers, NDP juries, and 

NDP judges making decisions about his decisions with 
SaskPower. 
 
And that’s why he has said . . . and that’s why he has said that 
there were other people that had knowledge of this. There were 
cabinet ministers that had knowledge of everything that was 
going on. In spite of the fact that all of the cabinet ministers are 
totally absolving themselves of any responsibility, he says they 
had full knowledge of this, Mr. Speaker. 
 
He knows that they’re ducking and running. He knows full well 
that he’s on the old NDP chopping block. So he rolled over. 
He’s rolled over on you guys and I suspect, I suspect before 
very long we’ll be getting a call from good old Jack. He’ll be 
calling us up and saying, I think you guys have a few questions 
that you should be asking the Premier of this province, the 
member from Cumberland, the member from Rosetown-Biggar, 
and P.A. Northcote. I think he’s got some questions for you 
folks that he would like to have asked on his behalf. 
 
What responsibility did you have, Mr. Member from 
Cumberland? What knowledge did you have of what was going 
on? What knowledge did you have of the transaction? Were you 
the one that supplied the discount coupon for $5.2 million to 
DEML? Were you the one that negotiated . . . were you one of 
the ones that negotiated the $300 million sweetheart supply 
contract . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order, order. Now I know the 
hon. member for Kindersley will recognize immediately that 
he’s not debating in a manner that’s required in the House and 
to direct his comments to the Chair, and I’m sure that he’ll want 
to renew the traditional style of debate in the House. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, I’m going to wrap up my comments 
now because I think we’ve made the points on this issue. I think 
we’ve made the points that Saskatchewan people . . . I think 
we’ve made the points the Saskatchewan people have been 
saying all along in this whole thing. In the end the old NDP 
Premier there has got a problem. 
 
He’s got a problem because his old buddy, the old war horse, 
the old guy that ran the campaign in 1991, the old fellow that 
knows everything about the inside workings of the NDP has 
rolled over on them. And I think he’s going to have a kind of a 
tell-all type confession when he gets to Public Accounts. 
 
And I think it’s going to be an extremely interesting time in 
Saskatchewan politics over the next year or so leading into the 
next election campaign. The people of this province ultimately 
will not allow an NDP jury, they will not allow an NDP judge, 
and they will not allow NDP defendants to govern this province 
any longer. 
 
The next election campaign this will be an issue. This will be an 
issue because we intend to keep it as an issue. We intend to call 
before this Committee of Public Accounts, person after person 
after person after person, document after document after 
document, until the people of Saskatchewan have got full 
knowledge of what went on in this situation. And when that 
happens, when that happens, the past in Saskatchewan will look 
meagre in terms of the investigation that will ensue. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 



March 26, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 299 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
had some remarks that I wanted to make but there’s been a 
change in the timing here. It was our understanding . . . And I 
might point out to those that watch us on television, that this 
House operates by agreement. When people say we’re going to 
speak for a certain length of time to allow other speakers to get 
on to the speaking list, we take them at their word. 
 
And the word we had from the Tories, or Saskatchewan Party, 
was that they would finish by approximately a quarter to 4. So 
one lesson that we can draw from the remarks of the member 
for Kindersley is that we can’t take them at their word. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, I want to . . . I just want to say that the 
remarks made by the member for Kindersley remind me of the 
old adage, the old adage which is: it’s one thing to get on the 
tiger and to ride the tiger; it’s another thing entirely to get off 
the tiger. 
 
It’s another thing entirely because when you get off the tiger, 
you risk a mauling. And what we’ve seen here today, Mr. 
Speaker, what we’ve listened to here today is a wounded 
member who’s been mauled badly today in this Legislative 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — What we heard today, what we heard 
today was a bitter, angry loser who’s delusional in his anger. 
That’s what we heard today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in wrapping up my comments, the member talked 
a lot about reputation. The member talked a lot about 
reputation. I just finished talking about a tiger. Maybe I should 
be talking about a leopard, Mr. Speaker. Because like a leopard, 
the Tories, or the new Saskatchewan Party, whatever they call 
themselves, they can’t sort of change their spots, Mr. Speaker. 
 
A leopard is a leopard. A Tory is a Tory. And when we talk 
about reputation, there’s only one group in Saskatchewan that 
really needs to worry about their political reputation, and that is 
the new Saskatchewan Tory Party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that concludes my remarks. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The division bells rang from 4:25 p.m. until 4:55 p.m. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 27 
 
Romanow Flavel Van Mulligen 
Wiens Shillington Mitchell 
Johnson Whitmore Goulet 
Upshall Kowalsky Calvert 
Teichrob Koenker Trew 
Lorje Bradley Scott 
Cline Stanger Sonntag 
Wall Kasperski Ward 

Murray Langford Thomson 
 

Nays — 9 
 
Krawetz Bjornerud D’Autremont 
Boyd Gantefoer Heppner 
Hillson McPherson Goohsen 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Address be Engrossed and Presented to 
His Honour the Lieutenant Governor 

 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 
the member from Saskatoon Riversdale: 
 

That the said address be engrossed and presented to His 
Honour the Lieutenant Governor by such members of the 
Assembly as are of the Executive Council. 

 
I so move. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Ways and Means 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 
the member from Rosetown-Biggar: 
 

That this Assembly, pursuant to rule 92, hereby appoints 
the Committee of Finance to consider the supply to be 
granted to Her Majesty, and to consider the ways and 
means of raising the supply. 

 
I so move. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:59 p.m. 





   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................273 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................273 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................273 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................273 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................273 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................273 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................273 
  Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................273 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................273 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................274 
  McPherson.................................................................................................................................................................................274 
  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................274 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................274 
  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................274 
  Goohsen .....................................................................................................................................................................................274 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ..........................................................................................................................................................................................274 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Goohsen .....................................................................................................................................................................................274 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................275 
  Romanow ...................................................................................................................................................................................275 
  McPherson.................................................................................................................................................................................275 
  Mitchell ......................................................................................................................................................................................275 
  Kowalsky ...................................................................................................................................................................................275 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Strength of the Saskatchewan Economy 
  Kasperski ...................................................................................................................................................................................275 
 Public Accounts Meeting Scheduled 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................276 
 Children’s Television Series to be Made in Saskatchewan 
  Hamilton ....................................................................................................................................................................................276 
 Photo Radar 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................276 
 Lakeland Citizens of the Year 
  Langford ....................................................................................................................................................................................277 
 Call for Channel Lake Independent Public Inquiry 
  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................277 
 Public Accountability 
  Van Mulligen.............................................................................................................................................................................277 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Inquiry into Channel Lake 
  Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................277 
  Lingenfelter ...............................................................................................................................................................................277 
 Compensation for Hepatitis C Victims 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................279 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................279 
  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................279 
 Health Care Funding 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................280 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................280 
 Investigation of Gemma House 
  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................281 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................281 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 "Building Independence: Investing in Families" 
  Romanow ...................................................................................................................................................................................282 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................282 
  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................283 
 
 



 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 741 — The Tory Bell Ringing Expenses Indemnification Act (Who’s Tory Now at $28,000 per day?) 
  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................283 
MOTION UNDER RULE 46 
 Channel Lake Inquiry 
  Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................283 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Kowalsky ...................................................................................................................................................................................284 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
ADDRESS IN REPLY 
  Kasperski ...................................................................................................................................................................................284 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................288 
  Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................291 
  Van Mulligen.............................................................................................................................................................................299 
 Recorded division .........................................................................................................................................................................299 
MOTIONS 
Address be Engrossed and Presented to His Honour the Lieutenant Governor 
  Shillington..................................................................................................................................................................................299 
 Ways and Means 
  Shillington..................................................................................................................................................................................299 
 
 


