





























































Hansard: May 25, 1998


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1349 
 May 25, 1998 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Health 
Vote 32 

 
Subvote(HE01) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, earlier 
this afternoon I was discussing the issue of Betaseron and 
Copaxone, MS (multiple sclerosis). 
 
I just picked up a newspaper article out of the Friday, May 22 
edition of the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix. There is another drug 
that the MS society is campaigning to have put on the drug 
plan. It’s called — I’m not sure if I’ve got it right — R-E-B-I-F, 
Rebif. 
 
And I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, what your department has 
done to date, whether or not you’re looking seriously at this 
drug. It sounds like it’s been approved by the federal . . . or it’s 
received federal approval. 
 
And what I would like to know is where we are in 
Saskatchewan today in regards to the drug. It certainly is a 
fairly expensive drug, anywhere from 17 to $21,000 a year, 
which really isn’t that much different from what Copaxone and 
Betaseron are. But is the department looking very closely at 
also putting . . . making this drug available through the drug 
plan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, on the Rebif prescription 
medicine, which is of interest to MS sufferers, as with any new 
drug it will be considered for the formulary. It will be 
examined, and is being examined, by the Saskatchewan review 
committee. It’s following all the usual processes. The 
information that I have is that a final decision will be made 
sometime this summer. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, according to the article it says that 
federal approval was already given to the drug. Why would 
there be a significant delay in Saskatchewan if there is federal 
approval for a drug already given? You’re talking about a 
formulary committee in the province of Saskatchewan. 
Wouldn’t you look at the reasons federal approval was given 
and move fairly quickly to have the drug as well put on the drug 
plan in Saskatchewan, based on the approval given at the 
federal level? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, the federal approval 
essentially is to determine the safety of the drug product for 
Canadians; that safety factor having been established now by 
the federal government, then each province in turn has its own 
process to determine whether it will go in its formulary. This is 
following exactly the same process that any other new drug that 
comes along to be tested by our formulary people. 
 
And I think there is not, in this case, any undue delay. The 
minister reports that the final decision should happen this 
summer. 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, you’re 
saying now, if I understood you correctly, just in your closing 
remarks you made some comment about hopefully this summer 
there’ll be a decision as to whether the drug will then be put 
under the drug plan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — That’s correct, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, another area that . . . 
a question that comes out of a headline in the Star-Phoenix as 
well, Wednesday, April 8. It’s regarding the Chelation 
Association of Saskatchewan, looking for chelation coverage to 
be covered by the department. 
 
Where are the discussions to date? How soon will you be 
arriving at a decision as to whether or not this will be covered 
as well? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, well I recall some of the 
discussions around chelation therapy that have gone on in the 
province over the last number of years. As the member will 
know, the college of physicians and surgeons, even as we 
speak, does not endorse the therapy based on their argument 
that there is no scientific evidence to support the effectiveness 
of the therapy. 
 
However, in concert with the community, with government, the 
college has agreed to pass a bylaw which allows physicians to 
provide the service in a safe and controlled manner here in 
Saskatchewan. Therefore we do see now the chelation therapy 
being offered in Saskatchewan communities around the 
province including here in Regina. 
 
It is my understanding that there is no provincial jurisdiction in 
Canada which covers chelation therapy as an insured service. 
And it would be my assumption that until the college of 
physicians and surgeons would endorse the therapy, that will 
likely remain the case in Saskatchewan. It would be highly 
unusual I think in this province that therapy would be 
considered an insured service without the endorsement of the 
college of physicians and surgeons. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, thank you, Mr. Minister. So basically 
what you’re saying, the college itself has not really come to a 
clear decision as to whether . . . how beneficial chelation is. 
 
The article that I have in front of me talks about a gentleman in 
his mid-70’s who felt he’s been really . . . has received a 
positive response as a result of chelation. I would certainly 
venture to guess that not everyone would be a positive 
candidate for chelation therapy. I think the other conventional 
— if I can use the word conventional — open-heart surgery or 
whatever, a valve replacement, might for most people be the 
most positive way to go. 
 
But it seems that in the past, a number of individuals, chelation 
certainly has provided some benefit. And in that regard, Mr. 
Minister, while the college is not totally . . . or doesn’t feel as 
strongly that it is a real benefit, if indeed it can be shown that 
there are some benefits to chelation, that it does help some 
people, is the department looking at, down the road, possibly 
including coverage of this therapy? 



1350 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 1998 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well as I indicated, Mr. Chair, until the 
department and government would have the endorsement of the 
college, it’s unlikely it would be covered as an insured service. I 
have memory of an attempt that we made to partner with a 
chelation study that was being conducted in Alberta. 
Unfortunately the linkages could not be developed between our 
province and theirs to conduct that study. I’m aware that the 
college of physicians is now in a process of trying to encourage 
some Saskatchewan physicians to become active in 
investigating the treatment as a credible research project. To 
date the information I have is that no physicians have come 
forward to develop a research project. 
 
We would be interested I’m sure, and it would appear that the 
college of physicians and surgeons would also be interested, in 
doing a credible, scientific, research project around the benefits 
of chelation. I think we’ve all had and received personal 
testimony from those who feel in their own personal lives, 
chelation has made an important difference.  
 
But without that empirical evidence that would be available to 
the college of physicians, they’re not at the point of endorsing it 
and therefore it would seem only right, I think, that we would 
not consider it an insured service until it had the endorsement of 
the college. 
 
This information I find interesting. There are now nine 
physicians in the province licensed to practice chelation. There 
are nine clinics operating. They are in Prince Albert, Norquay, 
two in Saskatoon, two in Regina, one in Moose Jaw, Tisdale, 
and Wadena. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, I thank you for that 
response. And I guess at the end of the day we’ll await to see 
where the college goes and through further research if it’s 
indeed shown that it can provide a positive treatment for a 
number of patients. I’m sure the college will, and physicians 
themselves will come with some recommendations as to its 
coverage. 
 
Another issue, Mr. Minister, that I’m not sure if we have a lot 
of cases of, but how familiar you are with Lyme’s disease I 
don’t know. First of all, I guess, how many cases would there 
be in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, the best information that the 
department officials have with us tonight is that there are very, 
very few cases in the province. Our chief medical officer, Dr. 
David Butler-Jones, I know is monitoring this situation very 
carefully. 
 
We can provide whatever more information we can get from the 
department to the member. We don’t have much more than that 
here tonight, other than to say that our understanding is there 
are very, very few reported cases. But the chief medical officer 
is monitoring it very carefully. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, I thank you. Mr. 
Minister, to my knowledge too it’s probably even less than a 
handful from what I understand. 
 
However, I am very familiar with one situation where a 
gentleman has acquired Lyme’s disease and unfortunately it’s 

really taken him from being a very productive individual to a 
person who’s actually had his whole livelihood put on hold — 
and really didn’t, as a self-employed individual didn’t have a lot 
of savings, and just almost seems to be fighting a lot of hoops 
just trying to get care. 
 
First of all, it took quite awhile for the medical profession to 
finally diagnose what the problem was. Secondly, without a lot 
of knowledge everybody’s . . . He’s almost like a guinea-pig as 
they try different treatments to see whether they can be of 
assistance. 
 
I guess the question at the end of the day, Mr. Minister . . . and 
going back to some of the comments we had this afternoon and 
certainly last week in discussing it with the Minister of Health, 
in regards to out-of-province treatment, this might be an area 
where we may look at other jurisdictions who may have spent 
more time and have spent more research and have come up with 
some clearer ways of tackling something like Lyme’s, rather 
than putting a lot of resources trying to bring enough officials in 
or spending the time on research just because we may have just 
a small handful of cases. 
 
Mr. Minister, is this something that the department will look at 
very seriously? And I’ll certainly bring you information, and 
your department information, on the case I’m talking about 
directly, to see if we can do something that may be of a benefit 
to this individual who’s been struggling with Lyme disease for 
probably the last three years. 
 
I think it was just about the last eight or nine months that they 
finally isolated his problem and it’s certainly been something 
that’s taken him from, like I indicated, a very productive, 
vibrant life to one where he is in constant pain. And it’s an issue 
I’d like to discuss with you. 
 
But is this something, an area, where the department can work 
together with other jurisdictions in Canada in finding ways of 
how we can use our dollars more effectively in providing care 
for individuals such as individuals with Lyme disease? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, the member I think makes a 
very helpful suggestion. In these instances where we’re dealing 
with new conditions, new diseases, new environmental health 
threats, and new pests and so on, the more that we can do to 
support each other’s work across Canada and in fact 
internationally, the better. We all certainly shouldn’t be trying 
to reinvent the wheel in our own jurisdictions. 
 
I’m aware that the Minister of Health and other ministers of 
Health in Canada have in fact been having some of these 
conversations about trying to strengthen issues of public health 
surveillance in a more national, global fashion, looking at how 
we might better work together. 
 
If in fact there are circumstances in Canada or elsewhere where 
there are more effective treatments, it is just in those 
circumstances that I know the department looks at 
out-of-province coverage and with the appropriate 
recommendations from physicians and so on. And so I would 
support the notion that the member brings to the House tonight 
that we should be working together more closely on these new 
and emerging diseases. 



May 25, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1351 

I do have some personal knowledge of someone who has been 
affected by Lyme disease, and it is extremely debilitating, an 
extremely debilitating disease. And so I support the member’s 
idea and I know that the Minister of Health has in fact been 
raising some of these same kind of issues in that context to the 
federal table. 
 
Mr. Toth: — I thank you, Mr. Minister, and I look forward to 
being able to bring some information in regards to this case, 
that has been brought to my attention, to your department to 
have it reviewed — or your colleague’s department. I’m sure 
with your assistance we can certainly twist his arm a little bit to 
make sure it is followed up on. But I thank you for that. 
 
Mr. Minister, as well, the Hantavirus . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . yes, the Hantavirus I guess. That’s that mouse disease. Is 
that something that’s cropped up a fair bit this past year? I 
know that’s another disease that a lot of people aren’t that 
familiar with. And unfortunately I know two younger 
individuals who as a result of coming in contact . . . and thought 
just for a moment they just had a slight flu, but after about three 
or four days when they had left the scene it was certainly 
shocking to family members just to find out that something like 
this that you weren’t even aware of could be so deadly. 
 
And I’m wondering what has been done in the past to deal with, 
to identify areas, problem areas, and as well how would you . . . 
what kind of cures or vaccine, if there is anything, or researches 
. . . what research has been done to determine what can be done 
to deal with this type of a problem? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I’m aware, as I think all 
members will be, of the Hantavirus that comes from a certain 
mouse. It’s not all mice I understand it, but deer mice I guess it 
is. And again I think we’ve all had some personal acquaintances 
perhaps that have been affected by this and it’s been around. 
 
I know that the public health wing of the Department of Health 
have monitored this situation very carefully. And given the 
broad-based rural agricultural community we have, and lots of 
folks at work where these mice are, I am informed that this in 
fact was a very specific discussion held between 
federal-provincial deputy ministers of Health, just around this 
very subject. 
 
And I’m also informed, although I don’t pretend to be a 
pharmacist nor a physician so my pronunciation here may not 
be entirely accurate, that a drug treatment therapy called 
Ribavirin, R-I-B-A-V-I-R-I-N, is proving very effective in the 
treatment of Hantavirus. But of course prevention, as with many 
disease conditions, is always the first step and anyone working 
in those circumstances are well advised of course to use 
whatever protective measures they can. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Minister. I would 
take it then that while that drug is available it’s something that 
if a person’s been or has the symptoms of that, certainly 
physicians . . . and they would want to confirm with their 
physicians or make sure they at least let them know. 
 
The one situation that I’m aware of was a family went out to 
clean the cottage, and I’m not sure why it ended up the husband 
was the one who was in actually doing the sweeping, and he 

was the one that succumbed to the disease. And this is . . . I 
think you just take for granted sometimes a bit of a flu 
symptom. And it just seems to be the type of disease you really 
don’t think much of. 
 
So I would . . . I guess the more information we can get out to 
people so that they’re aware of the fact that this can be a major 
problem, especially if they’re working in older buildings or 
going back to the cottage where something’s been sitting over 
winter and happen to be cleaning up, that they’d want to be 
mindful of the fact that they should be careful. As well, if some 
of these symptoms that may crop up, just indicating to people 
that these are the things that you might face. See a doctor 
immediately because there’s something that can be done right 
now. And I think that’s information that we certainly should get 
out there to people. 
 
Mr. Minister, in regards to another question. About a month ago 
we raised an issue regarding kidney transplants. Now I know 
my colleagues from Saltcoats and Canora were talking about 
the dialysis machine for Yorkton, but in this case we’re talking 
about an individual, a Jill Miner, a young Reginan who is 
currently on dialysis in need of a transplant. We brought to your 
attention that there was a donor available, a doctor was prepared 
to do surgery, but there wasn't a bed available. Consequently, 
she had to wait until July at an extra expense of roughly $3,000 
a month to the health case system. 
 
Mr. Minister, first of all is Ms. Miner still waiting for surgery? 
Or have you been able to accommodate her surgery — move 
that up? Or is she even on an extended waiting-list, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I do not have the information 
regarding this specific case. I’m not sure it would be 
appropriate for me to . . . Well it wouldn’t be appropriate, I 
guess, for me to discuss an individual case here in the House, 
particularly around any medical condition. The member will 
know that in all cases surgeries are prioritized by attending 
physicians and physicians involved. 
 
The member will also know that this year the province 
enhanced the annual funding to the transplant program by some 
$210,000. And we’ve also increased the reimbursement to 
physicians who perform the transplants. And more recently 
some one-time funding of $150,000 was provided to try and 
address some of the surgical backlog. 
 
And so we’re hoping through these steps to reduce some of the 
waiting times that are existing around transplants through both 
the enhanced annual funding, the new payments to physicians, 
and the one-time funding to try and reduce some of the backlog. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair. Thank you, Mr. Minister. Actually, 
Mr. Minister, as we were sitting here my colleague, the member 
from Souris-Cannington, basically gave me the answer that you 
really don’t have the information so . . . 
 
But putting this aside though, Mr. Minister, after we raised the 
question we also found out there are 40 other patients on the 
waiting-list for transplants. And touching base with Dr. Mark 
Baltzan, his comments were that it seems that we were almost a 
victim of our own success. Because I think since we’ve made 



1352 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 1998 

more of a determined effort to inform people about the value of 
organ transplant there’s been a lot of people coming forward 
willing to certainly donate their organs and probably more 
donors than there are actually individuals who need the organs. 
 
That aside though, Mr. Minister, can you just inform the 
Assembly tonight as to where we are, whether we’re dealing 
directly with a number of these cases, whether indeed we are 
performing more transplants . . . that we’re biting into the 
waiting-list of individuals who are waiting for transplants or are 
we falling further behind? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — No actually, Mr. Chair, not yet. No the 
story here is quite a positive story in fact of the statistical 
number of transplants which are happening in the province. Just 
for your information, in 1996 the number was 13, in 1997 that 
number grew to 17. The current waiting-list has 14 people on it; 
another 10 are in the assessment phase which would bring it to 
a total of 24 who are waiting. And this would mean that we 
anticipate having the number grow to 28 transplants to be done 
in 1998 which will represent a 64 per cent increase over 1997. 
 
And so I think the addition of the funding, the physician 
remuneration, and the special one-time funding to assist in the 
backlog, as well as I think the addition of new front-line nursing 
staff, will make a happy difference in the number of transplants 
that we’re able to perform in the province. A 64 per cent 
increase is predicted for this year. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair. Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Minister, when you talk about extra funding, does that funding 
go direct from the department to a specific hospital where the 
majority of these types of operations would be handled? Or is 
that money channelled through a district board and then to the 
hospital, and if that’s the process, does all of that money 
designated for this donor program in fact reach the end . . . the 
means whereby it’s supposed to be used? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, because much of that work of 
course is done in Saskatoon, the relief funding was provided to 
the Saskatoon district but very specifically for the purpose of 
transplants, and so it was very dedicated, very targeted, and it 
would appear by the prediction and the existing numbers now 
that it is working. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, thank you, Mr. Minister. So as you’ve 
indicated, it is targeted and the board cannot use the funds 
anywhere else, but indeed put it directly towards a donor 
program. 
 
Mr. Minister as well, in regards to Jill Miner, I’ll get some more 
information and get it to you and your officials. Maybe you can 
give us a response in writing. I’d appreciate that. 
 
Mr. Minister, another area I’d like to get into and talk a little bit 
about. Awhile back I sent a freedom of information request to 
the department regarding health boards, and there’s . . . one of 
the concerns I have and it’s certainly a concern that people all 
across the province of Saskatchewan have, is how the health 
dollars are being spent at the board level. 
 
Now one of the problems we’re running into, while we get the 
annual reports of the district boards, in many cases it’s very 

difficult to determine exactly what is the administrative level 
and what is actual service care level . . . for the fact that a 
number of administrative positions are basically lumped into an 
area of service, whether it’s acute care or whether it’s heavy 
care or home care or whatever. Now I appreciated the fact that 
your department did get back to us. We requested the 
information on the per diems and remunerations for the district 
boards. And if indeed the information is correct here, we see 
about one point six eight four million dollars is going directly 
into the hands of board members. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, when boards were set up, when district 
boards were set up . . . like for the Department of Health. We 
can go through the department. We can go through the blues. 
We basically see pretty well every employee over $2,500 that 
works in the department is listed. But in district boards, there’s 
no list of employees or their salaries. 
 
Now I wonder, Mr. Minister, if that was one of the criteria that 
was set up originally. Like the department, district boards 
would function in the same manner, and all administrative 
positions or employees over a certain level would be itemized 
individually. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, there is no legislated 
requirement on the district boards to do that. Our officials 
tonight tell me that many of the health district boards do in fact 
provide that information either, one, on request or, two, as a 
matter of course. That may not be an even circumstance all 
around the province. I think it’s something that the department 
and government would be interested in exploring with the 
health districts. 
 
We provide Public Accounts for government proper. I know our 
municipal governments are now providing public accounts. 
School boards to my knowledge do not. Health boards we have, 
apparently, a bit of a mix where some are doing it just out of 
course; some are doing it upon request. And perhaps there are 
some who are not doing it, but we’re not aware of those. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, and, Mr. Minister, to my knowledge 
. . . and so far we haven’t received a response. We have 
received . . . well actually I shouldn’t say response because we 
haven’t got anything in that area. We just haven’t . . . in fact the 
return here basically just . . . you listed the question, and all we 
got was the board per diems and nothing in regards to 
administrative levels of care. 
 
Now that may be partly because, like you say, some of the 
districts do provide that information; some don’t. But it would 
seem to be, Mr. Minister, the fact that you and I, as individual 
MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) . . . anyone can 
go to the Public Accounts and they know exactly the dollars that 
have gone through our hands. Basically most, in fact I believe 
all individuals in departments, you can pick up the blues, and 
you can determine the salaries of all individuals over $2,500, 
individualized in the Public Accounts. 
 
Mr. Minister, I think it would be appropriate for district boards 
to follow the same criteria as the department, as all departments 
in government. And I’m asking, Mr. Minister, if indeed the 
department will look into this and pursue this matter as I know 
it’s an area that’s of major concern and an issue and a question 



May 25, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1353 

that arises pretty well at all district board meetings, public 
meetings, when people are looking for how the monies are 
expended, that are handed to the district boards. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, the objective of the 
Department of Health is to try and bring as much transparency 
to the expenditure of health dollars in our province as is 
possible. We are sensitive — and I know the department is 
sensitive — to some of the concern which may exist around 
administrative costs and salaries and so on. 
 
I can report to the member tonight, although I believe maybe 
this is some of the information that you have, that costs of our 
various health boards are broken down into administrative costs 
which include everything from the CEO’s (chief executive 
officer) salary to caretaking salaries, but in that administrative 
column. And then separated out are the costs of the actual 
board, the functioning of the actual board. 
 
Put together, all of those costs represent 3.65 per cent of 
funding to districts; so less than 4 per cent is going into 
administration. That includes again all of the management 
salaries, caretaking, that sort of thing, plus the actual board 
expenses. What the member, I believe, is talking or inquiring of 
is sort of a public accounting of actual positions and salaries 
attached to positions. 
 
The position that the Department of Health takes is to 
encourage the district boards to provide that information, and 
beyond even that sort of encouragement, we’re now working 
with the district boards to try and set up guidelines so there can 
be some standardization of information provided through the 
districts. 
 
Again I repeat, the goal of government is to be as transparent as 
we possibly can with the expenditure of health dollars. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, the 
response I have and all the information I have is the per diems 
and honorariums, remuneration to board members. I have 
nothing that lists administrative areas. 
 
And I guess the reason I raise administration, Mr. Minister, is 
while you may have the CEO’s salary in there, I know just two 
of the boards locally . . . the comments I hear from people 
ongoing is the number of people now working in offices, the 
number of positions, whether it’s facilities manager or 
whatever, and then one of the boards were . . . they’re now 
hiring another level of management right within the facilities 
themselves. And I guess the people were saying, well we did 
have good managers in those facilities; why’d we move them to 
the board level and now we’re rehiring? 
 
And that’s why I’m asking for, and I feel it’s imperative that we 
have, salaries listed out and positions — not that we’re looking 
at all the staffing — but it gives you a better idea to determine 
the actual costs of administration, because if at an 
administrative level a management position is part of a salary of 
a certain area or component, that does not give you a direct idea 
of what that actual administrative level is for that district. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, you indicated you do have some other 
information. I wonder if you would be willing to send me a 

copy of it and also a response to my question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, we will provide for the 
member the information that I have tonight, which is our global 
numbers. They do not break down; these numbers break down 
only the global administrative number, the global number being 
spent for board operations equalling then the total of 
administration for a given district. But we’ll provide that to you. 
 
I repeat, I think it’s in all of our interests that health dollar 
expenditures be as transparent as possible. The department is 
working with district boards to establish some guidelines for the 
documentation, distribution of more specific kind of public 
accounting, of the expenditures. And I know we all want, I’m 
sure we all want, to be as administratively thin but 
administratively effective as we can in administering this large 
health system in the province. 
 
So we’ll be sure to get you the numbers that we have, and I give 
you the assurance that the department is working with districts 
to try to get more scrutiny of actual salaries and flow charts and 
all that stuff. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, as well . . . and I failed to ask this 
originally. But I . . . a question of the department: did your 
office receive the global questions that had been sent, and 
where are the responses? I haven’t been informed that we 
received those responses yet. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, the department has received 
the request, and the bulk of the work is done. There’s some 
tidying up, and they’ll be delivered to you shortly, as soon as 
possible. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Minister. 
Unfortunately, Mr. Minister, I would like to hear not just before 
the end of session but before we wind up discussion in health 
care or in Health estimates. But we look forward to receiving 
that information nonetheless. 
 
Mr. Minister, a comment just recently by the . . . and I think it’s 
not just the Premier, but the Minister of Health has been talking 
about the amounts of dollars that have disappeared out of health 
funding in Saskatchewan by the federal government. I’ve got a 
note here from an individual who’s an aboriginal person and 
just a couple of quotes here:  
 

During question period or member statements I heard the 
Hon. Clay Serby, Minister of Health, say that not one extra 
dollar was provided in the federal transfer payment to 
Saskatchewan for health care. 

 
Then this individual goes on to talk about the fact that he found 
it quite disturbing, knowing that . . . or indicating that Indian 
Affairs covers the health costs for treaty Indians, and even if the 
Health department does not receive the money as part of its 
regular transfer payment to the province, they are definitely 
receiving funds. 
 
Mr. Minister, what does the department receive or what . . . yes, 
I guess what would the department receive in actual funds from 
the federal government by transfers for agreements in health 
care to aboriginal peoples? Is it over and above the current 



1354 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 1998 

transfers to the aboriginal community? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, my understanding is the 
Department of Health receives none. Zero dollars. That all of 
the federal government money that’s provided for health care 
on reserve for aboriginal people — on reserve — is provided 
directly to the reserve. It does not come through the Department 
of Health. That’s my understanding. 
 
Point number two, when treaty Indian peoples, either on reserve 
or off reserve, access services off reserve, we are not 
reimbursed for that. 
 
Point number three, which I think is crucial — I feel that I’m 
more involved with these days — is that there was a time not so 
long ago when the federal Government of Canada took its 
responsibility to treaty Indian peoples more seriously in terms 
of providing social welfare benefits to all treaty Indian people 
on and off reserve; some several years ago unilaterally made the 
decision to no longer provide social service benefits to treaty 
Indians off reserve. Which has created — as the member knows 
— a significant new cost to the Saskatchewan taxpayer. 
 
If my understanding is correct, Indians . . . federal health 
services provided on reserve are provided directly to the 
reserve. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, when you’re saying 
on reserve, exactly what are you speaking of? The comment 
here is we’re talking about visiting a family physician or 
obtaining medication from a drug store and having to give the 
treaty card as well as the Sask health card. And the indication 
is, once the treaty card is given, the Sask health card is only 
secondary. 
 
The feeling that this individual has is that there are funds that 
actually move into the province as a result of services to treaty 
Indians. Mr. Minister, I need a clarification on that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, in the case of a treaty Indian 
person purchasing medicines at a pharmacy and showing the 
treaty card, then the pharmacist will be paid by the federal 
government. The billing goes to the federal government not to 
the Government of Saskatchewan in that case. So the money 
comes again straight from the federal government to the 
pharmacy not to the Government of Saskatchewan or the 
Department of Health. 
 
There is another circumstance, I’m told by the officials, where 
there can be some reimbursement by the federal government, 
and that will be for the provision of level 3 or 4 nursing home 
care, for nursing care in an institution, where a district, a health 
district in fact can seek reimbursement from the federal 
government. But again that money is paid directly to the district 
not to the Department of Health or through the treasury. 
 
Now the block funding that we get from the federal 
government, the CHST (Canada Health and Social Transfer), 
the transfer of funds that do come of course go into the General 
Revenue Fund and are used for the provision of health-care 
services — in this case physician and hospital services. 
 
But there’s no direct transfer of funds from the federal 

government to the Department of Health for on-reserve health 
services. And where some of those services are accessed 
through a pharmacy, or in the case of a level 3 and 4 nursing 
home, the reimbursement is direct either to the district or 
straight to the pharmacist. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Minister, a few questions directly related to Regina and the 
number of hospitals here in the city. 
 
First of all, the number of operating rooms that were 
functioning in the city of Regina, in the three hospitals — the 
Regina General, Pasqua, the Plains — in 1991, 1998, and 
projected future. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, we do not have back to 1991 
the number of theatres, operating theatres, in the city of Regina. 
We’ll get that for the member as quickly as possible, and get it 
to the member. 
 
I want to again reassure the member that in terms of the move 
of the Plains hospital in Regina, that all of the services will be 
moved, and that the number of surgeries being performed in this 
city should . . . will be as they are today, if not growing. 
 
We have seen I think, an impressive growth in the number of 
surgeries being performed in the province. In 1991 there were 
about 78,000 per year. We’re now up to 88,000 per year, so 
that’s an increase of 10,000 surgeries per year since 1991. 
 
We don’t have those operating theatre numbers back that far, 
but we’ll get them and provide them to the member. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, at the same time while you’re 
getting that information, would you also give the number of 
operations per day in the three facilities in ’91, ’98, and 
projected; and the number of out-patients per day in the three 
facilities in ’91, ’98, and projected. If you don’t mind, please, 
I’d appreciate that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, we will seek that information 
from the Regina District Board and get it from the Regina board 
and pass it to the member. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Minister, 
heart and neurosurgery are now mainly done I believe at the 
Plains here in southern Saskatchewan. Where will these 
operations now take place, once the change is made to the two 
health facilities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, those procedures will be 
provided at the new and expanded General Hospital, at the new 
health centre that will be in downtown Regina. That’s where the 
heart and neurosurgery work will be done. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, I believe there was a program 
involved called the health improvement incentive, and from the 
annual report the health districts have been allocated a total of 
$9,403,916 for health improvement initiatives. And I’m 
wondering if you can explain to the Assembly what exactly 
does this mean. What type of feedback have you received from 
the districts? Have they called the department and suggested 
maybe they could utilize their funds more appropriately — 



May 25, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1355 

directly to services that they need to provide — or exactly what 
is this program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, the health improvement 
initiatives have been part of the global budget for some time 
now to the districts. The member’s correct. It’s about $10 
million this year to the districts. My understanding is that 50 per 
cent of those funds must be used in terms of prevention — 
prevention of disease, health promotion in terms of prevention. 
The other 50 per cent, and there is flexibility here to work with 
the districts, but will generally be targeted for some 
community-based initiatives. 
 
I happened to, Mr. Chair, share lunch today with a group of 
people from the Rainbow Youth Center who are celebrating 
youth appreciation week here in Regina. And at that luncheon I 
met an individual who is now working in mental health — 
prevention of mental health disease and the promotion of good 
mental health. This is a brand-new initiative, and as we 
discussed it, and as I’ve said to the individual, I think this is the 
way we need to go. 
 
We are always faced with the situation where the urgent takes 
precedence over the important — the important in this case 
being prevention — and promotion of good health. In this 
relatively small way, when one considers the size of the health 
budget, we’re beginning to tackle some of that preventative 
work that’s so important and can do so much both to save 
human suffering, and much less important, but still important, 
can save precious health care dollars. If we can prevent an 
accident from happening, that’s 100 per cent better than trying 
to treat the accident after it’s happened. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. 
Minister, as I understand it then, you’re saying 50 per cent must 
be used in the area of prevention. The other 50 per cent . . . and 
I know this from ’96, it was 12.8 million, this year, or ’97, 9.4 
million. And I guess a couple of questions. When did this health 
improvement incentive begin? And also, when you’ve got 50 
per cent going towards prevention, where does the other 50 per 
cent go? Can districts use some of that money to meet needs 
that they do not have the funds for out of the general budget that 
they receive? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair. I’m guessing a bit. My sense 
is that the health improvement issue started in ’93-94, maybe 
’94-95, I recall, but I don’t recall precisely the year, but about 
then. 
 
The 50 per cent that’s not used directly, targeted directly to 
prevention — although some districts may be using a shade 
more than 50 per cent for preventative work — but the other 50 
per cent are for community-based initiatives. It may represent 
an increase in home care services or the breadth or range of 
home care services being provided. It might be reflected for 
instance in some home-based, community-based palliative care, 
which is so much appreciated in certain circumstances. 
 
We’ve been drawn into this somewhat, in that any federal 
funding that has come in the past has always come only for 
insured services — that’s to deal with the acute needs, the 
insured services. And so we know that in the long run 
prevention is key, and prevention is important. And that’s why 

the health improvement initiatives have been put in place. 
 
The 50 per cent not dedicated to prevention and promotion go 
to community-based services like home care, palliative care, 
and that sort of thing. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. Minister, a few questions 
in the area of the Plains, changeover of the Plains, and certainly 
the construction in the city of Regina in regards to health care 
and delivery of services. When the decision to close the Plains 
was brought forward and made back in, I believe 1992, what 
was the anticipated cost of the restructuring, refurbishing of the 
General and the Pasqua hospitals at that time to pick up the 
slack or the load once the Plains was closed down? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — The original cost projection, Mr. Chair, 
was $83.2 million. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Minister, to 
date what has been spent in upgrading both the General and the 
Pasqua hospitals? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — To date, Mr. Chair, a total of $78 million 
has been paid out in the renovations and the major expansions 
that are happening at both health care facilities. When the 
decision was taken those years back, as I indicated, the 
projected costs were $83.2 million. Since that time other 
important work has gone on in the Allan Blair cancer centre, 
which is widely known as the best in Canada, of another 8.5 
million into the Allan Blair Clinic. Costs associated with the 
MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) and the installation and 
housing of the MRI represent another 2.3, bringing the total 
then to $94.0 million. 
 
Now there are some other projects which the health board has 
been working towards, and that’s around mental health and so 
on and fire safety issues. But in terms of the work at the 
General and the Pasqua related to the transfer of the Plains, the 
total now is $94.0 million. That’s with the 8.5 added for the 
Allan Blair and the 2.3 for the MRI . . . and to date paid out is 
$78 million. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. Minister, when you’re 
saying paid out, that’s funds that have been paid for services or 
construction that’s already taken place. What is anticipated to 
be the final cost when construction is completed as well as . . . 
When I talk about construction being completed, that’s also 
construction of a new parking space or areas at the General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I want to be as accurate as I 
can for the member. The actual consolidation, the expansion 
required to create these two major health facilities now in 
southern Saskatchewan . . . we’ve been able to take $94 million. 
The 78 million has been paid out by the Department of Health 
to the Regina district for these projects. 
 
Other projects that the Regina health board are looking at 
around some mental health consolidation and medical office 
wing and so on are not strictly related to the move of the Plains 
hospital into the two expanded facilities. And so it’s our 
anticipation that the costs associated with the transfer of the 
Plains services — bed, staff, and physicians — will represent, is 
represented by the $94.0 million. 



1356 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 1998 

Mr. Toth: — Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. Minister, obviously 
there’s one figure in there that I don’t have. If I’ve got 78 
million paid to date, 8.5 to Allan Blair, 2.3 to MRI, and there’s 
about . . . you said 94, should be about 5.2 million someplace 
here that I don’t have, and maybe you could just indicate where 
that 5.2 is. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, the member’s right on. His 
mathematics is absolutely correct. As I indicated, the total 
projected cost was 83.2. In response to the question, how much 
has been paid out, 78 thus far. There is a remaining 5 to be yet 
paid through the department to the district for the completion of 
the project in addition to the Allan Blair and the MRI. And so 
there is yet a remaining 5.2 yet to be paid out. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. Minister, you’re 
indicating then that projected was 83.2; you’re looking at 
roughly 94 at the end of the day. That’s including all the costs, 
no further costs that will be . . . or bills that would be coming up 
on construction that you’re not aware of today that may arise? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, there are still some projects 
still in the tender process, the finaling of, so on. So these are 
projected but the department is quite confident they’re pretty 
close. 
 
Just to be clear, we’ve paid out now, from the 94, total costs of 
78. There’s still 16 million to be paid out. There’s still 16 
million to be paid out. We’ve now anticipated the total cost to 
be 94.0. That is the original 83.2, plus the 8.5 to the Allan Blair, 
plus the 2.3 around the MRI, bringing to the total of 94. We’ve 
paid out 78 and so there’s still 16 to be paid out. 
 
Now these are, you know, in some ways rounded figures. These 
are not precise figures, but we’re anticipating that as work 
progresses through these summer months, we’ll see the project 
coming in right round budget and on time. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. Minister, as I understand 
. . . and certainly with the meetings around the province 
regarding the Plains health care centre . . .I should say not 
necessarily totally around the province because I think we’re all 
aware of the fact that it’s the southern not even half, probably a 
third, and a bit up the east side of the province where a lot of 
the individuals in that area of the province would certainly be 
sent to and utilize Regina’s services depending on some of the 
procedures. Some procedures as you indicated earlier that only 
. . . like for transplants you would go to Saskatoon. I think you 
need to recognize we wouldn’t try to set up two transplant 
clinics in the province. I don’t know if it’s necessary. We’d 
want to utilize our dollars as appropriately as possible. 
 
But when the Plains is officially closed, the minister and your 
government have been talking about the fact that there will be 
675 beds. As I understand today there are 675 beds functional 
in the three facilities in Regina. When the Plains is closed there 
will continue to be 675 beds that will be functional. 
 
Mr. Minister, I guess the question is, is 675 beds enough to 
meet the needs of southern Saskatchewan when it comes to the 
services that are available? And, Mr. Minister, even if it is 
specifically in regards to the large urban centre like Regina, 
would you certainly look at ways of transferring patients out for 

some post-op care to some of the smaller centres and utilizing 
beds that are already in the system versus adding to — if indeed 
we see a situation down the road as we’re seeing in other 
provinces — rather than adding more beds to some of the 
current facilities that are currently in existence here in the 
province today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, to confirm again, as the 
member has indicated, there are today 675 acute care beds in 
the city of Regina. When the move of the Plains is complete all 
of the beds now at the Plains will be moved into the new 
facilities at the General and the Pasqua, and the bed count in 
Regina will be the same, 675. 
 
The average, daily census in Regina is 620. But we recognize 
there are times when pressures are put on this system. As the 
member indicates there might well be some real potential in 
developing further some of our regional centres to . . . either for 
postoperative care closer to home or in fact to provide services 
again closer to people’s homes that can relieve some of the 
pressures that sometimes build up in the large tertiary centres 
here in Regina. 
 
And so I’m aware, having heard the Minister of Health a 
number of times discuss this issue, that that in fact is much in 
his mind and in the planning of the department to always be 
monitoring: one, the number of beds in the large tertiary 
centres; but secondly, to be looking very carefully at our 
regional centres represented by, for instance, Moose Jaw, 
Yorkton, and so on where services could be developed, perhaps 
beds better utilized or perhaps more beds. And at the end of the 
day, in the large tertiary centres, we monitor these beds 
regularly. And there is opportunity if the need should be 
demonstrated for further expansion here. 
 
But we believe that, counting on the analysis of the Regina 
district, working with the districts around the capital city and 
throughout southern Saskatchewan, that the mix of beds that we 
have in the tertiary centres and in our regional centres can very 
adequately — in fact well — meet the needs of health care for 
southern Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. Minister, a question . . . 
and I’m not sure if this is in the globals, so I’m going to ask it 
just to make certain. How many physicians do we have 
practising in the province today? And as well, how many 
specialists would be practising in the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, practising family physicians 
in the province today, 688 GPs (general practitioners), family 
physicians, 688; practising specialists 463. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. Minister, have I got that 
. . . 688 for practising physicians and 463 specialists so a total 
of eleven hundred and some, quickly looking without getting 
down to specifics. 
 
Mr. Minister, in regards to the number of physicians, is this 
meeting the need? I was at a meeting in Swift Current not that 
long ago where the Swift Current doctors were quite concerned 
about the number of practising physicians they had in their 
community. I believe at one time they had 13; most recently 
they’re down to 7. And it seems to me like these numbers look 



May 25, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1357 

like we may have adequate numbers; that’s about one per 
thousand, I guess, one per thousand individuals in the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
But there are many doctors who are feeling burn-out. They are 
just feeling that the work load is becoming fairly extensive even 
with over 1,100 doctors in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, what efforts are being made to recruit more 
specialists in . . . And I’m not sure if all the specialities need 
more recruitment, but no doubt there are some areas where we 
do need it. And as far as general practitioners, what efforts are 
being made, number one, to recruit? And number two, as well, 
rather than just always recruiting outside, to try and encourage 
young people or recent Canadians to look at practice in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
(2000) 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I have actually a long list of 
programs and initiatives that are going on even as we speak in 
this session around recruitment and retention of physicians. 
 
The member is correct. We have approximately 1,150 
physicians practising in the province, which is a substantial 
number of physicians. Where the problems are will be in a 
number of specialities, where we can use more specialists — 
there’s just no doubt about that — and in some of our rural 
communities, where we have had difficulty retaining . . . 
recruiting and retaining family physicians in some of our 
communities. Those are the two pressure points. 
 
I think I will not take the time of the House tonight, but ask the 
department to provide to you this list. It’s a comprehensive list 
of efforts hopefully to attract some of our own graduates, 
medical graduates, and encouraging them to locate and practise 
in the province, to train as physicians. 
 
As you’ll know, we’ve signed an agreement with the 
Saskatchewan Medical Association which has built into that 
agreement a number of retention provisions, particularly 
recruiting and retaining physicians in rural Saskatchewan. I’ll 
provide for the member the total list of programing. 
 
The department is very sensitive of this, the districts are 
sensitive, and the SMA (Saskatchewan Medical Association), 
and the college is sensitive. We're all trying to work together to 
solve some of these physician supply issues. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 
Chairman, I move the committee rise, report progress, and ask 
for leave to sit again. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Why is the member for Athabasca on 
his feet? 
 
Mr. Belanger: — To ask for leave to introduce a guest. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It gives me 

great pleasure to rise this evening to introduce a guest in the 
Speaker’s gallery. We’re joined this evening by Mr. Gerald Roy 
of Ile-a-la-Crosse. 
 
Mr. Roy is here on a business trip with the Labour Force Board 
in the city here. He’s also a councillor on the northern village 
council of Ile-a-la-Crosse. He’s also a member of the Sakitawak 
Development Corporation and works as a youth worker at the 
Ile-a-la-Crosse Friendship Centre. And I believe Mr. Roy’s 
commitment to the northern and aboriginal people is something 
that we all admire. And I guess, in a nutshell, he’s the new type 
of northern leader that many of us talk about in the Assembly. 
 
And it gives me great pleasure to introduce him to the 
Assembly and ask all colleagues here to give him a warm 
welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

The Deputy Chair: — Why is the member for Regina South on 
his feet? 
 
Mr. Thomson: — I think, Mr. Chair, I wanted to join with the 
member . . . I guess I want to request leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I wanted to join with 
the hon. member for Athabasca in welcoming Mr. Roy here to 
the Assembly. Mr. Roy was at the luncheon today and the 
conference which is going on with the Labour Force 
Development Board. 
 
I want to, on behalf of government members, welcome him 
here. The work that this organization does is extremely 
important. It is, as members of this Assembly know, a 
partnership of business, labour, and government organizations 
that looks to the future in terms of making sure the needs of our 
economy are met in terms of having good workers available. 
 
Mr. Roy is, I understand, a relatively new participant in this 
process and on behalf of government members I’d like to 
welcome him here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 33  The Provincial Court Act, 1998 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Before I call clause 1, I’ll invite the 
minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you very much. I’m pleased to 
have with me tonight Susan Amrud, who’s the director of 
legislative services; Doug Moen, who is the executive director 
of the public law division; Barb Hookenson, who is the 



1358 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 1998 

executive director of court services; and John Whyte, who’s the 
deputy minister of Justice. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And welcome, Mr. Minister, and 
to your officials as well for part of this evening’s proceedings. 
 
I believe this is the second time in the last number of years the 
government has created this kind of a commission, and I guess 
up front I’d like to know how much money the first exercise 
cost the taxpayers and basically what we’re looking at for this 
second one — what it’s going to cost and how that compares. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The cost of the previous commission 
under the previous Act was $20,000. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And what are we estimating the 
cost of this one’s going to be? 
 
The Deputy Chair: — While the minister’s preparing for his 
answer, I’ll just remind the hon. member for Rosthern that 
questions or comments are to be directed through the Chair. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The first commission which will be set up 
under this new legislation will basically be ratifying the deal 
that was made last June, and so we don’t anticipate that the cost 
will be very great at all. And then three years out, when the next 
commission is in place, we’re not quite sure of how much it will 
cost but probably not . . . you know, under $50,000 or $70,000 
— somewhere in that range. But it’s every three years that this 
commission will come into place. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order. I’d like to draw the minister’s 
attention to rule 28 of the Legislative Assembly, that comments 
are to be directed through the Chair. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. That’s a rather 
interesting sort of an answer to the estimated cost, because at 
50, $70,000, it seems a little vague. And I would hope that the 
government has a better handle on the cost of these things than 
answers as vague as that. 
 
I’d like a general description of the process that’s going to 
ensue after this Bill is passed, like time lines, when the 
commission will be created, when will its recommendations be 
made, and those sorts of things. So I’d like to just ask the 
minister to make a general description of the process that will 
happen when the Bill is passed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Within 30 days after the Bill receives 
Royal Assent, the commission will have to be set up, and then 
they have six months from that date to provide their report. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. Section 20, Mr. Deputy Chair, 
deals with temporary disability. And it’s my understanding that 
temporary disability may be provided for a judge for a period 
up to 6 months, subject to a 12-month extension, which looks 
like that could end up being something like 18 months. 
 
In section 20(4) it states that if a judge’s incapacity is deemed 
to be permanent, he will be entitled to 70 per cent of the salary 
he would have received had he not been incapacitated. 

Is this benefit extended to retirement or is there a maximum 
limit on that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Chair, the benefit is payable to 
retirement. If you look at subsection (8) of that same section, it 
explains that. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And, Mr. Deputy Chair, is this 
kind of a situation in line with public service standards or is this 
one that’s sort of been created for this group of people 
individually? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — This is not changed from the current 
arrangement and this is basically an arrangement for judges. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Okay, thank you. And then, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, going on to 22(2), it deals with judges’ pensions. And 
it seems that that could possibly open the door to some 
patronage kinds of things. And it states that, subject to 
subsection (3), a judge who is less than 65 on the day that he or 
she ceases to be a judge, who has served as a judge 
continuously for at least two years, shall be paid a pension for 
life in accordance with this Act and the commission regulations. 
And I guess at first reading, what it appears to me is probably 
what it appears to everybody else in Saskatchewan, that this 
might be a fairly plush kind of a situation. 
 
And I guess I would like to tell the Minister that my concern on 
this section — and then I would ask that he provide an 
explanation to alleviate these concerns — am I right in the fact 
that, under this situation, the government could appoint a judge 
for two years? And it is certainly within their power to appoint 
a former NDP (New Democratic Party) cabinet minister who fit 
the other criteria, and that a person may only intend to sit on the 
bench for two years and then could collect a pension for life. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think the simple answer to your question 
is, that it’s not a full pension. It’s basically just a pension based 
on those two years. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. Then moving over to section 
27(1) which deals with supplementary allowance. And it states 
there and I’ll quote this, it’s section 27(1) that: 

 
The Lieutenant Governor in Council may provide for 
supplementary allowances, in any amount and subject to 
any terms and conditions that the Lieutenant Governor in 
Council considers advisable, to be paid to the recipient of: 

 
And then there’s two listings made there: an annuity, or a 
pension pursuant to the Act. 
 
That seems to be a very all-encompassing tool for government 
to provide extra funds to judges. What sorts of conditions, if 
there are any, are placed on these allowances? Or is it just that, 
that it’s an all-encompassing fund? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The limitation is the limitation set out in 
the Income Tax Act of Canada, and this is basically a cost of 
living adjustment. That’s all. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And Mr. Deputy Chair, that 
brings to a conclusion the questions that we have on that 



May 25, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1359 

provincial court Act. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My 
understanding, Minister, is that this is basically a cleaning up 
Act to bring the provincial court system up to date, and so there 
aren’t very many things that I need to know about it. But I did 
wonder about a couple of points here. In the interpretation of 
council it says it means the Judicial Council continued pursuant 
to section 53. Could you explain to me how that council is 
appointed and how their powers are disseminated? 
 
(2015) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, the council is 
composed of the members as set out in section 53; so it’s the 
Chief Justice of Saskatchewan, or a judge designated by him; 
the Chief Justice of the Court of Queen’s Bench, or a judge of 
the Court of Queen’s Bench designated by him; the chief judge 
of the Provincial Court; the president of the Law Society of 
Saskatchewan or another bencher as designated by the 
president; two other persons that are appointed by the 
Lieutenant Governor in Council after consultation by the 
Minister of Justice with the chairperson of the council and the 
chief judge of the court. 
 
And then the new part in this one is that there will be two 
judges that are elected by the other judges of the Provincial 
Court. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Just going on a 
little bit further in the Act, I was wondering, in the area of 
temporary judges there’s a list of names of people that you can 
choose temporary judges for, and I think the general population 
might be a little confused to as why, to begin with, you might 
need temporary judges, and why of course the people on that 
list would be there and who would make those final decisions. I 
think it might be important just for you to outline a little bit 
about that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, there are situations 
where there are judges who are ill or not available in a certain 
location when needed. The chief judge of the Provincial Court 
has a list of people who meet these qualifications who he uses 
when he requires a temporary judge. Practically it can’t be a 
practising lawyer, it has to be somebody who has quit 
practising. Quite often it’s a retired judge who comes back and 
helps out on a short-term basis. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. In the area of, 
usually retired judges, I had a question actually posed to me 
today by a constituent and that question was along the lines of: 
how old does a judge get to be before they retire? And how long 
after they’ve been retired are they allowed to be appointed to do 
special duties for government? There are areas of course — 
we’ve all heard about Judge Estey doing the thing for the grain 
thing — and of course there are many examples where retired 
judges are brought back to look at different problems. 
 
So the questions of course are — I guess just to put it bluntly — 
at what point do you determine that a man is no longer 
competent to make decisions? Or who determines if a fellow’s 
just getting a little too old to be able to make the decisions that 
have to be made in a sound and rational basis, or perhaps have 

entered their second childhood, or whatever. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well under this Act the retirement age is 
65 with the ability each year to — up until age 70 — to ask to 
be returned to the roster. And so effectively it’s age 70, but 
many people will decide to retire at age 65. 
 
Your other question around the whole issue of, at what point is 
a person no longer held to be in sort of capacity to do judicial 
work. Practically, the chief judge that ministers the court and 
selects those retired judges or others as his temporary judges, 
and then he would make that decision. But if there’s any 
question about his decision, the matter would go to the 
provincial Judicial Council, where that group of people that I 
described before would take a look at this and make a decision. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, sir. I think I understand how the 
process is working. But it seems to me that there’s a bit of gap 
in the process. And I’m sure that you will identify how that gap 
can be filled. 
 
In terms of identifying someone who no longer is making 
intelligent decisions . . . I have to say to you that I've known 
people at 65, 66 years of age who have suffered the beginnings 
of Alzheimer’s disease, for example, or many other kinds of 
debilitating disorders that would render one possibly into a 
condition where they wouldn’t answer to society in the way that 
we normally would expect that they would do that. 
 
So how are those things identified? And if an individual or a 
group of individuals thought that someone were not up to snuff 
any more — you know, to put it back into laymen’s terms — 
how would they go about identifying that and getting people to 
act on it or to have some checking done? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, the whole process 
around the provincial Judicial Council allows for the public to 
make their concerns known to that council. And practically if 
you look at section 62 you’ll see that the council can make an 
order. And it says: 
 

62(1) Where the council determines that the conduct of a 
judge does not constitute misconduct, or establish 
incapacity, the council may make an order dismissing the 
complaint. 

 
But if you go on, they can then, if there’s misconduct or 
incapacity — which is your question — at any age, a judge can 
be removed from the job. So if there’s somebody that’s age 40 
that is a judge but there’s a problem with their capacity to do 
the job, and the public has a concern, then there is a process for 
the removal of that judge. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Minister. So the old saying that 
once you’re a judge, you’re a judge for life no matter what, 
really isn’t exactly right. There are some provisions in the 
system to provide people with safety. 
 
And I think that’s important that you brought that out because a 
lot of the people that I talk to think that once you’re appointed 
as a judge you can go absolutely crazy, and you’re going to be a 
judge for ever anyway. And that simply isn’t true, and I’m glad 
to find that out for sure. Because I kind of thought maybe it was 



1360 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 1998 

that way myself. Who knows? Some of the judges we see some 
days we’re not too sure about. 
 
In the area of pensions, I have a question, Minister. I’m sure 
that the judges have looked this over pretty closely and have 
probably fended for themselves. But the question that came to 
my mind in here is . . . there is a pension process provided. It’s 
provided for judges, for their spouses, for their children, and the 
whole process seems to be laid out in here. 
 
Do judges then qualify for independent RRSPs (registered 
retirement savings plan) if they do conduct personal businesses 
or if their families conduct personal businesses? Or are they not 
allowed to participate in that process in society? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, there may be situations 
where people who have contributed to RRSPs before they’re 
appointed as a judge would have RRSPs, but practically with 
the salaries that are paid to the judges, I don’t think there would 
be any capacity for them to contribute to RRSPs once they’re 
appointed as a judge. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Well Minister, I guess I should have 
expanded on my train of thought which basically is that, if a 
spouse or even the judge himself, were to qualify for an RRSP 
and if it’s a self-directed RRSP and he puts it into a mutual 
fund, he then has a vested interest in some of the things that go 
on in society, and there could develop a conflict of interest. 
How is that short circuited or taken care of? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Practically the judges themselves will 
often disqualify themselves if they find that they’re in a 
situation where they have to make a ruling about something that 
they are tied into, or that they know about, that relates to them 
personally. And practically if they don’t do that and you know 
that as counsel in a particular case, then you can raise it and 
have the matter dealt with at that time. 
 
But practically it’s not usually a problem at all. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Minister, but of course the 
normal things wouldn’t be the ones that would likely show up 
as problems when you’ve done as much research to develop a 
piece of legislation, so it most likely would be the unusual 
situation that could crop up that we would hope would have 
safeguards built into the system to protect society. 
 
And the fact that you do have the mechanism for those things to 
be rectified is important for society to know. Again I just will 
repeat that a lot of people have the idea that judges can pretty 
well get away with whatever they want to do, and the reality is 
that they can’t. They’re very, I think, very regulated people, and 
their lives are not really their own for that period of time. 
 
I have one other question going back to remuneration on judges 
that are appointed. For example, if a retired judge is appointed 
to work on a particular case for government or something like 
that, how is that person paid or on what schedule? Is there a 
schedule? Does that fall under this Act, or would it be some 
other Act? Or how would that person be treated? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — It doesn’t fall under this Act. Effectively 
it’s dealt with on a negotiations basis each time a situation 

arises. So practically there may be situations where the judge is 
just paid expenses. Other times he may be paid some kind of an 
honorarium. But it’s negotiated each time. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — So then it would be paid, Mr. Deputy Chair, 
by whoever the department was that decided they needed a 
service of this kind, and they wouldn’t go onto this list that’s 
mentioned in this legislation then? I’ll let you respond to that, 
and then I have another question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The answer to that question is yes. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Very good. We’ve got that straightened out. 
 
One last item that I wanted to talk to you about was the 
immunity from liability. Could you explain to me — because 
I’m probably the only one that doesn’t understand this — who 
is immune and what the liability, of course, is that they are 
immune from? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, the member’s referring 
to section 63, and (1) of that section refers to actions by a judge 
or the justice of the peace. And they’re immune from liability 
provided whatever they do is not an act or omission that’s done 
maliciously without reasonable cause. 
 
And then part (2) of that same section 63 deals with “the 
council, a hearing committee or any member or officer of the 
council or hearing committee . . .” And once again it’s relating 
to acts or omissions that are done maliciously or without 
reasonable cause. So otherwise they’re protected from liability 
providing they’re doing their job in a fair and reasonable 
manner. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Mr. Chairman, Minister, I thank you for 
those answers, and I think that some of the things that I 
wondered about are now cleared up, and I think it’s a 
reasonably good Bill, and I think you should proceed with it. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 70 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I would like to thank 
my officials that are here, plus all of the other ones who aren’t 
here who have spent many hours, days, years, working on this 
particular legislation. 
 
I’d also like to thank all of the members of the Provincial Court 
and the other courts of Saskatchewan who have been of great 
assistance as we’ve developed this legislation. And I would like 
to say that having this come to this point is a very important 
thing for our justice system. 
 
And with all of that, I would like to move that we report this 
Bill without amendment. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
(2030) 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Just, with leave, to thank the minister and his 
officials for being here and giving us the opportunity to ask him 



May 25, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1361 

the questions on this. And I think, as he just explained, it is a 
substantial piece of legislation that has taken a lot of time and 
effort by various people, and we thank them for that. 
 

Bill No. 56 — The Municipal Revenue Sharing 
Amendment Act, 1998 

 
The Deputy Chair: — Before I call clause 1, I’ll invite the 
minister to introduce her officials. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 
I’m pleased to introduce my officials here to assist with 
explanations and questions tonight. On my right is John 
Edwards, the executive director of the policy and program 
review and development in the Department of Municipal 
Government. Directly behind me is Grete Nybraten, the senior 
policy analyst. And to her right is Doug Morcom, the manager 
of the grants and transfer programs. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Deputy Chairman, and I’d like to 
welcome the minister and her officials here this evening. I guess 
the first question is to find out exactly what Bill 56 is all about. 
This essentially implements the changes in funding levels 
announced in the budget. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, that is correct. It gives 
effect to the changes that were announced in the budget. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. This 
change in the budget then if I’m correct, was an increase of $3 
million. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, the $3 million increase 
affected the size of the revenue-sharing pool for rural municipal 
governments. In the urban revenue-sharing pool there was no 
change. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Okay, dealing with funding then. How much 
has funding for municipalities gone down since 1991? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, I have a chart here that 
outlines some changes between ’90-91 and the current fiscal 
year that we’re considering now. For urban municipalities the 
straight revenue-sharing grants were 67 million in ’90-91, and 
26.9 million in ’97-98. The rural revenue sharing grants in the 
previous year, related to the member’s question, is 46.9. This 
year it’s 26.2. 
 
Of course during the interval there have also been some 
substantial contributions to the Canada-Saskatchewan 
infrastructure programs that have not been included here. And 
another change that occurred over the last couple of years was 
the treasury, the provincial treasury, the general operating 
revenue fund, took over responsibility for health, hospital, and 
social assistance levies that previously were collected by 
municipalities from their ratepayers and remitted to the 
provincial government. So there’s been some other relief to 
urban and rural ratepayers which mitigates the drop in the size 
of the pool. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. The next question, Mr. Deputy 

Chairman, then is the levies that the minister spoke of, that she 
says have been now picked up and the municipalities are no 
longer responsible for — what is the total value of the levies 
that you just listed? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, the total amount of the 
value of those levies would be approximately 17 . . . I believe 
it’s $17.6 million in total. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. So if we added together the 
funding that took place in ’91, added the levies on to there, and 
this increase of 3 million, how much more are RMs (rural 
municipality) getting today than they were back in ’91? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, it’s quite clear and 
acknowledged that they are receiving less than they were in 
1991. And we have spoken to them in the terms of, there are 
changes in the transportation system, which is under transition. 
It’s not the time to be investing in the transportation 
infrastructure when it’s in a state of flux. And municipalities 
will admit that if they had had a continuing level budget since, 
say, 10 years ago, that they would likely have ended up 
investing it in roads that led to elevators, for instance, which are 
no longer there. 
 
So I think we have to stand ready to support them as the 
transportation system evolves and the transportation councils 
identify some priorities. In the meantime, we acknowledge that 
municipalities have contributed a great deal towards the 
balancing of the provincial budget and towards the maintaining 
of the highest quality possible of infrastructure during this 
transition period, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. Well, Mr. Chairman, this is 
rather interesting. If I followed that bit of logic correctly, it 
seemed to go something like this. It sure is good that the 
government cut back funds to municipalities so they didn’t 
build roads to elevators that now no longer exist. And so my 
question, Mr. Deputy Chairman, is how many elevators will 
have to be left in Saskatchewan before this government decides 
that now is the day to step in and help fund some of those roads 
that RMs are responsible for. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, in the new, if you like, 
era of provincial government discovering fiscal responsibility, 
of which Saskatchewan led the way, it has been acknowledged 
that transfers to levels of government that have the capacity to 
raise, on their own, revenue — being school boards and local 
governments — that in . . . not just in Saskatchewan but in 
Canada generally, that there have been cut-backs to 
municipalities. 
 
And in fact I saw a headline the other day where Premier Klein 
was acknowledging that the Alberta municipalities have been 
neglected. And so we’re saying that we appreciate what 
municipalities have done to contribute to the whole aura of 
fiscal responsibility at all levels in the province, and that 
certainly we hope to work with them in the future as we make 
an economic recovery, to help make contributions as we did 
with the Canada-Saskatchewan infrastructure program, to the 
renewal and maintenance of the infrastructure that’s so 
important to the economy of this province. 
 



1362 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 1998 

Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. Well, Mr. Deputy Chairman, I 
think where that answer went — if I followed that one, and it 
was a little more difficult to sort of follow its machinations than 
the other one was — that there’s a thanks that the RMs are now 
raising funds on their own. They have the ability to do that and 
they’ll have to continue to do that. And I didn’t hear any 
commitment, Mr. Deputy Chairman, that we were going to be 
getting any help for roads in the future. 
 
And this government also apparently has no plans for knowing 
to what level the number of elevators will have to change before 
it decides there is a need there to get involved in that situation 
as well. I hope most farmers out on the fields this evening are 
not watching this on television because they’d be rather 
disappointed, I’m afraid. 
 
Next question I have, Mr. Deputy Chairman, is do you have a 
breakdown regarding how each municipality should expect . . . 
or how much they should expect to get from this extra $3 
million that’s coming in this year? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Well, Mr. Chairman, there is a 
formula which gives some weight to equalization — in other 
words, recognizes municipalities with low assessments and 
gives them more through equalization because they don’t have 
an ability to raise money on their own. 
 
But what we did do that I think is progressive for municipalities 
is there were some old formulas that existed for a long time that 
gave municipalities assistance on a percentage basis for 
construction of roads, of certain classes of roads. And what 
we’ve done this year is we’ve reserved out of the 23.7 million 
— which represents an increase of 14 per cent over last year, 
Mr. Chairman, to rural roads — we’ve identified for the heavy 
haul, a high-volume road program, one point seven five million 
six; for bridges, point eight million six; and for traffic counts, 
100,000. 
 
And the balance of the money, rather than being linked to the 
class of road or the kind of construction, is given to 
municipalities unconditionally so that now they no longer have 
to construct new roads or reconstruct or add to the network in 
order to access the money.  
 
They get it unconditionally, and they can use it for maintenance 
or construction or in any way that they see fit within their own 
jurisdiction. 
 
So while it is more money to each municipality, there’s also 
that additional flexibility given to them on how they can spend 
the funds. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. How many extra kilometres of 
roads . . . and I guess that’s the key thing in rural Saskatchewan. 
The estimate will be built because of the change in funding, and 
do you consider it adequate? And if you don’t, what amount of 
funding would you consider adequate for the province right 
now for the needs of the province? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I think perhaps 
the member opposite has missed the gist of the remarks relating 
to unconditional funding, is that there may be no new roads 
built as a result of the increase in funding, because the money 

will be transferred to municipalities on an unconditional basis, 
where if they do not have the need to add to the network of 
roads that we already have, that they will be able to use that 
money for maintenance of existing roads. 
 
And that these decisions are entirely within the purview of 
people at the local government level, so we have no way of 
anticipating what those decisions might be. But whatever they 
are, we have faith in those locally elected people that the 
decisions they make on how to spend those unconditional funds 
will be in the best interests of their ratepayers and the people of 
the province, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And, Mr. Deputy Chairman, I 
think we’ve seen that what’s happening in our rural 
municipalities is pretty dismal. The roads that we need aren’t 
going to be happening. Knowing that the people there can 
expect . . . is that their taxes are going to increase drastically 
just to maintain some level of roads that they have now, much 
less improving them to the standards that they should be, 
keeping in mind the increased needs that are out there. 
 
That however, Mr. Deputy Chairman, takes care of the 
questions that we had on Bill No. 56 for this evening. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Madam 
Minister, welcome to you and to your ministers. I’m interested 
in some of the mathematics that you’ve been throwing around 
here. You quoted a figure of $17.6 million as the amount of 
monies that the government is picking up for municipalities in 
regard to health and treasury items, and so that gives you a 
chance to get back to where we’re at with the numbers. 
 
Is that reference to the 2 per cent tax that used to be on health 
districts for rural municipalities, or does that also include a 
segment from urban municipalities? 
 
(2045) 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, it wasn’t 2 per 
cent. It’s been awhile since the member opposite was a reeve of 
a rural municipality himself, but he will recognize that it was 2 
mills where there was a union hospital. And then there was a 
social assistance levy and a public health levy which was less 
onerous in rural municipalities, but affected the cities of Regina 
and Saskatoon substantially, and that burden totalling those 
three levies — $17.6 million province-wide — has for the last 
two years been picked up by the treasury. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Well good. I just wanted to establish that in 
fact it was partly paid by urban as well as rural so that people 
will understand that. And the 2 mill process, of course, was one 
that was no longer going to work so we’re glad to see that part 
gone and that you did listen in our way. 
 
However the mathematics still leaves us wondering a bit 
because of course, now we have a situation where we have 43.4 
millions of dollars that you have deducted from the two sources 
of municipalities — which is rural and urban. You’ve picked up 
17 but you took away 43 million more between 1991 and 1998 
and that leaves municipalities with a very hefty portion of 
cut-back in relationship to anything else in this province that 
I’ve heard. Can you show me any example where anybody else 



May 25, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1363 

has taken that kind of a cut-back in our province? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Well, Mr. Chairman, it’s always an 
exercise where you need to find a balance and there are many 
other factors that we could cite. For instance this year, in this 
year’s budget, we committed to pick up over $4 million of 
RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) policing costs on 
behalf of rural municipalities and small urbans under 500, 
which reduces the cost for larger municipalities. 
 
We’ve put in substantial amounts, Mr. Chairman, into the 
Canada-Saskatchewan infrastructure program — $11 million 
last year of a provincial contribution that went directly into 
municipal infrastructure, at their discretion as to the project. 
 
We removed the E&H (education and health) tax from fire 
trucks which municipalities buy. 
 
We’ve taken a number of other measures, not the least of 
which, Mr. Chairman, is the reductions in the provincial sales 
tax which affect all purchases of municipalities. And 
municipalities, being service-oriented to their people, are very 
substantial buyers of durable goods and services that are subject 
to that tax. 
 
So all of those represent savings to urban and rural 
municipalities, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. So, Madam 
Minister, what would this saving amount to altogether? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Well, Mr. Chairman, it’s really hard to 
quantify exactly how much it is in each and every case because 
there have been adjustments in the workers’ compensation 
premiums which municipalities pay on behalf of their 
employers. That depends on the circumstances. There have been 
reductions in the provincial sales tax to the tune of 2 per cent, 
and again that depends upon the size of the municipality and the 
nature of their purchases. 
 
But just suffice it to say that I think that municipalities, rural 
and urban, have done a very good job of maintaining the level 
of services to their ratepayers, increasing their mill rates very 
minimally, and keeping within the cost-price indexes in terms 
of the increases they pass along. They’ve done an admirable 
job, Mr. Chairman. 
 
And as our economy continues to flourish and as the finances of 
the province recover, we hope to be there to assist them further 
in providing services to their people and maintaining and 
developing their infrastructure. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, Madam 
Minister, that’s a really nice political speech, and I’m sure it’ll 
fly well in the next election wherever you campaign. But the 
truth of the matter is that you have cut back municipalities in 
this province, both urban and rural, more than you have cut 
back anybody else. Rural people have paid the price for 
balancing the budget of this government more than anybody 
else in the province has. They’ve more than paid their share. 
 
The other thing is that in paying that they have — and I’ll give 
them credit as you did — they have maintained a road structure 

that makes the highway system an embarrassment. Because 
even though you have cut back the rural people more than 
anybody else, and even though they’ve bit the bullet harder than 
anybody else, they have still managed to keep their road 
structure in pretty good shape. Now that isn’t true in every case, 
I know . . . but reasonably good compared to our highways. 
 
And I could take you for a little, short jaunt down the road, and 
show you that pretty quickly. 
 
Madam Minister, I take exception though to your comment that 
— in your earlier remarks to the other member — that it was a 
good thing, and that municipalities would agree with you that it 
was a good thing, that you cut them back, and that they didn’t 
have all that extra money to spend on roads because they’d have 
been too dumb to know enough which roads to build. And I 
take serious exception to that. 
 
Even though the transportation system is changing, even though 
there are some elevators built in different spots than there were 
before, the reality is that they’re not in very significantly 
different spots than there were elevators before. And it was 
distinctly predictable where those elevators were going to be 
going over the last 10 years. 
 
And there’s nobody in rural Saskatchewan that was too dumb to 
know where those elevators were going to end up. And there’s 
nobody in the country that’s too dumb to be on a municipal 
council to know where to spend their money on roads. Because 
they know how to spend their money, and they know how to 
decide which ones are the most important. And not all roads 
lead to elevators, believe me. Some of them lead to church, and 
some of them lead to the grocery store, and some of those 
things haven’t changed. 
 
So I take serious exception to your suggestion that those people 
are too dumb to know where to spend the money if you give it 
to them. In fact, I think that if you took some of the reeves and 
councillors out of this province, put them in charge of your 
Highway department, you’d all be better off. But that’s just a 
personal comment that I’ll throw in for you. 
 
I want to talk to you, Minister, about this Bill spending $3 
million more. And I wonder if that $3 million includes any 
money for grants that will be paid in lieu of taxes with regards 
to the treaty land entitlement settlements that are going on in the 
province today. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — The answer to the member’s latter 
question about whether any of that money will go to treaty land 
entitlements is, no. Those funds come from a separate fund, and 
a different department, and have nothing to do with the 
Department of Municipal Government. And the transfers 
identified in the estimates for transfers to municipalities go all 
directly 100 per cent to municipalities. 
 
But I do take exception, Mr. Chairman, having been a former 
reeve of a municipality myself, as the member opposite asking 
the questions I know was, when he says that rural . . . that local 
governments lack intelligence — his words are dumb — and I 
never said that. And I am affronted that he would insult all 
those local government representatives out there, as well as 
himself and myself. 



1364 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 1998 

I was not referring to them not knowing what roads to build, but 
saying that nobody would’ve known because the elevator 
companies don’t tell for competitive reasons what sites they’re 
going to choose until after they’re announced. And nobody 
knows which branch lines that the federal government is going 
to allow the railways to abandon. 
 
So it has nothing to do with intelligence or not knowing or not 
being able to be intelligent enough to figure something out. It 
has to do with the competitive atmosphere that people find 
themselves in, where even the most intelligent people wouldn’t 
have a clue how to figure out what the motives are in the minds 
of the marketplace. 
 
And I’d further like to say that if we hadn’t inherited a $15 
million debt and if we weren’t paying $2 million a day still on 
that, we would have never had to cut back municipalities or 
anybody else, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Touché, Madam 
Minister. The reality of what you say I can respect. However I 
would suggest to you that the way you phrased your answer 
before led one to believe that you were suggesting that people 
didn’t know what they were doing out in the country, and I’m 
glad you cleared that up because if they had read Hansard they 
would have been pretty sure that you were suggesting they were 
dumb. And now that you’ve cleared that up I’m sure they’ll all 
feel a lot better bumping through their roads as they go along. 
 
In this changes to this Act, in terms of the monies that you’re 
going to spend, are any of those monies dedicated towards the 
changes that you were anticipating in communities like Corman 
Park where one of the villages has recently decided to ask to be 
disbanded as a village because they don’t like the SAMA 
(Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency) 
arrangements that are causing their extra taxation. Were you 
anticipating that type of situation, and do any of these monies 
go to cover up for that anticipation? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, the matter that the 
member opposite refers to is completely unrelated to 
revenue-sharing grants of any kind. 
 
And I’d just like to correct him. It’s not a village that’s talking 
about or petitioning to change their status. It’s hamlets within a 
rural municipality, and the clause that he refers to has not to do 
with SAMA but in the exemptions in The Rural Municipality 
Act being 331(1)(q) which is being studied at the moment. 
 
And that’s a local situation. There would be . . . if there were 
those changes there would be adjustments in the assessment in 
taxes. But those are entirely local decisions and have no 
bearing, Mr. Chairman, on revenue sharing. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, Madam 
Minister, I’m glad to hear that none of this money is going to 
cover up for that particular situation. 
 
But you did raise a question wherein I think you gave the wrong 
answer. Because, in fact I watched the TV show the other night 
that you yourself were on, and they explained that the situation 
had been caused by the decision of SAMA to increase taxation. 
And the hamlet in question of course was finding itself being 

taxed on both property and on homes. And as a result of that 
additional taxation caused by the changes in SAMA, they have 
decided now to ask to be disbanded so that they won’t be a 
hamlet. 
 
So I think that you misled folks in your statement and would 
want an opportunity to correct that; otherwise you’d have to 
change the TV program I watched a couple of nights ago. So 
I’ll let you straighten that out for yourself before we go on. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, one more time. This 
provision has nothing to do with SAMA. This is a . . . not 
directly. This is a provision of The Rural Municipal Act in 
1989, an amendment that was made, where a clause was added 
in the section 331(1)(q). And this . . . well I can only . . . I don’t 
want to ascribe motives to the previous administration, but I 
think it was intended to perpetuate the relief from taxation on 
the farm dwellings in the province. 
 
And by some inadvertent wording since 1989, this provision 
was extended to rural residences that were non-farm if they 
were not in hamlets. So it gets to be a bit complex, but that is 
the reason that some of the hamlets are considering dissolution. 
Because if they are in a rural municipality proper and not part of 
a hamlet, they will be able to enjoy the exemption that 
331(1)(q) at the moment gives them, although that clause is 
under review. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, 
does the $3 million represented in this Bill represent any money 
that would go to offsetting the loss in education tax that would 
result if all of the hamlets in the province were to disband? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, the answer is no. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Well where would it come from? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, the money goes to 
equalization. Equalization is part of the distribution formula. It 
has nothing to do whatsoever with the education funding which 
comes to school divisions as part of the foundation grant for 
education purposes from the province. The two are entirely 
separate. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Well the question, Madam Minister, was this 
to compensate for the loss of education tax to the taxation 
system? Was there ever a case in which you might subsidize the 
education tax that are lost? For example, when you pay taxes in 
lieu on treaty lands, do you also pay the education tax? 
 
(2100) 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, those monies, the 
TLEs (treaty land entitlements), do not come from municipal 
revenue-sharing or from the foundation grant. They’re totally 
separate pools of money. The revenue-sharing, the issue under 
discussion here in this legislation, is money transferred directly 
to rural municipalities and urban municipalities. The funding 
formula for education to school divisions that those 
municipalities are in is a totally different issue. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, 
I am very happy to see that the municipalities in this province 



May 25, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1365 

are going to get $3 million more to spend. I’m happy that they 
don’t have to have conditional grants attached to a lot of their 
spending. Those things are good. The fact that you have taken 
$40 million out of the municipal system over the past eight 
years though is unforgivable And it’s undeniable that you have 
taken more out of rural Saskatchewan than you have any other 
sector of society. And that in itself should keep every rural 
person from voting for your government in the next election. 
 
Having said that, I am glad that you’re putting 3 million back, 
and to stop this particular piece of legislation would stop at least 
that much. And we can’t do that and we have no intention of 
doing that, so we will let the Bill go ahead. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 50 — The Urban Municipality 
Amendment Act, 1984 

 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We’re dealing 
here, I believe, with the assessment system in Saskatchewan 
and I guess dealing with this particular piece of legislation 
specifically. For the record, can you tell us what, in your view, 
was wrong with the current system and how what we’re dealing 
with here will improve that. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, what we’re doing here 
is learning, if you like, from the experience of reassessment in 
1997. We’re clarifying the application of penalties with costs 
associated with tax enforcement process. We’re providing a tax 
exemption for land and buildings occupied by an Indian band 
and used for the purpose of a school and other administrative 
matters. 
 
And we’re specifically amending the assessment appeal and 
taxation provisions in that in the last cycle it was an experience 
we hadn’t had for 30 years, but we ended up making 
amendments that were retroactive to January 1 in the year of 
assessment. And in the year 1997 we are passing amendments 
as late as May, that were retroactive to January 1 when mill 
rates had already been struck. 
 
So what we’re doing here is, by moving certain provisions from 
the Act into regulations, is allowing a window for ourselves. If 
we do not have the appropriate assessment information in time 
to set the percentages of value and take those actions that are 
required to effect reassessment, that we can change the 
deadlines by regulation even though the House may not be in 
session. 
 
And so we hope that we don’t have to use that. Our purpose is 
not to delay it but to create a safety net, in the event the 
information is not timely, that we don’t get snagged in the year 
2000 with making retroactive decisions. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And as you mention, Madam 
Minister, there’s a lot to be learned from the assessment as it 

went through. I’m not sure there’s been enough time to learn all 
that needed to be learned because it was a little rough in almost 
every area of Saskatchewan. And I would hope that some of the 
things we’re dealing with here tonight will take care of some of 
the unfairnesses that existed in a previous system. 
 
And on behalf of the member from Saltcoats, who is off trying 
to save the Plains hospital, I do have a specific example right 
here and I would like to hear your comment on that. 
 
And I think looking at it, it looks like there’s a fair bit of 
unfairness here. And it comes from Kamsack, where there’s an 
individual’s property tax bill climbed from $2,900 in 1996 to 
$4,011 this year. And next year it will be $5,200. And that isn’t 
a particular mansion, Madam Minister, it’s just one of the 
houses in the area. 
 
And I guess we’re dealing with what we’ve learned from 
assessment in the past, and I’m wondering what kind of 
information we can give this individual to explain why his tax 
bill has gone from $2,900 in ’96 to about $5,200 next year? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I’m not in a 
position, certainly, to comment on individual cases. 
 
When you make an adjustment to a system that’s been 
neglected for 30 years — as reassessment was, not having taken 
place between 1965 and 1997 — that there are bound to be 
some dramatic changes in the relative values of property in a 
period like that. Our purpose now with the legislation is to 
provide for regular, short, three-year intervals for reassessment 
so that dramatic adjustments will not occur. But certainly in this 
forum, we’re not equipped to deal with individual cases. 
 
Over all assessment should be revenue neutral. Some tax bills 
will go up. Some will go down. At the end of the day, the 
municipalities should need the same amount of revenue, so it 
should be revenue neutral over all, but there will be 
adjustments. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I guess it’s 
unfortunate we haven’t had a letter from someone in Kamsack 
wondering why his tax bill is going to, you know, drop from 
5,200 to 2,900, because I would be interested to have those two 
people meet and discuss that over coffee on a Saturday 
morning. 
 
Regarding the changes in this section that deal with regional 
parks, can you basically tell us precisely what you’re doing with 
this Bill regarding regional parks, and why those kinds of 
changes are happening? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, the changes here are 
meant to provide some flexibility because, as the member 
opposite knows, there are a number of situations, in fact most 
situations where there’s a regional park, where there are several 
municipalities that are cooperating in contributing to the 
operation, the administration, the capital costs and so on. And 
this is designed to allow municipalities, other than the ones that 
the park might be located in, from having a varying role in that 
administration. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. One of the items that you 



1366 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 1998 

mentioned earlier on was making sure that you didn’t have to 
go ahead and have legislation in place that was retroactive, as 
you mentioned earlier. 
 
With regards to changes in the appeal procedures, will this just 
make it easier, and will it also shorten up the time? And I guess 
the other question I have along with the time part for making 
appeals . . . what’s the average appeal time now that that exists? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, generally speaking the 
period that’s open for the appellant to lodge an appeal is 30 
days. That represented an increase from the previous 
legislation. And I’m not sure that I understand the question 
completely — whether you’re asking for the time that’s open 
for the lodging of an appeal or whether you’re asking for the 
average time for appeals to be dealt with. 
 
And I think the average time for appeals to be dealt with, in 
spite of their new assessment procedures and so on, is not 
taking much longer than it has historically. Local boards of 
revision have dealt with most of the appeals on an expeditious 
basis. And the appeals from 1997 that are being appealed to the 
Municipal Board are some settled, and some in the process right 
now. But it’s about the normal span of time that we’ve seen 
traditionally. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. Mr. Chairman, this basically 
takes me to the end of the questions on Bill No. 50. And I 
would hope that as we work through these various items, that 
some of the difficulties we’ve seen in the assessment system in 
the past will be taken care of, and things will work on smoothly, 
and people won’t have some of the unpleasant surprises that 
they’ve had in the past. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, 
new Bill, same kettle of fish. I think in one of your earlier 
comments that you may have misspoken yourself in terms of 
interpretation. And I think we need to let you clear that up. 
 
You referred at the beginning of your statements to the fact that 
you were going to be allowing through this Bill for Indian 
bands to not be taxed on school property. Now I think the 
confusion would come there because — and you’ll correct me if 
I’m wrong here — I think that Indian bands that have schools 
on reservations don’t pay taxes now. So you would be referring 
to taxes on school band properties out of reservations or both? 
 
If you could explain to us how exactly how that’s going to 
apply? And because I don’t want to take all night, how does that 
apply then to other groups of people? And I would use the term 
Hutterites as one of reference that you could make as a 
comparison. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, the explanation is very 
straightforward in that normally property that’s used for 
educational purposes is exempt from tax in any case. 
 
But there have been some instances where a school that was 
formerly operated by a school division that was located in a 
town and off reserve is no longer in use by the school division, 
has been leased by a nearby Indian band or a nearby private 
school board, and so the municipality has said if it’s no longer 
operated by the school division we will now tax it. And so 

we’re being specific about that, that if a building is used for K 
to 12 educational purposes, no matter who the school is run by 
or where it’s located, that it will continue to be exempt. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, 
that poses the question, how big of an area of land on which a 
building that is used for education would then qualify now 
under this new Act for exemption? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, normally the 
assessment and the building permit for the building and so on, 
there’d be a legal description that accompanies that building. 
And that would be the metes and bounds that would be 
considered to be exempt. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, Madam 
Minister, the Hutterite colonies in my community have schools 
on them. Every one has their own school and they have a 
teacher that is supplied by the education system. They’re 
accredited, acknowledged by the system and by the 
government. And if this legislation applies the way you say it 
does, it seems to me that the Hutterite colony, with a school on 
a home quarter section, would now qualify to have that home 
quarter section and that school building exempt from taxation. 
Is that right? 
 
(2115) 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, the building would be 
exempt. And as the member knows, in such to the case that he 
cites, so would all the other buildings and improvements be 
exempt, being agriculturally related buildings and dwellings of 
farms. The school would come under the same situation. 
 
And there’s no intent to expand the exemption. It’s simply to 
clarify that where a building that has been formerly used as a 
school by a public school division is converted to a different 
kind of an educational institution under different management 
but still an educational institution, that it would continue to 
enjoy the same exemption as previously. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, 
though in reality would . . . No, this Act the way I see it, the 
property that the school sits on is also exempt. And right now 
while agricultural buildings are exempt, the property is not. 
That’s always been the difference that people have sort of held, 
is that if you pay on the farm land then you don’t pay on the 
farm building. 
 
So if the school is on farm land that is assessed and taxed, and 
you have this Bill in place, I’m saying to you that it seems to 
me that you have opened the door for these people to challenge 
the right to be able to be exempt on the entire home quarter. 
Now is there provision in the Bill to cover off that probability 
or possibility? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chair, if I may I’ll just briefly 
read the section — section 275 amended, section 21(1): 
 

(the) buildings or any portion of a building occupied by an 
Indian band and used for the purposes of a school, together 
with any land used in conjunction with those buildings or 
that portion of the building, where the land and buildings 



May 25, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1367 

are owned by: (i) an Indian band; (ii) a school division; or 
(iii) any person, society or organization whose lands and 
improvements are exempt from taxation pursuant to this or 
any other Act. 
 

So it’s confined to the building, the portions of a building, 
together with the land that’s underneath them. I hope that is 
sufficiently clear, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, Madam 
Minister, it’s very clear. But that is very confusing because in 
reality here you’re suggesting that only the land under the 
building . . . but in reality you know very well that any school 
that’s used in any town or community also has a playground, it 
also has properties around the school, and that brings me back 
to the first question I asked: how big of an area of land is 
included that the building sits on? And of course if you’d 
answered that in terms of a hundred feet or a thousand feet, then 
you’d have something to base your last statement on, but in fact 
I think you have left this Act with an open door. Sorry, but I 
believe that you have missed the boat on this one a little bit — 
not that I care — but you know, there it is, you blew it. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Well, Mr. Chairman, if I miss the boat 
I’m sure lucky I can swim. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 30 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 51 — The Rural Municipality 
Amendment Act, 1998 

 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. One of the things 
that Bill 51 does, it gives the municipalities more flexibility in 
setting penalties for tax arrears. And I guess I would like you to 
comment on what the rationale is for that. And I’m wondering 
if you also don’t see an accompanying danger of a real 
patchwork of tax enforcement systems, with different penalties 
in different municipalities, and if you foresee any problems in 
that area. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, this change was 
instituted as a result of a resolution from the 1997 SARM 
(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) 
convention. And we have confidence that the rationale and the 
debate that accompanied it there makes sense and that this will 
be a provision that will be widely used by municipalities. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And I’m not questioning that the 
municipalities aren’t going to be as wise as they can in it, but 
any time that you have different penalties in different 
jurisdictions it usually creates a certain amount of one, 
confusion, and sometimes a certain amount of ill will as well. 
 
There’s a part in this Act that makes it an offence to remove 
fixtures from properties in tax arrears. Is this really a general 
problem or is this just put in place to close a loophole that’s sort 
of foreseen? 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, this is a change, an 
amendment that is common to all the three Acts — northern, 
urban, and rural. And it is designed to prevent — not just 
fixtures really — but the destruction or removal of any 
improvement when property is under tax distress. And 
municipalities have asked for this for a long time, because 
sometimes there are legal proceedings, bankruptcies, that kind 
of thing, and sometimes these procedures take a fair amount of 
time. And there have been many cases where the value of the 
property has been quite eroded by the time the municipality 
actually gets to take title. And this is meant to prevent that. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. There’s a section in here, Mr. 
Chairman, that deals with fees for municipal services, and with 
penalties for those as well. And I’d like for you to explain how 
the penalties work for such things as fire protection when you 
can’t withdraw someone’s fire protection — or can you? And if 
you can’t withdraw the fire protection then the penalties are 
really relatively meaningless, correct? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, there are actually two 
aspects to this issue, really. One is of course you wouldn’t want 
to refuse, for instance, to answer a fire call because there was no 
guarantee that a service fee would be paid. So there’s provision 
in an instance like that to add any such charges after the fact to 
the taxes and make them collectible. 
 
So there are two parts. It gives the municipalities more 
flexibility in upfront charges; at the same time it gives them 
more flexibility in collecting such service charges after the fact 
and giving force to that collection. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Basically that 
takes care of the questions we have on that particular Bill. One 
of the key things that has come up, Mr. Chairman, is the 
concept of flexibility. I think by and large municipalities will 
appreciate that. And I think one of the answers that the minister 
gave is that a lot of these ideas came out of . . . from the 
organizations themselves. 
 
And to that extent, that they’re given some of the power and 
flexibility that they’re asking for, I think we basically support 
this particular Bill. And those are the questions that we have on 
this Bill. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, 
certainly only a fool would take on the whole of SARM. And 
immediately that you said that this Bill is a result of their 
requests, we all tread with a great deal of fear for making a 
mistake. However, just because they asked for it doesn’t 
necessarily mean you’re giving them what they have wanted. 
 
So in the area of these different jurisdictions having the right to 
make different assessments in penalties, do you have any limits 
on the amounts of differences that there can be? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, this has been . . . these 
provisions have been used successfully by urban municipalities 
for a long time. And this is something, a provision, an 
enablement, that rural municipalities have wanted as well. 
 
And of course in all cases, as you know, elected councils are 
accountable to the people who they serve. And of course any — 



1368 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 1998 

say for instance, fire charges — that would be collected through 
the procedures that are outlined here would have to be fair and 
reasonable and the same as other fire charges. 
 
So as you know, there are all kinds of checks and balances to 
the use of good common sense by local governments, and 
they’ve wanted this provision for some time, and I’m sure that 
they will, as I said to the member opposite before, use it wisely. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, Madam 
Minister, for the most part you’re right. Common sense will 
prevail in rural municipal circles, but there are exceptions to the 
rule even there. 
 
While you say that everybody’s going to use this fairly and 
equitably and reasonably from the municipal point of view, 
what about the human rights of the individual person out there 
who all of a sudden finds himself being penalized under this 
piece of legislation, and he thinks or she thinks that it is an 
exorbitant amount of money? What recourse do they have in a 
system where legislation provides for any amount without 
limitation of variance? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I think that we 
would want to observe what happens as a result of this new 
flexibility and authority that’s given, but I certainly think that 
we would want to, in the first instance, give municipalities the 
benefit of the doubt that they would use them wisely. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — So in other words you’re saying you don’t 
have any safeguards built into this whatsoever and that 
individual rights have not been a consideration in this 
legislation, and someone of course is going to have to be burnt 
and then individually take on the system in order to try to get 
this resolved before you’d even look at it. Is that what you said? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Well, Mr. Chairman, individual rights 
are always a consideration, and I don’t think there’s anybody 
that’s more acutely aware of that than local governments that 
are face to face with the people that they are accountable to on a 
daily basis. 
 
So I would say that we would give local councils and locally 
elected people the benefit of the doubt, and of course they 
always have their own recourse, their own appeal processes, 
legal processes, and then at the end of the day the electoral 
process if they don’t think that they’re being dealt with fairly, 
just as they do now, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 37 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
(2130) 
 

Bill No. 52 — The Northern Municipalities 
Amendment Act, 1998 

 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Just a couple of questions, Mr. Speaker. 

Could you . . . Madam Minister, welcome to your staff 
members and could you explain to us please, the proposed 
changes or the proposed amendments to the Act, please. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Well, Mr. Chairman, just briefly, the 
main points are: providing a new authority to establish the 
Northern Revenue Sharing Trust Account Management Board 
to advise the minister on allocations of northern grants and 
make recommendations. There are, similar to the other two 
municipal Acts that we’ve just considered, amendments to the 
assessment, assessment appeals, and taxation provisions, and 
penalties relating to the tax enforcement process and removal of 
fixtures or parts of improvements from property on which taxes 
are outstanding. 
 
And other miscellaneous matters respecting the administration 
of municipalities, some of which have been brought to us as a 
result of resolutions at conventions and viewpoints of 
administrators of northern municipalities, and councillors, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Could I get 
some basic information on the new authority of the Northern 
Revenue Sharing Trust Account, as to what the board make-up 
and the purpose of the new board is. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, it is proposed that the 
Northern Revenue Sharing Trust Account Management Board 
be established and that the members would be either a 
councillor, a mayor, a clerk of a northern or urban municipality, 
nominated and appointed by order in council, and that the 
functions of this board would be to make recommendations on 
the northern revenue-sharing grants and the northern capital 
grants and any proposed changes to the Act or regulations 
concerning the revenue-sharing trust account. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Would that also include, Madam Minister, 
the administration fee administered by SERM (Saskatchewan 
Environment and Resource Management) as a result of them 
taking payments as a result of the issuing of permits on land? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Well partly. Mr. Chairman, the 
Northern Revenue Sharing Trust Account is made up of taxes 
and lease fees from northern property. So we’re always 
prepared to listen to the recommendations. And this formalizes 
the process and gives it a higher profile and increases the 
authority, if you like, by making it a formal arrangement. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Exactly how much per year does the 
Northern Revenue Sharing Trust Account collect from all the 
land tax or the land fees that it is primarily responsible for? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, we don’t have the 
exact numbers with us, and of course it varies from year to year. 
I think that this year, in this fiscal year, it’s approximately one 
and a half million dollars, because there’s about 2.5 in the . . . to 
be distributed this year and 1 million of that is from the General 
Revenue Fund, so the balance would be from those sources. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — And what does SERM currently charge the 
NRSTA (Northern Revenue Sharing Trust Account) for 
administration, which primarily is just the issuing of the lease 
fees and the collection of such fees? 



May 25, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1369 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, I regret that I don’t 
have that with me, but the Northern Revenue Sharing Trust 
Account is audited annually and reports to the legislature. And 
it has been . . . the latest annual report has been tabled with our 
. . . (inaudible) . . . and the accounting that the member asks for. 
So I would refer him to that. It’s not the subject of discussion in 
the context of this legislation tonight. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. One of the 
questions that I had, dealt with the functions and the powers of 
the board, and that question was just asked by the member that 
was asking the questions previously. 
 
Dealing with the make-up of that board, the NRSTA Board, I 
have basically two questions. One is, what’s the length of time 
that people will serve on that board? And what if any is their 
remuneration for that? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, the terms by the order 
in council would be a maximum of two years to a term. And 
there is a per diem paid from the Northern Revenue Sharing 
Trust Account. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. Well, Mr. Chairman, that takes 
care of the questions that we had on that particular Bill. And I 
would like to thank the minister for the work that she has done 
throughout the last number of Bills and the discussion, and for 
her official as well for being here. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, Madam 
Minister, again I’ve been listening with interest. And when the 
member from Athabasca asked about the amounts of taxes that 
are taken in, obviously you state that you don’t have those 
tonight. And we respect the fact that you may not be able to lay 
your hands to that immediately. Would you give a commitment 
to provide that information to that member and myself. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — I would just repeat and remind the 
member that it has been provided, in that the Northern Revenue 
Sharing Trust Account fund is one which is reported and tabled 
in the legislature every year in the form of an audited statement 
of all the activities, revenue, and expenditures. So I would be 
happy to provide the member with a copy but it has been tabled 
in the legislature in this session. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you. You referred, Madam Minister, 
to the fact that this Bill, like one of the last ones for southern 
regions, changes the assessment appeal process. In what way is 
that process being changed and how will it benefit the 
individuals that want to have reassessments done? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, just briefly I’ll go over 
some of the highlights of what the amendments do, is that the 
amendments confirm that both municipalities and SAMA may 
appeal, or be party to appeals. Appellants are prevented from 
appealing the entire assessment roll rather than just property in 
which they have an interest. It permits a person to voluntarily 
withdraw an appeal. It permits an appeal to be settled without 
going to the board of revision hearing if there’s a mutual 
agreement that there’s an error in the assessment, that it’s 
defective. It applies the same notice requirements to SAMA as 
is done for owners of appeals to the Municipal Board; fixes a 
term for the board of revision appointments and provides 

remuneration for that appointment. 
 
Some of these are responding to legal decisions and some of 
them are as a result of expressions from the public or from 
administrators or councillors or conventions of municipal 
organizations. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, 
that doesn’t at all answer my question or relieve my fears that 
the system is still just as convoluted as it has been. You know 
very well from correspondence that we’ve had in the past year 
that a lot of people were denied the right to appeals on their 
assessments. And they were denied a lot of times those rights to 
appeal on the basis of having missed deadlines; that in fact we 
were able to prove people hadn’t missed and this was being 
used as a vehicle to try to circumvent people’s rights to have 
their appeals heard. 
 
And in fact I got a nice letter from a gentleman the other day, 
thanking me for helping him to overcome that particular 
problem. And he stated that after he was able to get his appeal 
in front of the appropriate authorities, they in fact fully agreed 
with him and he got everything that he wanted in terms of relief 
from the taxation burden that he felt was unfair on his 
properties. 
 
Have you in any way addressed that problem? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Well, Mr. Chairman, it sounds very 
much as if the system worked. There is an appeal process, and 
among people with common sense listening to each other and 
paying attention, that these stories will always have a happy 
ending, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Well thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank 
you, Madam Minister, but obviously some people in the SAMA 
departments and what not don’t have all that common sense that 
you keep talking about, because these are cases in reality, and I 
do have the letters on my desk in my office. 
 
So the reality is that this individual in particular that I talked 
about tonight — and there were others as well — were 
successful only after pursuing through their MLA getting the 
appeal that they should have been allowed without any 
problems to begin with. 
 
And that is a problem in your department and in the department 
of SAMA and you need to address that, and not say that people 
with common sense will listen. Because they didn’t listen. And 
the fact of the matter is that we’ve gone through this experience. 
It didn’t happen. There is no common sense. The common 
sense part has failed. Now there is no understanding, there is no 
compassion. All of this stuff is fluff that you make up to try to 
get Bills passed in a hurry here. 
 
And I have no objection to you passing your Bills in a hurry, 
but I object vehemently to you suggesting that people in your 
department have common sense or any kind of respect for 
people that try to get fair play, because we have proof positive 
that that has not happened. And it took an exorbitant amount of 
effort to get through those bridges and pitfalls that were thrown 
in front of people. 
 



1370 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 1998 

And so, Madam Minister, I’ve asked you very simply, have you 
addressed that question in this legislation? And so far I hear the 
answer as being no. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, we have an appeal . . . 
or a review process going on right now. And if the member 
opposite has some constructive suggestions that he would like 
to pass on, I’m sure that the committee would welcome any 
suggestions that he might have to make. 
 
I just have to add briefly that I made a mistake on the term of 
the officers of the Northern Revenue Sharing Trust Account. 
It’s three years, not two years. 
 
(2145) 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 28 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The Chair: — If the minister would report the Bill without 
amendments, please. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, before I do that I’d like 
to thank the members opposite for their questions and I’d like to 
thank the officials from the department for their assistance. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 32 — The Wildlife Amendment Act, 1998 
 
The Chair: — I would ask the minister to introduce his 
officials before we start. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have with me 
the deputy minister, Stuart Kramer, and director of fish and 
wildlife, Dennis Sherratt. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman of committee. 
I’d like to welcome the minister and his officials here this 
evening and hopefully you’ll have all the answers and we can 
all go away happy. 
 
Mr. Minister, one of the things this particular Bill is doing is 
raising the fines for offences involved with The Wildlife Act. 
You’re raising it up to $100,000 and in some cases that’s 
probably a good idea. In others I would have some concerns 
that perhaps you’re rushing too far too quickly in that area. 
 
I wonder if you could outline for us what offences would fall 
into that $100,000 range. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Well thank you, Mr. Chairman. Our 
wildlife and natural resources are very important and in raising 
the fees to $100,000 we are in line with our own Fisheries Act 
which has fees or penalties ranging up to $100,000. Also the 
neighbouring province’s offences with regards to fish and 
wildlife are in the neighbourhood of $100,000 as well. 
 
Basically this would be the more severe, the more organized 
crime — poaching, trafficking in wildlife — which is certainly 

beyond the person going out to the back 40 and shooting a deer 
for their own use. This is trafficking, poaching, and such like — 
the severe crimes. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
where will these offences be laid out that would qualify or be 
subject to the $100,000 penalty? You say poaching, trafficking 
in wildlife parts, etc. What does the et cetera include? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — The et cetera might include trafficking and 
poaching in rare and endangered species. And obviously the 
penalty that is enforced, levied, will be at the discretion of the 
judge and the courts when they weigh all of the evidence. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Would this be 
on a first offence or on subsequent offences after a person has 
been charged and convicted? 
 
How exactly do you see this working? If someone has a deer 
head and they’re shipping it illegally across one of our borders 
in any direction, would that be tantamount to exporting of 
animal parts and therefore qualify for the $100,000 fine? How 
do you see this working? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Well obviously the maximum fine would 
only be levied in very exceptional circumstances. Again that 
would be at the discretion of the judge and the courts. But 
probably a first offence if somebody forgot to get a permit, 
certainly they would not be penalized to that extent. But again, 
if there was organized crime and trafficking and many people 
involved, the fines could amount to $100,000. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well some of 
the complaints that have been raised in the past involving such 
things as trafficking or illegal taking of game — animal parts — 
part of that equation has also included outfitters that are 
operating illegally. Will this fine of $100,000 also be applicable 
to operations that are running illegal outfitting operations, 
illegal guiding operations for big game, for birds, for fish, for 
any of our wildlife resources? Will these also apply in that area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — The whole purpose of this Act, Mr. 
Chairman, is to point out the value of our wildlife — our birds, 
animals, and such like. And with many species declining in 
numbers — more and more endangered species — we want to 
send a message to the public that we will not tolerate crimes, 
especially organized crimes for profit, trafficking in wildlife. 
And if outfitting or whatever the case might be, we want to send 
a clear message that our wildlife is important and will not be . . . 
offences involving wildlife will simply not be tolerated. And 
obviously the courts and the judges decide the levies of the 
fines. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. What are you 
doing though to apprehend the illegal outfitting operations that 
are taking place? I’m sure that most of us have rumours of 
them. We may even have information or knowledge that some 
of them are taking place, with difficulty in proving it at times, 
but what is the department doing to enforce those regulations 
and therefore have the opportunity to levy these kind of fines? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — But first of all, Mr. Chairman, if somebody 
is aware of someone else breaking the law with regards to fish 



May 25, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1371 

and wildlife and natural resources, we urge them to call our tip 
line. It’s a turn-in-poacher line which you do not have to leave 
your name, and we would appreciate the call, and we do get 
hundreds of calls each year. 
 
And other ways that we combat crime include undercover 
operations, which does take a lot of manpower, a lot of time, so 
a little slap-on-the-wrist fee penalty would certainly not 
compensate for the efforts put into breaking into some of these 
criminal activities. So that was another reason we need a 
substantial fine to make the enforcement of the law more 
reasonable as well. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. One of the 
issues that has been of notice in the last six months to a year has 
been the issue of night hunting. What is the fine range 
for someone who is illegally hunting at night or illegally 
spotlighting animals at night? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — For night-hunting offences which is now 
illegal here in Saskatchewan — with hunting policed at night — 
with the use of artificial lights, the minimum fine is $1,000. 
And again it can be all the way up to $100,000 but that again it 
would depend on the judge and the courts. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — One of the sections of this particular Act 
allows the government to dispose of seized game parts or meat 
from such. What manner does the department use to dispose of 
these particular items — let’s say you have two different 
examples: a gallbladder from a bear and a hindquarter of a 
moose. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — The meat example, Mr. Chairman, that was 
used, the meat would be donated to either a local food bank or 
some charitable group which is raising money for the 
community such as perhaps a Boy Scouts banquet. Things like 
the bear gall bladder would be retained in custody for further 
evidence and simply would not be released back into the public. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I was just 
checking to make sure that you weren’t using them for 
whatever purposes some people want them for. I’m not sure that 
you need them for that purposes, but I was just checking to 
make sure you didn’t have . . . 
 
I would like to thank the minister and his officials for coming 
in. I think my other questions can be dealt with under SERM. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 10 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 11 - The Trustee Amendment Act, 1998 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I’ll invite the Minister of Justice to 
introduce his official. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Yes, I’m pleased to have with me this 
evening Madeleine Robertson from Saskatchewan Justice. 
 
Clause 1 

Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I believe most 
of us understand fairly well what this particular piece of 
legislation is attempting to accomplish — giving trustees a little 
more latitude — especially in times when interest rates are such 
as they are, there’s need to look a little further abroad for better 
investments. 
 
However, anytime you look for better investments you also put 
things a bit more at risk. And I’m . . . just like to have a little bit 
of assurances how this Bill manages to take . . . give the 
opportunity for the flexibility to look for some other 
opportunities and balance that off with not putting money at 
risk. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The simple answer to that is, that the 
trustees have to act prudently and they have to follow the 
criteria that are set out in the Act. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. I guess 
one of the questions that comes up is, I think, traditionally in 
the way the previous legislation was set up, it was so structured 
that I doubt if trustees ever were found to be negligent in what 
they were doing. This gives them a lot more latitude. What 
happens to trustees that could be found negligent in how they 
take care of the money that they’re trustees of? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Basically trustees can still be sued if they 
don’t act prudently and follow the criteria. 
 
(2200) 
 
Mr. Heppner: — On trusts in which government is involved, 
and I think some examples would be the Meewasin Valley 
Authority, Wascana Centre Authority, Municipal Board, is 
there any possibility that government could be held, or left 
holding the bag for funding if trust investments are lost in those 
situations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think practically most of those kinds of 
trust funds would be managed by separate authorities and 
wouldn’t end up with some of the questions that arise here. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And, Mr. Deputy Chairman, as 
we mentioned just a little earlier on that, one of the reasons for 
the changes is to give the trust the opportunity for better 
investment situations than they may be facing at present. 
 
And I’m wondering are there are any trusts that are currently 
facing or experiencing financial difficulties because their 
investments are as restricted as they have been? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well I think practically there are some 
situations where, for example in testamentary trusts, where a 
family inherits a business and they have to dispose of the 
business because it wouldn’t qualify as an investment that could 
stay in the trust. And so there are quite a number of hardships 
that way. 
 
And so practically the people who have requested this 
legislation are people who have been hamstrung by the present 
legislation. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. Deputy Chairman, as we talked 



1372 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 1998 

about earlier on, this gives the opportunity for trustees to look 
for better investment situations than previous. 
 
And I’m wondering approximately how much better rate of 
return can trusts expect under this situation? Because I would 
imagine that as you loosen the situation you took into 
consideration how much of an advantage it would be to, you 
know, stretch the situation somewhat. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well I think the answer to that is it really 
depends on the situation at the time that they’re required to 
make their investment decisions. And so at this time there may 
be some more beneficial ways to invest money than, for 
example, in a savings account or the strict list that’s under the 
present Act. 
 
But practically it requires a prudent decision and a decision 
made in the circumstances at the time. And so it’s not very easy 
to answer that question with an exact number. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. Mr. Deputy Chairman, that 
basically concludes the questions we have on this one. I think 
that the direction and the intent is something we support. And 
we’ll be watching fairly closely to make sure that, as some of 
the restrictions have been loosened, that we haven’t put at risk 
some of the trust funds that are out there. 
 
And I would also like to thank you for this opportunity to go 
through this piece of legislation, and to your official as well. 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Minister, when 
you loosen up the ability for people to play with other folks’ 
money there’s always a risk, as the other members have pointed 
out here. So I pose to you questions — supposing someone 
handling a trust decides to buy shares in a stock market in a 
company similar to Bre-X, and the bottom falls out of it, and 
the money is lost. Is anybody responsible, or do you have any 
safeguards for that type of eventuality? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well I think you have the same kinds of 
protections that you do now, Mr. Deputy Chair. And basically 
in the section 3, where it sets out the investment, there are quite 
a number of very clear criteria that you would have to use if 
you’re investing other people’s money. 
 
And those criteria set out quite clearly — that you have to be 
prudent and that you have to be careful in what you’re doing. 
And if you don’t, then you’re subject to being sued, and you 
follow the similar remedies that we have now. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Well thank you, Mr. Chairman. Minister, I’m 
quite . . . that all the people in St. Paul that lost their shirts 
thought they were being very prudent when they bought shares 
in Bre-X. So the word “being prudent” doesn’t protect anybody 
from anything, really does it? 
 
The other question I have is — do family trusts fall in this 
category? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Yes. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 

Clauses 2 to 18 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Yes, I’d like to thank my official who is 
here and other officials who’ve worked on this legislation, and 
I’d like to also thank the opposition members for their 
questions, and I would like to move this Bill be recommended 
without amendment. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 33  The Provincial Court Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 56 — The Municipal Revenue Sharing 
Amendment Act, 1998 

 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the Bill be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 50 — The Urban Municipality 
Amendment Act, 1998 

 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Speaker, I move this Bill be now 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 51 — The Rural Municipality 
Amendment Act, 1998 

 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 52 — The Northern Municipalities 
Amendment Act, 1998 

 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 32 — The Wildlife Amendment Act, 1998 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 



May 25, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1373 

Bill No. 11 — The Trustee Amendment Act, 1998 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
(2215) 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Environment and Resource Management 

Vote 26 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I invite the minister to introduce his 
officials. Before I do that, I just want to remind committee 
members that the minister and his officials were here last on 
April 20.  
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair, I have with 
me Stuart Kramer, the deputy minister; Dave Phillips, assistant 
deputy minister; Dennis Sherratt, director of fish and wildlife 
branch; and Shelly Vandermey, executive director of corporate 
services. 
 
Subvote (ER01) 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman of 
committees. I’d like to welcome the minister and his officials 
here again this evening. The last time we met, April 20, I asked 
you at that time about the global questions. Do you have them 
available? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. In response 
to the hon. member’s question, we are working to provide a 
very thorough and diligent reply to the questions, and we assure 
you that the information will be coming. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’d just like to 
let you know that my tax cheque is also in that same mail so 
your salary may very well be in jeopardy. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, we do need those estimates to determine . . . 
not estimates, sorry, those global questions rather than simply 
going through all of this one question at a time in the House. 
We are certainly prepared to do that if we don’t receive the 
global questions although we hope that won’t be necessary. So 
if you could please expedite those responses before you return 
again on another day in a couple of weeks or a month or so, 
whenever the next time will be, because those responses are 
very important, Mr. Minister. 
 
I have quite a number of questions here I would like to ask you. 
I’m wondering if you could outline for us what the new goals, 
programs, and legislation, or regulations are for your 
department that you’re working on for this coming year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. We are just 
in the process of course of beginning legislation and regulation 
activities for the coming year but certainly there’ll be ongoing 
efforts around the forestry, wildlife, and environmental 

monitoring and protection. But we do not have any details of 
any particular regulations or legislation which will be coming 
forward next year. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I wonder if 
you could sort of give us your main directions in issues like 
forestry; in wildlife management; and in the parks area; and 
also in the environmental area that’s under your administration. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Thank you for the question. With regards to 
forestry, we are more and more looking at all uses of the forest. 
Forestry used to be a matter of sort of divvying up the trees that 
we cut down. Now we look at all of the activities in the forest. 
So we’re looking at sustainable management and, of course, 
reforestation. 
 
In wildlife management we want to ensure sustainable game 
populations. There will be surveys conducted along with fishery 
population. We will be monitoring that closely. 
 
With regards to environmental issues, we’ll certainly be 
working to enhance things like used oil recycling, used tires, 
and other things that will get potential contaminants out of the 
environment. So ongoing progress on a number of these fronts. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. In a number 
of those areas that you have mentioned, there are difficulties 
and we will get into some of those as we go along. 
 
I’d like to deal with some of the park questions right now, Mr. 
Minister. What are you doing with the parks programs this 
year? I know that over the past few years parks have received a 
diminishing amount — of particularly capital funding, but 
funding in general at a time when we would hope — I don’t 
know that it’s a fact — but we would hope that the usage for the 
parks has been increasing. With the situation with our roads, 
people visit our parks once and then look for some other place 
to go because they don’t want to drive back over that road 
again. So what is happening with the parks in your department? 
With the funding for those parks? Are we receiving new capital 
for the infrastructure within the park system? And is the usage 
for our parks increasing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Well certainly, Mr. Deputy Chair, our parks 
are very important to people in Saskatchewan. Last year we had 
2.2 million visitors to our parks. 
 
And we were very pleased last year that we were able to get 
$1.7 million of new money for our parks infrastructure. This 
would be for roads within parks, buildings, water, sewage — 
basically any of the essential services. And this 1.7 million will 
be added on to our existing capital, which brings us to 2.5 
million, and this is over a 10 year period. So we’re very pleased 
with the attention that we are giving our parks, and I’m sure the 
public will be as well. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:27 p.m. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund 
 Health — Vote 32 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1349 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1349 
 General Revenue Fund 
 Environment and Resource Management — Vote 26 
  Scott .........................................................................................................................................................................................1373 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1373 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1357 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1357 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 Bill No. 33  The Provincial Court Act, 1998 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1357 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1358 
  Goohsen ...................................................................................................................................................................................1359 
 Bill No. 56 — The Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment Act, 1998 
  Teichrob...................................................................................................................................................................................1361 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1361 
  Goohsen ...................................................................................................................................................................................1362 
 Bill No. 50 — The Urban Municipality Amendment Act, 1984 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1365 
  Teichrob...................................................................................................................................................................................1365 
  Goohsen ...................................................................................................................................................................................1366 
 Bill No. 51 — The Rural Municipality Amendment Act, 1998 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1367 
  Teichrob...................................................................................................................................................................................1367 
  Goohsen ...................................................................................................................................................................................1367 
 Bill No. 52 — The Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 1998 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1368 
  Teichrob...................................................................................................................................................................................1368 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1369 
  Goohsen ...................................................................................................................................................................................1369 
 Bill No. 32 — The Wildlife Amendment Act, 1998 
  Scott .........................................................................................................................................................................................1370 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1370 
 Bill No. 11 - The Trustee Amendment Act, 1998 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1371 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1371 
  Goohsen ...................................................................................................................................................................................1372 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 33  The Provincial Court Act 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1372 
 Bill No. 56 — The Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment Act, 1998 
  Teichrob...................................................................................................................................................................................1372 
 Bill No. 50 — The Urban Municipality Amendment Act, 1998 
  Teichrob...................................................................................................................................................................................1372 
 Bill No. 51 — The Rural Municipality Amendment Act, 1998 
  Teichrob...................................................................................................................................................................................1372 
 Bill No. 52 — The Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 1998 
  Teichrob...................................................................................................................................................................................1372 
 Bill No. 32 — The Wildlife Amendment Act, 1998 
  Scott .........................................................................................................................................................................................1372 
 Bill No. 11 — The Trustee Amendment Act, 1998 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1373 
 


