





























































Hansard: March 31, 1998


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 345 
 March 31, 1998 
 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have 
a petition to present on behalf of residents from the community 
of Francis. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, I also have petitions to 
present today. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find out 
all the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
And as in duty bound your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

These petitions comes from Milestone, Regina, and Radville, 
Mr. Speaker. I so present. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, to present petitions as well, reading 
the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake’s fiasco. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition is signed by individuals from the Naicam, 
Rosthern areas. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
And as is in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

The community involved, Mr. Speaker, is Hudson Bay. 
 

Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I too rise to present a petition 
and these come from individuals who are concerned about the 
payment made to Jack Messer and asking that that be 
immediately stopped. And this comes from the people in the 
Spiritwood and Leask area. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to 
present petitions on behalf of Saskatchewan people. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 

The signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Tisdale, Melfort, Arborfield, Star City. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I also have a petition to present 
today. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are all from Francis. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased as well this 
afternoon to present a petition on behalf of residents of 
Saskatchewan. The petition surrounds the whole Jack Messer, 
Channel Lake situation here in the province of Saskatchewan 
that many people across this province are participating in our 
campaign to stop this . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Now the hon. member 
will, being a veteran member, will recognize of course that to 
present remarks that become debate, in a petition, is out of order 
and I’ll ask him to go directly to the prayer of the petition. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to present 
on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan the petition 
surrounding this incident. And these people, the petitioners, 
come from the Hudson Bay area of Saskatchewan. As I said, 
coming in from all over the province. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am here to present a 
petition on behalf of people from the Pilot Butte, Regina, White 
City areas. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 



346 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 1998 

 

I so present. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I join with my 
colleague in bringing forward the Plains hospital petitions. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed the petition are from 
the Ponteix and Aneroid areas of the province. I so present. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
petitions of citizens concerned about the Plains hospital closure. 
The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Those who’ve signed these petitions are from communities of 
Assiniboia, Lafleche, Viceroy, Mossbank, Limerick, and also 
the community of Morse. I so present. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of people of Saskatchewan. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting some legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains hospital 
may be continued. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition has been signed by the people that 
live in Assiniboia and Limerick and surrounding areas. And I so 
present. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy this 
morning, Mr. Speaker, to present on behalf of the people of the 
beautiful community of Morse, Saskatchewan, and a few from 
Ernfold, the following petition: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reach the necessary agreements with other levels of 
government to fund the twinning of the Trans-Canada 
Highway in Saskatchewan so that work can begin in 1998, 
and to set out a time frame for the ultimate completion of 
the project with or without federal assistance. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

And I’m really happy to present this on their behalf, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 

Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 

Of citizens petitioning the assembly respecting the funding 
of the twinning of the Trans-Canada Highway; acting to 
save the Plains Health Centre; and the cancellation of 
severance payments to Jack Messer and calling an 
independent inquiry into Channel Lake. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
Standing Committee on Crown Corporations 

 
Ms. Lorje: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to present the 
third report of the Standing Committee on Crown Corporations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, your committee, in examining the matter of the 
acquisition, management, and sale of Channel Lake’s petroleum 
company by SaskPower is pursuing a line of inquiry in which it 
has deemed it necessary and advisable to have the services of an 
expert adviser and legal counsel. Your committee recommends 
therefore that the Assembly authorize and empower the 
committee to engage the services of counsel and that it be 
deemed to have had such power and authority as and from 
March 30, 1998. 
 
And further, your committee recommends that the Assembly 
authorize the television broadcast and distribution of the 
proceedings of the Standing Committee on Crown Corporations 
on the legislative broadcast system during its hearings on the 
above inquiry at the direction of the committee. 
 
I would respectfully submit my report, Mr. Speaker, and I will 
now move the following motion: 
 

That the third report of the Standing Committee on Crown 
Corporations be now concurred in. 

 
I move it, seconded by the member for Prince Albert Carlton. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 22 ask the government the following question: 
 

Of the Minister of Justice: how many people presently sit 
on the Surface Rights Arbitration Board under authority of 
The Surface Rights Acquisition and Compensation Act, 
1969; what job description and criteria must these people 
meet to qualify for a position on the board; how many 
cases do these members hear each month; how many 
remain on the books unsettled, that is how many 
applications I guess, or hearings remain on the books 
unsettled; what is the remuneration for each member and 



March 31, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 347 

 

the chairperson; how many board members are not . . . or 
previously were members of the NDP (New Democratic 
Party); at what point was it decided that precedence could 
not or should not be used by the board in accordance with 
the Canadian and British system of law? 
 

I so present. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Seated in the government galleries this afternoon are three 
gentlemen who are from my constituency of Yorkton: Mr. Max 
Proutts, Mr. Robert Horvath, and Mr. Martin. These three 
gentlemen have been working with the Department of 
Highways for a number of years. 
 
Mr. Horvath, of the three — who’s seated in the middle — is 
still employed. The other two are now retired and are enjoying 
the fruits of all their hard labour over the number of years. So I 
want to this afternoon welcome them to the Assembly for 
question period and ask all the members to join with me in 
welcoming them here this afternoon, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Poll Results 
 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, when 
the Saskatchewan Party was born just a few short months ago, 
our first goal was to establish ourselves as the real opposition 
and the clear alternative to the NDP government. 
 
A poll published in today’s Leader-Post and Star Phoenix 
shows that we have achieved that goal. Nearly 60 per cent of 
those who expressed an opinion said the Saskatchewan Party is 
the more effective opposition. The poll shows the Saskatchewan 
Party is clearly seen as the better opposition by our party 
supporters, while the Liberal opposition doesn’t even have the 
confidence of Liberal voters. 
 
Clearly, many Liberal voters are looking for a better alternative 
and I would invite them to take a good, close look at the 
Saskatchewan Party. 
 
As David Smith from the U of S (University of Saskatchewan) 
said: 
 

“It’s been quite a long time in the Saskatchewan legislature 
since there’s been a concentrated, visible, forceful 
opposition,” . . . “My sense is the public welcomes a strong 
opposition in this province.” 
 

Mr. Speaker, we are pleased that the public sees us as an 
effective opposition, but that is only the first step. Our goal is to 
be seen as an effective government heading into the next 
provincial election. We realize we still have a long way to go 
towards that goal, but with the election of our new leader, 
thousands of new Saskatchewan Party members, and an NDP 
government that is getting more arrogant and out of touch every 
day, we will move closer to that goal every day. 

As I said the other day, Mr. Speaker, we’re just getting started. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

New Saskatchewan Business Ambassadors Program 
 

Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 
was my pleasure to attend a press conference this morning 
where my colleague, the Minister of Economic and 
Co-operative Development, today announced a new program 
aimed at promoting Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan 
people know what a great province this is to live and to work in 
and some less fortunate people outside our province are not 
aware of our dynamic, growing economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Business Ambassadors program 
is one way we intend to tell the world about our province. The 
program will provide those travelling outside of Saskatchewan 
on business with marketing kits they can use to use to promote 
the province as a place to live, work, and to do business, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The kit includes printed material and a CD-ROM (compact disc 
read-only memory) with information on our province, on our 
quality of life, and on our business advantages. Mr. Speaker, I 
have taken the liberty of providing a Business Ambassador’s 
pin at each member’s place and I invite each member to put 
them on as a show of pride for our province. 
 
I hope all members of the legislature will join us as Business 
Ambassadors promoting Saskatchewan to the world. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Economic Developer of the Year Award 
 
Mr. Renaud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. James Leier of 
Tisdale has been awarded the 1998 Economic Developer of the 
Year Award from the Saskatchewan Economic Developers 
Association at their annual convention held in Tisdale this past 
week, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This distinction is awarded annually at the Saskatchewan 
Economic Developers conference. It is given in recognition of 
excellence in economic development enterprises at the local and 
regional level. A special committee of Saskatchewan Economic 
Developers reviews the accomplishments of candidates, which 
are drawn from the membership of the association. 
 
Mr. Leier is the chairperson for the Eden REDA (regional 
economic development authority) and is employed as the 
director of economic development by the Kelsey Development 
Corp. and the town of Tisdale. Mr. Leier has also been recently 
recognized by the National Association of Economic 
Developers for overseeing very successful community 
investment programs in Tisdale. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we all know that the strength of Saskatchewan is 
its people. I would like to acknowledge Mr. Leier’s 
contribution, as well as others like him who are committed to 
improving the communities of Saskatchewan. 
 



348 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 1998 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Disney Buys Saskatoon Movie Rights 
 

Ms. Lorje: — Mr. Speaker, one of the best news items in this 
month’s good news budget was the announcement of the film 
employment tax credit equal to 35 per cent of the costs of 
employing Saskatchewan talent. Because of this boost to the 
Saskatchewan film industry, there will be a raft of 
announcements of projects in the movie industry in our 
province. Like this one — the Disney Corporation, maker of 
politically correct films like Snow White and Dumbo, has signed 
a deal with Edge Productions of Saskatoon to market the film 
The Summer of Monkeys, shot in Saskatoon last summer. 
 
The director of Edge Productions, David Doerksen, said that 
Disney plans to market the film in the United States and around 
the world. The Canadian rights have been sold to Sullivan 
Entertainment. It appears that Edge Productions’ film about a 
group of runaway anthropoids is in good hands. 
 
The film stars Michael Ontkean and Wilford Brimley, the actor 
who told us eating oatmeal is “the right thing to do.” The 
Summer of Monkeys will first be seen on Superchannel, then on 
cable, then in the video stores, with the possibility of a 
theatrical release. 
 
And success breeds success. Both HBO (Home Box Office) and 
Warner Brothers has contacted Edge Productions about future 
projects. This, Mr. Speaker, is good news from Hollywood 
North. 
 
Thank you. 
 

Remote Housing Program 
 

Mr. Johnson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last spring our 
government announced that starting in 1997 we would, over the 
three years, spend $8 million to provide housing in northern 
Saskatchewan. In 1997, 24 homes were approved to be built in 
six northern communities under the remote housing program. 
This represented $1.8 million in new home construction, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
This year we will approve 20 more homes for construction. This 
represents another $1.5 million in construction. Clients of the 
program finance 25 per cent of the basic building costs and 
contribute to construction of their new home through sweat 
equity, with their friends and family often pitching in. Grants 
for 75 per cent of construction costs are provided by the 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1996-97, through open tender, more than half 
of the work tendered under this program was awarded to 
northern contractors. 
 
The remote housing program is more than an opportunity to 
provide much-needed housing, Mr. Speaker. It is also an 
opportunity for employment, an opportunity for training skills, 
and a general feeling of accomplishment for the people and 
communities involved. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Inquiry into Channel Lake 
 

Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my questions this 
afternoon are for the Premier or his designate. Well you finally 
got the little old Crown Corporations hearings off the ground 
this morning and people are starting to see that it is a phoney 
example of how democracy should work right from the outset. 
 
I sat there for three hours in the committee listening to the Chair 
tell us how unbiased and impartial she was, and then listened to 
her blather on about her opinion about everything under the sun, 
including her dime-store political analysis of the performance 
of the opposition and the third party. If I want to know who’s 
doing better in Saskatchewan in opposition, I’ll consult the 
front page of the Leader-Post, not the NDP Chair of Crown 
Corporations. 
 
Mr. Premier, Mr. Deputy Premier, would you now admit that 
your little NDP-run show trial is nothing but a charade and will 
you do the right and honourable thing and call a public inquiry 
that the public of Saskatchewan are demanding? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
member opposite that it’s my understanding that the whole 
committee was working very well when the member from 
Melfort was there discussing and debating. 
 
And I wanted to congratulate all members, if they cease yelling 
from their seats, Mr. Speaker, as they’re prone to do and are 
allowed to do — holler and yell while I’m trying to answer. But 
the fact of the matter is, but the fact of the matter is that the 
committee is working well, that the members are there asking 
questions. 
 
And I understand that while the member, the potential future 
leader of the Conservative Party, the member from Melfort was 
asking the questions, everything was going well. And all heck 
broke loose after the member from Kindersley came in. 
 
Now maybe, just maybe, just maybe you should take a lead 
from that, sir. Maybe you should let the next leader ask the 
questions in a reasonable manner, which he’s prone to do, and 
maybe you should take time back in your office doing those 
things that you like to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s no wonder that 
columnists are starting to call Saskatchewan “Arkansas North.” 
This thing is being run like some backwater southern county 
where the mayor has bought off the local judge. 
 
The Chair of Crown Corporations is taking your marching 
orders directly from the Premier. And if you don’t believe that, 
just look what happened when our members called the Premier 
and ministers responsible as primary witnesses. The Chair got 
her Liberal puppet, the member from North Battleford, to move 
to adjourn the meeting. You could barely see her lips moving 
while he was talking. 



March 31, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 349 

 

Mr. Premier, Mr. Deputy Premier, you two over there are 
primary witnesses. The public of Saskatchewan is demanding 
that you speak to the Crown Corporations Committee and bring 
forward testimony. Are you going to appear, Mr. Deputy 
Premier, are you going to appear as a witness before the Crown 
Corporations Committee, or are you going to hide behind your 
hand-picked NDP Chair of Crown Corporations? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, as hard as it is for the 
member from Kindersley to admit this, I think the Chair today 
congratulated all members when they made comments, even the 
member from Melfort, the former Liberal who now says he 
wants to lead the Conservative Party. 
 
And I understand that, that people do have the right to change 
parties. Some would argue, a deal cut in the dark of night, why 
he would do that. But the Chair of Crown Corporations has a 
role to play; she’s doing that. And we intend the committee to 
work. 
 
What I want to do today is congratulate the members opposite, 
who had been boycotting the House and boycotting their own 
committee, the Public Accounts Committee, of finally coming 
to the committee and beginning the work of investigating, and 
carrying out the inquiry into Channel Lake. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, what we have here is an NDP judge 
— in this case the member back over in the corner there — and 
an NDP jury looking into NDP crimes and preventing, 
preventing us from calling forward NDP witnesses. The Chair 
of Public Accounts is not only clearly biased, she’s 
incompetent. We spent most of the morning listening to her 
blather on about what she thinks. Well nobody cares what she 
thinks. She is a facilitator, and nothing other than that, and she 
should keep her remarks to herself. 
 
Mr. Premier, Mr. Deputy Premier, you have now admitted it. 
The Premier has admitted to interfering with the SaskPower 
board to save Jack Messer’s job. We want to know how many 
more times did the Premier intervene on behalf of Jack Messer. 
Is the Premier’s fingerprints all over Jack Messer’s severance 
cheque? And will the Premier, will the Premier of 
Saskatchewan be at Crown Corporations Committee to testify 
before that committee? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my understanding 
that the process this morning was one that all members of the 
committee were involved in. That questions were asked by the 
member from Melfort, by members from the Liberal caucus, 
members of the NDP caucus. That’s as it should be in setting up 
the process and structure of who should appear before the 
committee, who should give evidence in the inquiry which is 
being carried out by the House. 
 
And I want to say to you, sir, that the insults that you throw 
across the floor about a private member who’s unable to stand 
and defend herself in this House, I think is unconscionable and I 
would ask you to apologize, to apologize in carrying that out in 
that manner. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Health Information Network Appointment 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for the 
Minister of Health. Mr. Minister, yesterday we learned that the 
Premier intervened to save his old buddy Jack Messer from the 
chopping block, against the best judgement of the SaskPower 
board. 
 
Jack Messer’s not the only political hack who gets fixed up by 
this government. Last week the minister assured us Gord 
Nystuen was not a political appointment. He said the SHIN 
(Saskatchewan Health Information Network) board made the 
decision and Nystuen was more qualified than the other 37 
candidates. Really, Mr. Minister? 
 
Mr. Minister, here I have a résumé from one of the five 
candidates short-listed in the recruitment process. Let me tell 
you, the only way Nystuen was more qualified is through his 
membership in the New Democratic Party. 
 
Mr. Minister, when is your government going to start 
appointing qualified men and women to run our Crowns and 
highly important initiatives such as SHIN? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
want to agree with what the member opposite says, that this is a 
very important and significant project, SHIN is. And it will 
provide comprehensive information to the people of 
Saskatchewan and we will be able to link communities within 
the new health information age in a way in which we’re not 
accustomed, and will provide regional services as well to 
communities that we’ve not seen in the past. 
 
So the member is right in terms of what SHIN will do. The 
member is not right when he suggests that there has been any 
interference on the part of the government in the selection of 
this individual — absolutely false. There are, Mr. Speaker, there 
are, Mr. Speaker, 25 members who sit on the SHIN board. Of 
those SHIN board . . . On that SHIN board there are only two 
government representatives. 
 
And when the election . . . when the selection process began 
there were 39 applications that made their way to the SHIN 
board, and from that there was a short list of four, I understand. 
And from those four, Mr. Nystuen was selected through a 
process that is directly involving the executive of the SHIN 
board, and they made Mr. Nystuen their candidate as the person 
who’s responsible for overseeing the Crown. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, a further question to the minister. 
Mr. Speaker, the minister insists Nystuen was the most 
qualified person for the job. Well let’s do a little comparison. 
 
Who do we want running the health information computer 
network — a person with a master’s degree and a Ph.D. in 
medical physics from the University of Saskatchewan, or an 
NDP hack with experience in Liquor and Gaming; a former 
director of nuclear medicine at the Winnipeg general hospital, 
or an NDP bagman; a person who is recognized internationally 



350 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 1998 

 

for his contribution to the application of computers in nuclear 
medicine and has extensive experience in the 
telecommunications and information technology sectors, or an 
NDP hack that deals with computer problems by turning them 
off? 
 
Mr. Minister, in your estimation, who is better qualified to run 
the computerized health network — an NDP bagman or a 
highly qualified medical professional with an extensive 
background in computer information systems? Mr. Minister, 
who is more qualified? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, if the member is asking me 
who is more qualified to manage the SHIN operation in this 
province, what the member should be doing is he should be 
calling Mr. Jack Grossman. Mr. Grossman is the Chair of the 
SHIN board. Mr. Grossman would say to the member opposite 
that we have a process. 
 
Now if you don’t believe or don’t appreciate and don’t accept 
the fact that people and representation from the Saskatchewan 
Medical Association, that the nurses from the nurses’ 
association, from SUN (Saskatchewan Union of Nurses) and 
from the SMA (Saskatchewan Medical Association) and people 
from the college of physicians and surgeons can’t make a 
decision about who is best to operate the health system in the 
province, then they should revert back to the old system that the 
Tory member opposite used in the 1986 to 1990, which was to 
select people based on their political preference, not on their 
abilities. And that’s not the way Mr. Grossman and the SHIN 
board is going to do business or hire people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Escape from North Battleford Facility 
 

Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Justice. This morning the people 
of North Battleford and throughout Saskatchewan awoke to the 
startling news that Sandy Charles, the teenager who murdered 
and ate the flesh of a 7-year-old, was at large over night after 
escaping from custody during a refreshing walk in the sun. 
Media reports he simply ran away from the person who was 
supervising him. 
 
Mr. Minister, this person has been described by the RCMP 
(Royal Canadian Mounted Police) as psychotic and extremely 
dangerous. Can you tell the people of Saskatchewan why a 
person as threatening to the public as Sandy Charles was in a 
position to so easily escape in the first place? Mr. Minister, how 
can this happen? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to just inform the 
member about this situation because, as he knows, the member 
has been returned to custody again. The forensic unit in North 
Battleford takes very seriously the protection of its inmates in a 
very serious fashion. And the forensic unit in North Battleford 
also provides, on a daily basis, comprehensive assessment and 
treatment for people who need to be incarcerated. 
 
As the member has indicated, on a daily basis this individual is 

assessed to try to appreciate and understand what kind of 
programing he can be involved in, or she can be involved in, 
depending on what the individual needs of the client might be. 
On this particular day this individual was also assessed. And 
when they took this individual out into the community, this 
person managed to escape. 
 
Now into the future, Mr. Speaker, what will happen is exactly 
the same process that we’re doing today. The person is returned 
back into custody again. And we appreciate the difficult 
environment under which these assessments are made. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Plains Health Centre Closure 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, much of the media’s attention 
today is focused on what is taking place in the Crown 
Corporations Committee meeting, but there’s another issue 
today that’s an even greater travesty. 
 
This NDP government demonstrated its priorities when it 
announced that the Plains hospital will be the future home of 
SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology) just as the Liberal opposition revealed last week. 
 
Mr. Minister, Regina is in the midst of a health care crisis. 
There have been cases when there isn’t a single available bed in 
this city, and waiting-lists are at an all-time high. Still you want 
to close the Plains hospital. Please explain why your 
government is turning your backs on the health care needs of 
the people of southern Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As you would 
know, in 1995 the district health board, Mr. Speaker, told us it 
was their intention to create two centres of excellence for health 
in the city of Regina and to consolidate technical expertise and 
skills within those two centres. They indicated to us at that time 
that they were vacating the Plains, and what subsequently 
happened was an investigation into the best alternate use of that 
facility. 
 
And clearly the education of 12,000 students to participate in a 
facility that will assist them to find jobs in the new and 
changing economy is very worthwhile. There’s 12,000 students 
from southern Saskatchewan that will be going to this facility. 
And we had a large representation of supportive people from 
the community today. And I would say that we now have 
consolidated and enhanced services for both health and 
education. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, this government might think 
that today’s announcement will dampen efforts by those who 
are fighting to save the Plains and our health care system, but in 
fact the opposite is true. Our office has been flooded with calls 
since the announcement was made earlier today, and people are 
telling us to keep up the fight. Don’t allow the NDP to shove 
this decision down our throats. 
 
Mr. Minister, it’s not too late to let the people have a say. Allow 
the residents who will be affected by this decision to speak. 



March 31, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 351 

 

Will you place a moratorium on the closure of the Plains until 
the next provincial election? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I might start 
out by pointing out that you know, even though you continue to 
portray differently, that there will be no loss of services in the 
city of Regina. 
 
And I would ask you, when we have back-filled all of the 
federal Liberal cuts to both education and health, that you 
would just get on board and support the effective use of the 
dollars of these areas for the enhancement of services in a way 
that makes sense to anyone who had bothered to give it a little 
thought. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, the Liberal opposition 
demonstrated yesterday that this government’s been misleading 
people about the financial costs of the decision to close the 
Plains hospital. Isn’t it possible that you’ve also failed to 
address the human costs that go with shutting down the Plains 
hospital, or is this just one more example that underlines the 
fact that you just don’t care. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well first of all, just to help you out 
with your facts a little bit, even in order to use this as a 
technical facility, it’s going to have to be vacant for a whole 
year while all the mechanical systems are removed. So you 
greatly misrepresent the difficulties in moving down the road 
that you would advise. 
 
But I would tell you that 91 per cent of the students who 
graduate from SIAST are employed; 93 per cent of those 
students are employed in Saskatchewan and 48 per cent are 
employed outside the centres of Regina and Saskatoon. This is 
certainly of the 70 that serves all the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. Now . . . Order, 
order. Now the Chair is having some difficulty being able to 
hear the answer being provided by the minister, and I’ll ask for 
the cooperation of the House in order to provide the minister’s 
response be heard. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we have more 
people working in this province than ever before in its history. 
And we certainly agree that there are challenges in health, but 
we have huge challenges in education as well. 
 
And there’s 12,000 students being trained to work in the 
Saskatchewan economy. We have employers saying this is a 
critical need for them. And certainly they are very enthusiastic 
about the opportunity to come together in this facility. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, this is an issue that affects the 
people of Regina and southern Saskatchewan. I’d like to read a 
few lines from a letter addressed to the Premier from a Moose 
Jaw resident about the proposed closure of the Plains. And it 
reads, and I quote: 
 

Mr. Premier: Many bills are passed in parliament on the 

strength that if one life is saved it would be worth it. The 
Plains has saved my life once, and many others. Follow 
your conscience, sir. 

 
Mr. Premier, do you have a conscience left? Do you remember 
what it’s like to care? Try to think back when you placed a 
proper value on health care in this province. Will you follow 
your conscience? Will you place a moratorium on the closure 
until the people can have their say in the next provincial 
election? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Having driven from Moose Jaw to 
Regina many times, in my recollection the Lewvan is actually 
closer to Moose Jaw and it leads directly to the Pasqua 
Hospital, so I think there is no particular difficulty there. 
 
Over a lifetime a family occupies many different homes and 
what’s important is that you have the same facilities as you 
have in the previous one. There is no loss of services, no loss of 
beds, and you should quit worrying about it and support this 
very excellent project. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Rural Health Care 
 
Mr. McLane: — Mr. Speaker, another day, another meeting, 
and a community of concerned citizens about what’s happening 
to their health care. Mr. Speaker, last night our leader, Jim 
Melenchuk, was among 400 people who attended a meeting in 
Wynyard where residents are hoping that a $1.5 million deficit 
facing the Living Sky Health District will not result in further 
bed closures or elimination of front-line workers. Unlike a 
government that doesn’t care and the Tories who would 
privatize health care, the Liberal opposition believe that proper 
health care services are paramount in urban and rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is for the real Minister of Health 
today, whoever that may be. Mr. Minister, hundreds of 
concerned people are expected to attend another meeting 
tonight in Watrous, the Minister of Agriculture’s own home 
town, and I plan on being there. Mr. Minister, will you 
accompany me to that meeting tonight and will you tell the 
people of Watrous why you’re downsizing and cutting health 
care services in Watrous? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, there are two issues here that 
the member needs to pay attention to. First, the member 
opposite needs to remember that in this province we have health 
boards, and through the decision-making process that we have, 
through a democratic process that we have in this province, 
health boards have been assigned the responsibility of ensuring 
that the most appropriate, efficient health services are provided 
in their district. 
 
Today the Living Sky District is pursuing, through the various 
communities that are within that area, what kinds of health 
services and needs they need to provide and are completing that 



352 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 1998 

 

process today. The member opposite needs to remember that 
just not more than 10 days ago in this province, we put $1.72 
billion into the health care budget, the largest amount of 
funding that has ever gone into the health care system in this 
province. And this province is funding health care nearly at 88 
per cent of its total allocation — no assistance from the federal 
government, all provincially funded health care dollars in this 
province on an annual basis with no federal participation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Minister, 
I am going to be at that meeting tonight as I said. And you 
know what I’m going to tell the people there? I’m going to tell 
them to fight for their hospital beds because there are no other 
places for them to go. There are no extra beds in Regina, 
Saskatoon, or other cities. They’re overflowing. 
 
We have waiting-lists that are an all-time high, Mr. Minister. 
We have stretchers lining the hallways of our hospitals. There 
are occasions when there is not a single hospital bed available 
in this entire city of Regina and still we see health care 
cut-backs continuing. 
 
Mr. Minister, you brag about, you brag about a $1.7 billion 
health budget, the highest ever in this province. But can you tell 
the people of the province, where has all the money gone? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well I could tell you where the money 
hasn’t come from. The money hasn’t come from the federal 
government in Ottawa. That’s where it hasn’t come from. And 
it’s come from the people of Saskatchewan and from this 
government. 
 
Now for the member opposite to stand up and say that he 
believes in a democratic process and that he doesn’t believe in 
the two-tiered health system, this is what his leader said. This is 
what his leader said — Mr. Melenchuk, who was at the meeting 
last night but just recently said — private, specialized surgical 
clinics should be permitted to open in the province of 
Saskatchewan. That’s what your leader said on November 27 of 
1996. 
 
You should stand up tonight when you’re at the meeting and 
say that this is what your leader believes in. He believes in 
private clinics. He believes in privatization of the medical 
system and the health system. He believes in two-tier care 
health. This is your leader who says this. This is your leader 
who talks about the democratic process, who said that you may 
not get, you may not get the democratic process working if you 
believe in district health boards. He doesn’t believe in district 
health care boards. So clearly, Mr. Speaker, you . . . two-tiered 
health . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Next question. 
 

Escape from North Battleford Facility 
 

Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again to the 
Minister of Justice. Mr. Minister of Justice, thankfully Sandy 
Charles was apprehended before he could harm any other 

innocent victims. However that’s of little comfort to the people 
of Saskatchewan who now know exactly how easy it is for 
murderers such as Sandy Charles, who are confined to mental 
hospitals, to escape from custody. 
 
What procedures are in place currently? Will you immediately 
make the safety of citizens of Saskatchewan your top priority 
and change your lax policy when it comes to people like Sandy 
Charles and stop putting them in a position where they can so 
easily escape custody? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s unfortunate that the 
member opposite doesn’t have a full appreciation of the role 
and the work of the North Battleford forensic unit. Because 
from time to time in this province, we have people who suffer 
from emotional issues that require incarceration. It’s an 
unfortunate situation, Mr. Speaker, that that happens. 
 
But we also need to be . . . we need to remember that in this 
province that we’re blessed with one of the best services in the 
North Battleford forensic unit anywhere in North America — 
the best forensic unit. 
 
Now from time to time, Mr. Speaker, we need to ensure that 
people who are in those kinds of environment are treated with 
dignity and compassion and care to ensure that they also have a 
life in an environment that none of us would like to live in. 
 
In the case of this gentleman, on a day-to-day we assess his 
ability to perform the kinds of activities and behaviours that he 
can participate in. And yes, yesterday he was in an area that 
wasn’t as confined as the professional community might have 
assessed him to be. But remember that on a day-to-day issue, 
the mental state of these people change, but we want to make 
sure that they also have an opportunity to live in dignity, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

SIAST Wascana Campus Relocation 
 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am very 
pleased today to inform the hon. members about an important 
announcement I made earlier today concerning the SIAST 
Wascana campus. The government is committed to investing in 
Saskatchewan people, and especially young people, through 
education and training that’s linked to employment. Certainly 
that investment includes upgrading the facilities of our schools, 
universities, colleges, SIAST campuses, to ensure that students 
and teachers have access to an environment that is conducive to 
learning and teaching. 
 
Ninety-one per cent of SIAST graduates are employed, Mr. 
Speaker, and 93 per cent of those in Saskatchewan — that’s 
quite an achievement — 48 per cent outside Regina and 
Saskatoon. SIAST plays a very crucial role in the delivery of 
training in this province, yet for 25 years the institution’s 
Wascana campus has not had a suitable home. 
 
This morning I announced that eight existing Wascana campus 
sites will relocate to the soon-to-be-vacant Plains hospital site. 



March 31, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 353 

 

This move will provide students and faculty with a modern 
facility designed to accommodate the kind of training that leads 
to jobs. 
 
Wascana campus’s 12,000 students and 400 employees will be 
able to strengthen their sense of community in the new building. 
Students in academic upgrading, agriculture, health sciences, 
business and technical programs, will mingle in the hallways 
and common areas. Enhanced communication and cooperation 
will no doubt lead to innovative programing. 
 
Overlap and duplication will be eliminated. There’ll be equity 
in library, bookstore, registration, counselling, day care, and 
recreation services. 
 
In addition, by amalgamating the operations at one site in close 
proximity to the University of Regina and Saskatchewan’s 
high-tech research park, we’re creating an exciting new model 
for partnerships in education, training, research, and economic 
development. 
 
The new Wascana campus is a significant outcome of The 
Saskatchewan Training Strategy, and it positions SIAST to 
more effectively fulfil its training role in the province. This is 
truly a good news announcement. The amalgamation of 
Wascana campus is a sound decision that makes good use of the 
Plains site, and it’s a good investment for our young people in 
Saskatchewan of the future. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, while the Minister of Post-Secondary Education may 
think that this is a good news day, it is indeed probably also a 
very bad news day when we take a look at the fact that the 
campus which is now going to be expanding into an area that 
has been a very, very important hospital, not only to the people 
of Regina but also to the people of Saskatchewan, today is that 
final nail in the coffin. When people realize across this province 
that this government will not — will not —listen to the people 
of Saskatchewan and keep the Plains hospital open. 
 
That realization is going to occur today, and I think we are 
going to see very, very angry people across the province. They 
believe that there is a need for the Plains hospital to be open and 
to serve the people of Saskatchewan. And today’s 
announcement indeed says that’s not going to happen. 
 
On the other side of course, it is good news day for students in 
the city of Regina as well as all across Saskatchewan who 
attend the SIAST campuses. When we see the fact that eight 
campuses can be put together to improve program, and I say 
that sincerely, I hope that there is an improvement in the 
program, we do need that because we are lacking. 
 
I looked at the minister’s response this morning, and in it she 
states that there will be a savings of approximately $3 million 
annually and this will help to pay for the $28.8 million 
conversion that will be necessary. And I go back to the fact that 
apparently the Plains hospital is closing because we couldn’t 
find $10 million to take care of an asbestos problem. Now we 
found $28.8 million to place into that hospital. 
 

The balancing of the ledger is going to be interesting when we 
see that there will be $3 million worth of savings and its going 
to pay for a $28.8 million renovation. I think we have to take a 
good look at those numbers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When we have students that will attend and will benefit, no 
question I think that that will occur, I hope that the president, 
Mr. Knight, has indeed put together a proposal that will work 
for Saskatchewan students, because that who really is . . . what 
this program is all about — it’s the students of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I think it is of course a sad day. It’s sad because of 
what this government is doing. Mr. Speaker, this is not an 
education issue. This is a health care issue. And day after day 
what we bring into this House as a Liberal caucus are horror 
stories — horror stories where people can’t get beds. There are 
no beds in this city. Weekend after weekend there is not one 
bed available or not even stretchers, enough stretchers available. 
 
So shame on you in thinking that you can make this into an 
education issue. What it is, is turning hospital beds, hospital 
rooms, into offices, and that’s were your priorities are. And I 
say shame on you for that. 
 
People are being pulled off of their surgery beds. How may 
times did we hear of this, Mr. Speaker? Last fall, it was day 
after day people being pulled off their surgery beds because 
there was not a bed available for them after the surgery. And 
there are not beds available for them before the surgery. 
 
And what’s happening, you have people like the lady in 
Coronach who laid six days — six days, seven days — with a 
broken hip because she couldn’t have a bed here in Regina. 
Shame on you. 
 
If you think this is a good political move, so be it. If you are so 
confident, why don’t you put the moratorium on the closure of 
the Plains until after the election? Put that question to the 
people of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request leave of the 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker, to respond to the ministerial statement 
regarding the amalgamation of programs and services at the 
Plains hospital. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, oftentimes 
ministerial statements that refers to changes being made by 
government leave questions in the minds of many people in 
Saskatchewan. And one of those questions that have been 
brought to my attention is what implications does this 
announcement have for Kelsey Institute in Saskatoon? 
 
I have had concerns expressed to me by my constituents about 
program heads at Saskatoon’s Kelsey Institute being replaced 
by department heads. If this is going to be the case, Mr. 
Speaker, it is the view of many that this is a very detrimental 
move to students and their chances of employment success. 
 



354 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 1998 

 

It is felt by those students and by their parents that one 
department head who is responsible for overseeing a number of 
programs and who may not even be stationed at Kelsey, will not 
practically or effectively be able to serve the needs of Saskatoon 
students. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, it is incumbent upon the minister 
responsible to explain the full implications of the amalgamation 
for the students that attend Kelsey in Saskatoon. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, in the interest of providing 
open, accountable, and responsible government I hereby 
provide the written answer to question 16. 
 
The Speaker: — Question 16 is answered. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — And likewise for question 17, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Question 17 is answered and tabled. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that the Assembly resolve itself 
into the Committee of Finance, and the proposed amendment 
thereto moved by Mr. Gantefoer. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 
pleased to be able to continue my comments that I began 
yesterday in support of our government’s ’98-99 budget. And 
what I said yesterday is that this budget is our fifth consecutive 
balanced budget and it’s a budget that has balanced priorities, 
which are the priorities of the people of Saskatchewan. The 
priorities of some debt reduction, some tax reduction, and 
investing in people — in all of the key priority areas. 
 
I’d like to just make a comment, as I already did yesterday, on 
the importance of priorities of health care and also education 
with the announcement that the minister has just provided 
today. 
 
And certainly there has been concerns from my constituency of 
Weyburn-Big Muddy on the closure of the Plains and the 
consolidation of services at the General and the Pasqua. But 
what the people really do need to know and what they have to 
feel confident in is what will be the result of that? And the 
result of that will be no bed losses, no job losses, and improved 
services. 
 
The other factor now today that was announced is that the 
consolidation of the SIAST facilities within the Plains institute 
is good news — it’s good news for our students right across this 
province. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Locating SIAST with the University of 
Regina and the high-tech research park together, provides 
unique opportunities for innovative partnerships in education, in 
training, in research. It makes a profile for SIAST. It will make 
a stronger sense of community for the students. Its single 
location will improve communications, there will be greater 
access to library and the bookstore resources, a more equitable 
support services. The decision is a good decision and it’s a good 
investment in our young people and our future. 
 
When I ended yesterday I was commenting on the irresponsible 
attitude that Ottawa has taken as it allows our grain 
transportation system to be dismantled without having a plan in 
place to deal with those consequences. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those consequences are severe. Farmers are 
paying significantly higher freight rates. Often one-third of their 
grain ticket is going to the freight rate. The road impact costs 
for provincial and local governments have soared. These will 
increase by tens of millions of dollars per year over the next 
five years as more branch lines are abandoned and elevator 
consolidation continues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to give you some facts that will help to put 
the enormity of this crisis into perspective. Saskatchewan 
currently has 6,800 kilometres of rail branch lines. Over the 
past number of years about 3,400 kilometres have been 
abandoned. Another 1,140 kilometres have been identified for 
abandonment in CN and CP’s (Canadian National and Canadian 
Pacific) three-year plan. Up to 3,000 kilometres of 
grain-dependent branch lines could be lost in the next five to ten 
years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if this is not tragedy enough, loss of these branch 
lines resulting in higher freight rates for the farmers, increased 
prices on our road system, there’s also railway jobs, 600 
railway jobs that could be lost in Saskatchewan. That’s what’s 
happening with our branch lines, Mr. Speaker. Tragic loss of 
valuable transportation infrastructure, paid for by the taxpayers 
of Saskatchewan and Canada and now being cast aside by the 
railways, all for the reason of bottom line economics. 
 
(1430) 
 
Unfortunately, a parallel process is also occurring on the grain 
handling side of the equation. In 1972, we had 900 grain 
delivery points in Saskatchewan with about 2,500 individual 
elevators. We currently now have 450 delivery points with 
about 650 individual traditional elevators, 47 larger 
terminal-style elevators. Industry sources forecast the number 
of delivery points in 10 to 15 years may be as few as 70. The 
bulk of the grain traffic that was carried on these branch lines 
will in the future be carried by large trucks on the provincial 
road network. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the circumstance is a direct result of actions taken 
by the federal government. Yet there is virtually no money from 
the federal government. No money from the railways, no money 
from the grain companies to offset this massive shift of grain 
traffic from rails to roads. 
 



March 31, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 355 

 

Twenty million dollars per year over four years has been 
targeted for Saskatchewan in the Crow benefit pay-out; $20 
million over four years for railroads and highways under the 
Canada agriculture infrastructure program known as CAIP 
(Canada/Saskatchewan Agri-Infrastructure Program). 
 
Compare that to the $400 million cost of losing the Crow 
benefit in this province. Virtually the entire financial 
responsibility for maintaining and improving the highway and 
road infrastructure has been placed by default on the taxpayers 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in addition, significantly increased transportation 
costs are being borne directly by producers impacted by branch 
line closures, as they’re forced to buy larger vehicles and haul 
greater distances. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my officials and myself have met with many 
community groups in the last year to discuss their concerns, and 
options for addressing these concerns. It’s been a long, it’s been 
a difficult process, but there is hope and there are examples 
where progress is being made. 
 
Many of my colleagues here in the legislature will be aware of 
the success of the Southern Rails Cooperative of Avonlea, 
Saskatchewan’s first short-line railway under the 1989 
Saskatchewan Railway Act. It’s a prime example of producers 
working together to save a branch line that was being 
abandoned. 
 
Of course it wasn’t all smooth sailing in the development 
process. But despite predictions to the contrary, Southern Rails 
Cooperative has continued to provide service for farmers in that 
area. They are now currently negotiating with CN to expand the 
area served by their cooperative. Now Southern Rails had a loan 
guarantee from the Government of Saskatchewan and they have 
fully discharged their obligation. 
 
Omni Trax of Denver, Colorado operating the Carlton Trail 
railway has begun operating on two former CN subdivisions: 
the Meadow Lake and Blaine Lake subdivisions from Meadow 
Lake to near North Battleford; and the Warman subdivision 
from Prince Albert to Warman. As well, Omni Trax has begun 
operating the Hudson Bay line in Manitoba. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to report that we also have other 
potential short-line operations in other areas of the province. 
And in both past and future projects, the red herring of 
succession rights that is always being raised by the members 
opposite has not been and most likely will not be an issue. 
 
Other potentially profitable lines will likely be bought up by 
private corporations similar to Omni Trax. These lines, for the 
most part, carry many different types of traffic not just grain. 
However, it’s the other lines — the grain-dependent lines — 
that face the greatest risk of abandonment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government continues to urge groups 
interested in putting together a short-line operation to do a 
detailed assessment of their line and their local commitment and 
then put together a comprehensive business plan. Community 
and producer support is critical to ensure there will be traffic on 
those lines. 

My department is ready and it is willing to help. If there’s need 
for financial assistance to purchase assets, the province is 
willing to consider each proposal on a case-by-case basis, 
providing there’s evidence of strong local commitment and the 
potential for a viable operation. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, what is absolutely key to the viability of 
short-lines in this province is that we need some changes in the 
Canadian transportation Act and in the regulations that the 
federal government has put in place, because those changes that 
they have made are not short-line friendly. 
 
For short-lines to be viable in this province we need to have 
revenue sharing ensured. We need to have short-lines that can 
deal with either of the main line carriers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you may be aware, western premiers and 
western Transportation ministers last year asked the federal 
government to establish an independent, system-wide review to 
improve long-term grain handling and transportation 
performance from farm to customer. 
 
In response, late last year, the federal government appointed 
former justice, Mr. Willard Estey, to chair this review. 
 
I don’t think there is any way to overemphasize the potential for 
impact on western producers of the work being done by Mr. 
Estey. This review has the same potential to change the grain 
handling and transportation system as the McPherson report of 
the 1960s or the commission findings of Justice Emmett Hall in 
the 1970s. 
 
The Estey review can be a milestone, a landmark, a fork in the 
road. And as that famous philosopher and former New York 
Yankee catcher, Yogi Berra once said, when you come to a fork 
in the road, take it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity to meet with Mr. Estey in 
Regina, along with the other Transportation ministers and with 
our Agriculture ministers from Manitoba, Alberta, and British 
Columbia. We presented our views on options for developing a 
customer competitive oriented system and how the adoption of 
more efficient practices can contribute to resolving grain 
transportation performance problems. 
 
In July of 1997 the western provinces sent our proposed terms 
of reference to the Minister of Transport, Hon. Collenette. 
These terms of reference called for development, 
implementation, of modern logistic practices to enhance the 
competitiveness of grain, Canadian grain exports, by improving 
the overall system performance and efficiency. 
 
In a recent meeting with Mr. Estey I specifically addressed the 
branch line abandonment issue and advised him, in 
Saskatchewan’s view, the rail abandonment process is clearly 
not working in the best interests of all the players. 
 
Federal legislation is preventing producers from obtaining 
increased control of the grain collection system by allowing the 
railways to segment and de-market unwanted branch lines in 
order to prevent the development of short-line railways. 
 
The federal government has stated a primary objective of the 



356 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 1998 

 

branch line abandonment provision in the CTA (Canadian 
Transportation Agency) is to promote short-line railways 
instead of promoting the discontinuing of service when lines are 
uneconomic. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this isn’t what’s happening in Saskatchewan. The 
legislation is definitely not short-line friendly, as claimed by the 
federal government. Producers who want to operate short-lines 
on unwanted branch lines have been told by the railways that 
parts of these lines are not for sale. 
 
We have seen that in the group of the west-central road 
committee — road and rail committee. They’ve gone to meet 
with CN and they’ve been told no, we don’t want to sell. We 
will not negotiate. We just want to take a piece out here and a 
piece out there. Existing or future short-line operations do not 
have guaranteed access to the main line and they have to crawl 
into bed with CN and CP, on their terms. That is not short-line 
friendly. Existing or future short-line operations cannot 
automatically get a favourable revenue division with the main 
line carrier, a revenue division that will allow the short-lines to 
make a go of it. That again is not short-line friendly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we believe producers and other interested parties 
should be given a fair opportunity to purchase branch lines in 
instances in which short-lines will provide a viable alternative 
for moving grain, and they have strong local support. It makes 
sense. I stressed this to Mr. Estey at our January meeting, that 
the grain review must examine the branch line abandonment 
issue as part of its review. Our clear message to the federal 
government is that fast-track branch line abandonment is an 
abuse of the intent of the Canadian transportation Act and 
obstructs short-line development. 
 
And I’ve asked the Minister of Transportation to intervene 
directly with the presidents of CN and CPR (Canadian Pacific 
Railway) to ensure that the railways negotiate in good faith 
where viable short-line proposals are put forward, to ensure that 
all other branch line rationalization plans are halted until the 
Estey review establishes new rules that provide a fair 
opportunity for short-line development. 
 
But how did he respond? He says, well I think that the railways 
will probably play fair. Does it make sense to be dismantling a 
system while the review is taking place? And of course it 
doesn’t. And I ask on our behalf of our provincial Liberals that 
they should get this message to their federal Liberal 
counterparts; that there should be a halt on abandonment during 
a review. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Now it’s interesting, it’s very interesting 
to me, it’s very interesting that the Liberal . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order, order. Now as all hon. 
members will appreciate, there’s still some time available to 
enter into budget debate and put your remarks on the record. 
And I’ll encourage all hon. members, if they have remarks to 
make, to put them on the record rather than shouting them 
across the floor. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I do want to 

tell them that the Liberal Party themselves have just passed a 
resolution at one of their recent conventions. They passed a 
resolution calling for a stop to rail-line abandonment until a 
federal review is completed. But why don’t they listen? They 
don’t listen to the producers, they don’t listen to the . . . well I 
haven’t heard the provincial Liberals even saying it to their 
federal cousins. I can’t get any commitment from them. 
 
It seems to me, it seems to me if a review is to be legitimate, as 
I hope it is, that you don’t dismantle the system in the year of 
the review. I’ve indicated to Mr. Estey that producers must have 
the chance to fully participate in this grain review process 
because they pay the full cost of grain handling and 
transportation. And I stress that farmers are clearly frustrated 
with continuing grain transportation problems. 
 
Mr. Speaker, studies have shown that 500 to $800 million 
annually can be saved in operational savings in grain 
transportation and we need to use practical, common sense 
approaches. But we have to ensure that some of those savings 
are going back to producers. And we have to know that some of 
those savings can go back into an infrastructure system in this 
province to meet the new demands. 
 
We know how the railways can capture those savings. We do 
know how the grain companies can capture those savings, but 
how can we insure that the producers and the taxpayers are also 
protected. 
 
This grain review may be the single most important event in the 
history of grain production in Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, right across this province, rural Saskatchewan, but 
also all members of Saskatchewan, recognize this review and 
what’s happening in transportation is a huge, huge issue. We 
have a federal government that took out a Crow benefit that 
saves them annually $400 million. They deregulate a system 
that has no competition in it. And then they say, let’s just wait 
and see what happens. It is irresponsible. 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just want to take a moment to quote from Kevin 
Hursh, what he has said: 
 

It’s time we had rules aimed at establishing the lowest cost 
system for farmers, for ratepayers, for taxpayers, rather 
than the railways and elevator companies. Public good for 
the use of the community at large. 

 
That’s what we need to happen in this year of the grain 
transportation review. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also like to confirm that transportation is a 
priority area for our government. And with one of the largest 
per capita road networks in the known universe, highways and 
roads are a key component of our transportation priorities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve increased our spending on highways and 
roads by about $40 million in the ’97-98 fiscal year. Not 
including the $20 million provided to local governments 
through the Department of Municipal Government. We made a 
commitment to spend $2.5 billion during the next 10 years to 



March 31, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 357 

 

improve our roads and highways. 
 
For the 1998-99 fiscal year, we have a Highways and 
Transportation budget of $219 million — an additional $20 
million increase from last year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are going to put the roads in Saskatchewan 
into the best shape possible. We’re using joint planning. We 
used transportation area committees to help establish our 
priorities. 
 
I want to speak just very quickly for a moment about the 
petitions that had come in on twinning. And we made a 
commitment to do an additional 48 kilometres of Trans-Canada 
Highway — 27 kilometres on the west side, 21 kilometres on 
the east side. And let me remind people: we’re doing that 
without one federal dollar in a national highways program. 
 
Now I’m sure that members opposite from the Liberal Party 
were bringing me in petitions. I’m certainly hoping that they 
will help me as I take those petitions over to the Member of 
Parliament, Ralph Goodale, to make sure that those petitions 
also go to Ottawa. There is a federal responsibility here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year our government will be spending a $144 
million to upgrade, to resurface and repair our roads and 
highways. That’s more than 65 per cent of our total budget 
going to this critical work. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I am proud of the department staff that will 
be . . . and the increase in staffing that will also happen to keep 
our roads in good shape in this province. 
 
I’m pleased to say that I hear from right across this province 
how well the Department of Highways and Transportation 
meets with their areas and is doing the very best they can in 
building our system for the future. And I want to congratulate 
the department people for doing that fine work. 
 
Our budget will increase about 58 positions within our 
department. It will also, because of the increase in the capital 
program, it’s expected to create about 300 jobs in the 
Saskatchewan road building industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want you to know that I take our government’s 
commitment to transportation very seriously, and that I’m 
determined to provide the residents of Saskatchewan with a 
transportation infrastructure that meets their needs. 
 
And as I said previously, if we had meaningful federal 
cost-sharing on our national highways, meaningful 
compensation for the destruction of our road system due to 
rail-line abandonment, we could do a lot more in a shorter time 
frame. 
 
In Saskatchewan, transportation is the backbone of our 
economy. Rail is a vital link in our ability to transport grain, 
and roads are an essential economic, cultural community 
lifeline. 
 
We have a lot more to do, but we are making progress. And I’m 
confident that if we work together we can get the job done. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I just want to take a few minutes on also talking 
about my other responsibility as being the Minister responsible 
for the Status of Women. I want to tell you about a number of 
ways government is working to promote women’s equality in 
Saskatchewan. And I’d like to begin with the issue of pay 
equity because that is an important issue and one that has been 
receiving considerable media attention. 
 
Unfortunately there’s often a lot of confusion about pay equity 
and the wage gap and what government is doing to address it. 
So I’d like to take just a few minutes to outline the issue and 
clarify our actions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s important to note that pay equity is often 
confused with equal pay for equal work. They’re not the same 
thing. We have equal pay laws in place which ensure that 
women who do have same or similar work as men are paid 
equally. These protections have been in The Labour Standards 
Act for more than 20 years. 
 
As you know, men continue to earn more than women. The 
difference in earning is the result of many factors. They include 
education, hours of work, work patterns, marital, family status, 
and discrimination based on gender. 
 
Education is a factor because it leads to higher earnings for both 
women and men. And even more important, however, is the 
field of study. As I mentioned earlier, women are well 
represented in the province’s universities and post-secondary 
institutions; however they tend to be concentrated in fields of 
study that lead to lower wages. 
 
Relatively few women are enrolled in courses of study that are 
more likely to lead to jobs in higher paying fields such as 
engineering, physical science, and computer science. As a 
result, field of study has a bearing also on the wage gap 
between men and women. 
 
So strategies for addressing this include gender equity programs 
throughout our education system. Among other things, we need 
to encourage girls and young women to excel in maths and 
sciences and to consider non-traditional careers. 
 
Another major factor contributing to the wage gap is that 
women spend less time than men in paid work and more time 
on unpaid work. Even among those who are considered 
full-time workers in the paid labour force, women on average 
put in about 35 hours a week while men average 44 hours per 
week. As a result, men are taking home more money than 
women. 
 
But women are much more likely to limit their hours of paid 
work because of their family responsibilities. So the fact that 
women are providing this unpaid support in the home often 
allows men to spend more time in their paid employment. So 
it’s clear that the difference in work patterns between men and 
women, amongst other factors, is a major contributor to the 
wage gap. 
 
Mr. Speaker, gender discrimination is another factor which 
contributes to the wage gap. Women’s work has been 
traditionally undervalued and underpaid. And it’s not that the 
work that women do is of low value; it’s just the fact that it is 



358 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 1998 

 

women who do it. 
 
In a ranking of jobs according to skill and complexity, the U.S. 
(United States) Dictionary of Occupational Titles showed that 
zoo keepers and dog pound attendants were rated higher than 
nursery school teachers and child care workers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s this traditional undervaluing of women’s work 
is the problem that pay equity is designed to address. Pay equity 
process is designed to close the portion of the wage gap which 
is caused by undervaluing and underpaying traditional women’s 
work. And this is what is being implemented through pay equity 
within the public sector. 
 
Pay equity initiatives are under way in all government 
departments, in Crown corporations and agencies, as well as 
SIAST and the regional colleges. Approximately 24,000 people 
working for 24 different employers are affected. Our pay equity 
approach is moving along quickly and it’s getting results. 
 
It’s anticipated by the end of 1998, 10 of the 17 Crown 
corporations — as well as the government departments and 
agencies — will have completed the pay equity process. This is 
no small task. It involves complex job evaluation plans; job 
class comparisons for a wide range of positions. Our approach 
has been to encourage employers and unions to work 
collaboratively on this process. 
 
While formal pay equity initiatives such as this are important, 
there is no single remedy for closing the wage gap. It’s 
estimated that pay equity will close about 20 to 30 per cent of 
the total wage gap. Economic equality for women in the 
workplace will only be achieved by addressing all of the other 
factors which contribute to the wage gap. 
 
And to this end, the Government of Saskatchewan has 
undertaken a broad range of initiatives to secure women’s 
equality. We have strengthened the child care system; we have 
the balancing work and family initiatives; we have employment 
equity that’s mandatory; we have a Saskatchewan training 
strategy that’s been developed by the Department of 
Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training. 
 
In recent years our government has made significant changes in 
labour legislation which has had direct impacts on improving 
conditions for women workers. Saskatchewan Occupational 
Health and Safety Act was the first legislation to address 
violence and harassment. 
 
New labour standards legislation improves working conditions 
and benefits for part-time workers, the majority of which are 
women. It also gives protections and benefits to domestic 
workers and strengthens maternity and other family-related 
benefits. 
 
A new program that we have announced through the Women’s 
Secretariat is the women’s organization on-line program, 
providing more than 70 women’s organizations with funding to 
access the Internet and take advantage of new communication 
technology. This program’s emphasis is on rural, northern 
women, first nations, Metis, immigrant, visible minority, and 
disabled women. 
 

And this program has received very, very positive comments 
from women’s groups. I just want to read one. And I quote: 
 

Finally, we want you to know that we think this program 
was a brilliant idea. We’re about as excited as we can be 
about the opportunity you will be affording so many 
women across this province to open the latest door to 
power that seemed to have been shut in our faces. 

 
In addition of course, there’s been many other programs we’ve 
talked about in health care initiatives, in our social program 
redesign, which are all very positive news for women and for 
families and for people across Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just in closing I want to say one thing that I think 
is absolutely vital in what people in Saskatchewan believe in. I 
believe people in Saskatchewan believe in common sense, 
compassion, in community, but also commitment — 
commitment. As a parent, as a teacher, I’ve always felt that 
commitment was a very, very important quality. 
 
When I ask my children, when they enter into some kind of a 
new program or they join a club, that they should give their 
commitment to that club. If they join 4-H or if it’s the 
figure-skating or if it’s the dance club, that they should give 
commitment to that. And so if they go part way through the 
year and all of a sudden things aren’t working out that well, that 
they don’t get to just quit. Because they’ve made their 
commitment for that year to be involved in that. 
 
I believe when a politician goes out on a campaign and you’ve 
got a platform card in your hand and you knock on the doors of 
your constituents, you’re making a commitment. You’ve made 
a commitment to the party that you represent. You’re making a 
commitment to the constituents that you’re asking to vote for 
you; that this is what you believe in. And you have a term, you 
know, that you’re going to be elected for that term, and it’s 
based on that commitment. The people vote for you based on 
your commitment. 
 
And I’ve got our platform cards here from 1991 and 1995. And 
we’ve made commitments to the Saskatchewan people and 
we’re living up to those commitments. 
 
But what I find to be really disconcerting is the lack of 
commitment I have seen in the formation of the old, new, 
whatever we want to call it, Tory Party, the Saskatchewan 
Party. 
 
How could people go out on their campaign, knock on doors 
and say, I am a Liberal and this is what I stand for and this is 
my commitment to you and this is what I’ve elected you for, 
and somewhere along the line they can’t get along and all of 
sudden they change their name and they’re something else. 
They’re committed to something else. 
 
It’s the same as the Tories. They go out and campaign they’re 
Tories and all of a sudden there’s no commitment to that part 
way through. They try to change their name. There’s no 
commitment. I want to quote, in just closing, what I think about 
the commitment that has been made for many of the opposition 
members. And I quote from the Star-Phoenix: 
 



March 31, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 359 

 

Ken Krawetz, asked about crossing the floor said, it’s 
totally false and nothing but an attempt by the Tories to 
grab media attention. We have a signed document from all 
members and I can say unequivocally there is no truth to it. 
 

I think that’s something about commitment. I could go on; I’ve 
got quotes here from every single one of those members. And 
we have newspaper articles that they talk about their 
commitment. There’s no commitment. They don’t believe in 
government as a tool; they believe in power. And any way that 
they can try to grab that power they think that that’s okay. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve enjoyed the opportunity to be able to stand in 
support of this budget. I believe it’s a budget that’s based on the 
values of the people of Saskatchewan. It is a balanced approach. 
It’s an approach that invests in people. It’s an approach that 
believes that government is there to do the best they can to 
improve our communities, to improve our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am proud to say I will be voting in favour of our 
’98-99 budget. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1500) 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, I’m extremely pleased to rise in the Assembly 
today to participate in the budget speech debate. I want to talk 
about this government’s budget as good news — a budget that 
particularly means good news for Saskatchewan education. And 
it’s good news for Saskatchewan people and it’s extremely 
good news for the future of our province. 
 
First of all, Mr. Speaker, I would like to express my 
appreciation for my constituents, the citizens of Saskatoon 
Nutana constituency. As you know, I was first elected to take 
my seat in this legislature in the fall of 1986. And throughout 
those eleven and a half years I’ve been privileged to work with 
the many, many people of Saskatoon Nutana. I’ve been 
privileged to represent them in opposition when the NDP was in 
opposition between 1986 and 1991, and I’ve been pleased to 
represent them as a member of the government caucus. 
 
The people of Saskatoon Nutana are my neighbours. A good 
many of them are beyond being acquaintances — they’re my 
friends. And it’s an important responsibility which they have 
entrusted to me to represent them in the Legislative Assembly 
of Saskatchewan. I feel extremely honoured to continue seeking 
to maintain their trust by working on behalf of all of the people 
living in my constituency. 
 
I would also like to express my special appreciation to my 
constituency assistant, Lorna Bratvold, who so ably handles all 
of the issues that are brought to our constituency office, and she 
obviously helps me keep in touch with the many issues and 
concerns of the people of Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, our government’s 1998 budget is about 
three fundamental things. It’s about vision, it’s about balance, 
and it’s about investing in people. 
 
The budget, from my point of view, demonstrates the clear and 

positive vision of our province’s future which our government 
shares with Saskatchewan citizens. It’s a vision of prosperity 
and a healthy province, a healthy society, where healthy men 
and women in healthy communities contribute to a caring, 
compassionate, and creative democracy. 
 
It’s a vision of a society of responsibility in which individuals 
and families take personal responsibility for their lives and 
where the broader society willingly accepts its responsibility to 
support those in need. 
 
It is a vision, I think, inspired by the shared successes of our 
past but which faces the future with confidence. 
 
I think that this budget also demonstrates our government’s 
commitment to balance, to a reasoned and balanced approach to 
public policy. It’s based on sound principles and achieves a 
balance among three important fiscal objectives: reducing the 
debt, reducing taxes in a sustainable way, and providing new 
investment in key public policy programs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite don’t like to be reminded of 
this, but when our government took office in 1991, 
Saskatchewan had the highest per capita debt in Canada. That 
level of debt was unsustainable, and the annual interest 
payments alone quickly reached more than $880 million. 
 
Working together with all of our Saskatchewan citizens, we’ve 
been able in a shared, collective way to reduce that burden of 
debt and we’ve reduced the annual interest payments by more 
than $150 million per year. That is $150 million dollars every 
year, Mr. Speaker. That means $150 million every year that no 
longer goes to New York or Zurich. It means that we have been 
able to take that $150 million to improve public services, to 
improve people’s lives, and to lower taxes for Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
In addition to reducing the debt and the annual interest 
payments, our government has also continued to reduce taxes 
— not just for one year only, Mr. Speaker, not just during the 
year of an election, but we’ve reduced taxes in a steady, 
consistent and sustainable way. 
 
Last year, two years before any kind of an election, we reduced 
the provincial sales tax by two full percentage points — the 
single largest and most broadly based tax reduction in the 
history of our province. 
 
This year we are reducing the provincial income tax, once 
again, in a steady and sustainable way. 
 
In addition to reducing the debt and reducing taxes, our 
government’s balanced approach has provided in this budget 
significant improvement in public services for Saskatchewan 
people and Saskatchewan communities. 
 
This budget, Mr. Speaker, is investing in people; it’s investing 
for prosperity, jobs, and growth; it’s investing in stronger and 
healthy communities; it’s investing in our action plan for 
Saskatchewan’s children; it’s investing in health care; and it’s 
investing in the future of our province by investing in 
education. 
 



360 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 1998 

 

Mr. Speaker, before I turn specifically to the budget for 
education, I’d like to express my appreciation for the men and 
women who work throughout our public education system in 
classrooms and communities all across our province. I am 
absolutely convinced that there is no more dedicated and 
conscientious group than our own Saskatchewan classroom 
teachers, administrative and support staff, and locally elected 
trustees. And working together with parents and the broader 
community and the provincial government, these folks have 
built a public education system in our province which is second 
to none in Canada. 
 
I know that all of the members of the Legislative Assembly will 
join me in expressing to all of these people our appreciation and 
the public’s appreciation for their collective contribution. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, a moment ago, I said that 
our government’s 1998 budget is good news for education. And 
I’d like to elaborate on that point for a moment. 
 
Let us acknowledge some of the significant challenges and 
changing circumstances being faced by public education and 
our schools today — changing enrolment patterns and declining 
enrolment overall in rural school divisions. And this isn’t just 
happening in Saskatchewan. It’s happening in many provinces 
that basically have a rural economy. 
 
Increasingly complex diversity among our student population 
and new pressures and expectations being placed on the 
education system by our society, which at times seems to turn 
to the school to solve every new social problem. Our schools 
are doing a great job, a good job, Mr. Speaker, at meeting those 
challenges, and it’s important that Saskatchewan students, 
parents, teachers, trustees, and the public know that our 
government is committed to education as a high priority. 
 
The 1998 budget clearly demonstrates our government’s 
commitment to education. It demonstrates our commitment to 
education by investing in quality and sustaining excellence, 
investing in students with special needs, and investing in safe 
and healthy schools. 
 
In a year when the total budgetary expenditure increase is 3.6 
per cent, we’re increasing our operating grants to schools this 
year by 5.7 per cent. When you take into account the additional 
provincial funds being provided to school boards for grants in 
lieu of taxes, our combined increase in operating funding for 
school boards this year is 6.2 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget provides $384 million in operating 
grants to schools, the highest level in Saskatchewan’s history. 
This is an increase of almost $21 million this year and we 
anticipate the province will now begin to bear an increasing 
share of total education costs. 
 
Those provincial operating grants are distributed to school 
boards on a fair and equitable basis in accordance with the 
principles of equalization. The vast majority of the province’s 
operating grants to school boards is given or provided 
unconditionally to school boards. That enables locally elected 
and locally accountable school boards to make the most 

effective decisions in the interests of their students. 
 
In addition to increases in the basic per pupil rates, I’m 
particularly pleased that we have targeted funding to specific 
needs and priorities; for example, an increase of 33 per cent in 
the total per pupil grant for curriculum implementation. This 
will help school boards and teachers to implement a core 
curricula effectively and to support it with appropriate 
resources. 
 
An increase of more than $2 million in provincial funding 
support for students who have special needs, and a significant 
increase in funding for student transportation. Providing 
appropriate bus service for students is an important factor in the 
cost of high quality education services to our sparse student 
population, particularly in some parts of rural Saskatchewan. 
 
In addition to investing in educational quality, in excellence, 
and in the diverse needs of our diverse student population, this 
budget also provides for a substantial increase in our 
government’s continuing investment in safe and healthy schools 
for Saskatchewan students. Our government has allocated $7.3 
million increase in the education capital funding this year — an 
increase of 43 per cent. 
 
This funding will provide direct provincial government 
financial support for major projects in communities across 
Saskatchewan — communities such as North Battleford, 
Estevan, Yorkton, Central Butte, Biggar, and Lloydminster. A 
high quality education certainly does not depend solely on 
bricks and mortar, Mr. Speaker, but our students deserve a safe 
and healthy learning environment. And this budget 
demonstrates our government’s commitment to make those 
investments. 
 
It is for all of these reasons, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan’s 
1998 budget is indeed a good news budget for education and a 
good news budget for our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we should all note that every student in our school 
system today will spend their entire adult lives in the 21st 
century. They are the boys and girls and the young men and 
women who will provide the creativity, the leadership, the 
compassion, and the energy which will guide Saskatchewan’s 
collective future. 
 
We owe it to them and we owe it to our province to renew our 
commitment to Saskatchewan’s public education system — a 
commitment where every student may experience a joy of 
learning that will sustain them throughout their lives. A 
commitment where every student experiences dignity and 
respect and learns to respect others throughout their lives. A 
commitment where every student’s school experience may be 
enriched by important activities like 4-H, science fairs, sports, 
music, and drama. 
 
A commitment where parent and community involvement helps 
to enrich and support the lives of our schools and our 
classrooms. A commitment where aboriginal students are 
welcomed, are valued, are engaged, and are successful. A 
commitment where our provincial education system continues 
to embody profound respect and mutual tolerance among rural, 
northern, and urban school boards and among our Catholic, 



March 31, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 361 

 

public, and francophone component. 
 
And above all, Mr. Speaker, a commitment that our provincial 
education system, in our beautiful province, will continue to 
make the most powerful contribution to social life in a civilized 
democracy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m extremely proud of our government’s 1998 
budget. It is a balanced approach to public policy, it reduces 
further debt, it invests in people, and it gives us tax relief. It’s 
with pride that I’ll be voting for this budget, and I would 
encourage all members of the Legislative Assembly to join me 
in voting yes to the 1998-1999 provincial budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it truly is 
always an honour and a privilege to stand in this Assembly as 
an elected member of this venerable institution and representing 
the good people from Melville constituency. 
 
I could only imagine — and I still sometimes reflect back — as 
to how the member from Saskatoon Eastview must have felt 
when he got up for the last time and tendered his resignation. 
After some 11 years, to say goodbye to this institution, to his 
colleagues, close friends, Mr. Speaker, it must have been not 
unlike saying goodbye to family. He had served honourably, 
sincerely; dedicated his time on behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan. He tendered his resignation with a great deal of 
difficulty but also with a great deal of dignity. 
 
(1515) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to begin my text this afternoon by 
acknowledging your role, sir, and the diligence with which you 
carry out your responsibilities while the House is in session and 
beyond. 
 
I appreciate, as do a lot of the young people in various schools 
throughout the province, that you were good enough to visit to 
discuss our precious democratic process. I continue to be 
impressed by some students’ ongoing curiosity when they ask, 
who was that man in the funny-looking hat again? And I’m able 
to remind them the importance of the role that you play. 
 
You hold, sir, our democratic institution in very high regard, 
and I want to publicly say once again that I share that very deep 
respect. My respects also to all the hard-working staff who 
make our life in this noble profession easier. I want to begin by 
acknowledging the hard-working people from throughout my 
great constituency of Melville and all of rural Saskatchewan 
who continue to persevere during these challenging times. 
 
To everyone involved with economic development in rural and 
urban settings, I commend you for continuing in your efforts to 
promote communities, help small businesses to establish, and 
existing ones to continue to expand. And heaven only knows 
how much your initiative, your dedication are appreciated, 
given some of the lack of assistance from the present 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, only a short few weeks ago the Liberal 
government in Ottawa introduced a balanced budget that will 

provide hope for many areas and peoples of Canada. Mr. 
Speaker, we live in a province that produces enough wheat to 
feed 100 million people each and every year. This province is 
said to have enough potash reserves underneath that rich soil to 
meet world needs for the next 400 years. We live in a province 
that has assets above and below the land that give us an 
opportunity for present and future wealth that should be the 
envy of an entire world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I read carefully the throne speech and the budget 
speech presented to this Assembly. I am dismayed to find that 
these provincial documents provide no hope for rural 
Saskatchewan. I do appreciate that the financial mess inflicted 
on Saskatchewan and Canada by the old Tories required 
sacrifices that at times seemed very difficult to accept. 
 
The NDP government of this province chose to balance the 
books by increased taxation rather than reduce spending in 
non-essential government areas. Taxes in this province are far 
too high. The NDP government chose to cripple the health care 
facilities provided in rural Saskatchewan. The NDP government 
chose to let our rural highways and transportation system, our 
road system, deteriorate to a very dangerous level. 
 
This NDP government is led by a Premier who will close the 
Plains hospital even though over 100,000 residents of rural 
Saskatchewan have signed petitions opposing such waste. 
Adding to the General and Pasqua hospitals may save some city 
votes for the NDP in the inner city of Regina; however, the 
closure of the Plains hospital demanded by this Premier will 
destroy an important facility that was built in large part through 
efforts of people living in rural Saskatchewan. People in rural 
Saskatchewan will again pay an unfair price to resolve the 
financial mess created by the old Tories. 
 
People living in rural communities will again pay an unfair 
price because the NDP made choices that reflect complete 
ignorance of the difficulties facing our rural friends. And the 
NDP back-benchers who represent those rural areas are not 
heard to speak out in this legislature. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to congratulate Mr. Sinclair 
Harrison and SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities) for their initiative in seeking the funds 
necessary to repair our rural road system. Years of neglect by 
the NDP government have left a situation that help from a 
federal Liberal government is necessary. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want Sinclair Harrison and all of the 
municipal authorities to know that the Saskatchewan Liberal 
Party will provide every possible support. The Saskatchewan 
Liberal Party knows and understands that the rural road 
situation is too critical to be resolved without attention by all 
levels of government. The Saskatchewan Liberal government 
will stand with SARM in seeking federal government 
assistance. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, your loyal Liberal opposition has 
continually brought to the attention of this Assembly the health 
care difficulties forced on rural communities by the NDP. And I 
am sick and tired, as are the people of this province, of the 
Premier dismissing serious health-related problems by resorting 
to a sanctimonious harangue about health contributions made 



362 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 1998 

 

by the federal Liberal government. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the NDP government closed hospitals and 
reduced the number of acute care beds before — before — the 
Liberal government was elected to office. The folks in rural 
Saskatchewan don’t accept your answer, Mr. Premier. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to remind this Assembly that it is 
the contributions that are made by the Liberal government that 
ensures all citizens of Canada have access to the finest universal 
health care program in the entire world. 
 
Without such help, the Saskatchewan plan could not have lasted 
a decade if left totally to the NDP. It would not only have been 
born here but would die here also under the NDP. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I understand that difficult 
choices had to be made to clean up the mess left by the old 
Tories. But the choices made by the NDP are destroying health 
care in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
This afternoon I would just like to remind this Assembly of just 
a few of the wrong choices the NDP did make. It is not a happy 
story, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Within days of taking over government in 1991, thousands, 
thousands of taxpayers’ dollars were squandered to chase a 
pipedream of a former minister of Economic Development. 
Millions of taxpayers’ dollars were offered to self-styled 
American industrialists to move Piper Aircraft from Florida to 
Saskatchewan. Thousands of dollars were wasted and not one 
job created in this province — a pipedream gone up in smoke, 
fuelled with taxpayers’ money. 
 
In 1992 SaskPower called for co-generation proposals to fill a 
projected shortage in future power supplies. Several proposals 
were presented at huge costs to the consulting industry, as well 
as a lot of community organizations. 
 
Well the projected power shortage mysteriously disappeared 
and all the projects were scrapped. A proposal put together by 
South Parkland Rural Development association in Melville 
outlined the following benefits. 
 
Some $80 million private investment money from 
Calgary-based Rich Minerals. More than 300 jobs-plus as this 
development progressed. Communities within a 60-mile radius 
involved would have realized approximately a 90 per cent 
reduction in landfill site needs. Thirty per cent of the fuel for 
these generations would have been waste, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
the balance made up by natural gas. Fourthly, major 
contributions to economic development in east-central 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, today a future power shortage has 
suddenly reappeared. Now the NDP government has signed a 
co-generation deal with the Husky Oil upgrader. I suspect that 
the price Husky paid for the government shares of the upgrader 
was based on the millions an Alberta company is now going to 
make from co-generation. The NDP government turned its back 
on Saskatchewan communities in favour of a deal with an 

Alberta company. Another opportunity to invest in rural 
Saskatchewan rejected by this NDP government. 
 
During 1997, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a proposal was presented 
from east-central Saskatchewan inviting Maple Leaf Foods to 
build a state-of-the-art meat processing plant in the area. The 
operation of the plant would have created in the vicinity of 
2,200 — 2,200 — full-time, permanent jobs. The operation of 
the plant would have ensured our farmers a secure market for 
the sale of their livestock, an opportunity for local feed grain 
sales. 
 
Brandon, Manitoba was selected as the site because the 
province of Manitoba supports the rural communities, supports 
their businesses, and supports rural economic development. 
Why could it not have been Saskatchewan you might ask? 
Could it be because of the resolution proposed at the NDP 
convention to support a boycott of this company which wanted 
to create 2,200 jobs here in this province? Why would they 
locate here, given the NDP made it crystal clear they were not 
wanted? With economic development policies like that, it is no 
wonder that our youth continue to leave our province, that we 
have no economic activities in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the early mistakes of this government 
might have been forgiven if they had been able to learn and 
listen. Unfortunately that wasn’t to be. In 1996 the NDP 
government began a sorry waste of millions of dollars. This 
time it was a botched attempt to purchase interest in an 
electrical utility in Guyana. The price tag of $32 million would 
have opened a lot of hospital beds, and when the dust settles, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this province will have lost millions on a 
venture that should never have begun in the first place. 
 
I’m disgusted when the Premier continues to defend such 
blatant waste of taxpayers’ dollars. While SaskPower 
management and NDP cabinet ministers were flying around the 
world looking for opportunities to invest taxpayers’ money, 
some strange things were happening here at home. SaskPower 
was busy setting up a subsidiary company to deal in natural gas 
reserves. Now it didn’t seem to matter that another member of 
the Crown corporation family, SaskEnergy, thought that 
handling of the gas reserves came under their mandate. 
 
However, when George Hill was president of SaskPower, he 
hired an Estevan friend, an executive of Manalta Coal, to work 
for SaskPower. With those credentials, Lawrence Portigal was 
somehow considered a natural to head up a new venture dealing 
with natural gas. After losing millions of dollars, it seemed only 
natural to put Lawrence Portigal in charge of selling Channel 
Lake quickly so that the losses could be hidden from public 
scrutiny. Might that Guyana fiasco have been some kind of 
smoke-screen, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to cloud some other very 
serious issues? 
 
It appears, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that total losses of more than 
$10 million will have to be borne by the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan. More than $10 million wasted and not one job 
created — not one new job. 
 
The Deputy Premier then stands up in this House and says, we 
are sorry. But by the way, I have asked the Vice-Chair of 
SaskPower to decide if we should provide severance pay to the 



March 31, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 363 

 

guy I just fired. Well a thorough review will be conducted as 
well. 
 
The next day we are told that J.R. Messer will be paid some 
$300,000 severance pay. The J.R. of Dallas TV never had it so 
good, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I thought this government learned a 
lesson when George Hill of old Tory fame deposited $1 million 
in trust to satisfy what he thought should be his severance. 
 
If this government isn’t somewhat on the stupid side, they are 
certainly slow learners, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Speaker, why 
should we think that that policy is so strange. We saw the fired 
president of STC (Saskatchewan Transportation Company) get 
a big severance pay and then a cushy appointment as 
vice-president of Liquor and Gaming Commission. After all, 
the province only lost $750,000 when STC didn’t send out 
invoices. 
 
(1530) 
 
Does anyone here remember an old Tory fiasco known as 
GigaText? I must say though, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that it is 
somewhat humorous when you listen to the new Tory official 
opposition debating with the government of the day about who 
mismanaged and squandered most of our hard-earned, 
taxpayers’ dollars. 
 
The most damning indictment of this NDP government may yet 
be the mishandling of the gaming industry. The secret dealings 
of the Regina casino will soon come to light. Perhaps, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, sooner than later. 
 
The tour bus company chosen by Casino Regina — without 
tender — as their exclusive tour operator has now been declared 
bankrupt and more millions have been lost by taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan. The VLT (video lottery terminal) situation is a 
serious concern to all of Saskatchewan and to rural 
Saskatchewan because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, over $70 million, 
and counting, each and every year is taken from rural 
communities and deposited to the general funds of this 
province. 
 
Prior to the VLT gambling opportunity, that $70 million was 
available to communities for their recreation needs and local 
enhancements. Rural Saskatchewan should receive at least 50 
per cent of the profits from the VLT revenues, for special 
community needs. 
 
VLT gambling creates problems associated with addiction. The 
NDP must accept responsibility for the social ills created by 
their VLT and gambling programs. They must immediately 
launch a thorough review of the effects of gambling programs 
on the society of this province. They must fund effective 
programs to give hope to those people, unfortunate people, with 
addictions. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in my first opportunity to address this 
Assembly I spoke about how unfortunate it was that the general 
public has become so cynical about politicians. I spoke of 
politicians who no longer enjoy voter trust because they had 
made promises that they never intended to keep. I talked about 
politicians who, by committing criminal offences, had almost 
completely destroyed public confidence in the electoral process. 

I expressed sincere hope that such terrible breach of trust would 
never again bring dishonour to this Assembly. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, last July politics in this province became a 
national spectacle, once again, of gigantic political cynicism, 
when eight members of this Assembly chose to blatantly betray 
the voters of their constituencies. Eight members of this 
Assembly chose opportunism over integrity. There is no need 
for me to waste time today providing quotes that would prove 
their lack of truth, honesty, credibility or integrity. The public 
record is clear. Voters in their constituencies understand and 
feel that personal betrayal. They will deal with that betrayal 
during the next election campaign. 
 
However, I want to go on record today to describe that betrayal 
as the single most despicable political act ever recorded in the 
history of this great province. Never before have so many 
people felt betrayed by so many elected officials. Those 
politicians acting without principle, searching only for personal 
power, will never again be trusted by the voters of this 
province. 
 
The member from Kindersley candidly admitted that the voters 
of Saskatchewan would never again trust a Tory to be premier 
of this province, and I agree. But I have news for that member; 
the people of this province won’t elect a new Tory either. 
Where the member from Kindersley and I obviously disagree is 
in my great respect for the intelligence of the Saskatchewan 
voters. I refuse to believe that the voters of this province will be 
impressed by a group of power-hungry turncoats masquerading 
under a new name. 
 
The people of this province will understand that if it struts like a 
Tory, if it talks like a Tory, if it steals Reform policy and if it 
reports to Tory bagmen, then it is a Tory. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 
can’t believe that eight people who’ve just turned their backs on 
the people who elected them, now have the unmitigated gall to 
present member recall legislation to this Assembly. That action 
alone demonstrates beyond doubt a total lack of respect for the 
political intelligence of Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I wonder if that great team builder from 
Melfort will consider doing an honourable thing — stand up in 
his place and tell this Assembly that under no circumstances 
will the party he now belongs to accept any money from the 
secret Tory trust fund of over three and a half million dollars. 
 
The Provincial Auditor says it is ill-gotten, and the provincial 
returning officer says it was collected contrary to electoral law. 
That money legally belongs to the people of this province; it 
doesn’t belong to this new Tory Party nor does it belong to 
some unnamed trustee. 
 
As a show of solidarity, I challenge every member of the new 
party in this House to go on public record today in this 
Assembly and categorically reject any use of the secret Tory 
trust fund and demand its return to the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to know, who is Edgar 
Bergen? And in a few weeks we will know the results of the 
mail-in ballot by the new party members to choose the Charlie 
McCarthy who will be called the leader of the new Tory Party. 



364 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 1998 

 

The member from Melfort-Tisdale called this a political 
pyramid scheme: buy one membership, sell 10 more, and cast 
11 leadership votes. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, until the trustees of the secret Tory 
trust fund are disclosed, we will never know the identity of 
Edgar Bergen. Tommy Douglas used to say, he who pays the 
piper calls the tune. Who pays the piper for the new Tory song 
sheet? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, nothing will ever emphasize the duplicity 
of the old Tories as much as their actions in this House during 
the past several days. The members of the new/old Tory Party 
should now reflect on their strategy and hang their heads in 
shame. 
 
Let’s just review the events of the past several weeks. Firstly, a 
motion to discuss Channel Lake transactions in Public Accounts 
Committee as presented by my Liberal friend and colleague, the 
member from North Battleford. Nine times the members from 
Melfort-Tisdale and Kelvington-Wadena — nine times — voted 
with the government to block the investigation. Why? 
 
As public pressure mounted, the NDP agreed to support the 
motion for a review, complete with subpoena power. Jack 
Messer and Lawrie Portigal agreed to appear. The Chair of 
Public Accounts, the member from Kelvington-Wadena, shirks 
her sworn duty and refused to call a committee meeting. 
 
The new/old Tories waste $28,000 a day ringing bells. Before 
we have an opportunity to examine the available information, 
the new/old Tories want to spend a couple of million dollars on 
an inquiry that might not report until after the next election. 
Why, I wonder? 
 
The NDP calls the Crown Corporations Committee to 
investigate Channel Lake. The Chair of that committee is a 
government member. Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are several 
questions that need to be answered. Why did the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena shirk her sworn duty and refuse to call a 
meeting of the Public Accounts Committee? Why did the 
member, why did the member refer to her own committee as a 
kangaroo court? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, if my memory serves me correctly, the last 
members of this Assembly to refer to it as a kangaroo court, 
were expelled. Is it just coincidence that both those former 
members were elected as Liberals and betrayed their supporters 
by jumping to the old Tories? We won’t talk about where those 
two former members are now. 
 
When will this deceit end? Do the new/old Tory members really 
believe that the media or the general public will accept a foolish 
exchange of backdated letters as proof that they were prepared 
to call a meeting of Public Accounts? When will the member 
from Kelvington-Wadena act with integrity and principle? The 
member from Kelvington-Wadena has demeaned every member 
in this House by calling Public Accounts a kangaroo court. 
 
If she believes that to be true, she should resign as the Chair of 
that committee as a matter of principle. If she does not, if she 
does not believe her statement to be true, then apologize to this 
Assembly for that serious slur. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the member from Kindersley is as much to 
blame for this mess as the Chair of the Public Accounts 
Committee. The general public sees through the antics of this 
member even though he has his seat mate so mesmerized. 
 
The member stated that SPC (Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation) president, Jack Messer, et al., had been taken to 
the cleaners by Lawrie Portigal and DEML (Direct Energy 
Marketing Limited). The member stated that DEML had 
purchased Channel Lake at a $5 million discount and then 
received a sweetheart deal for future gas purchases, of $300 
million. The member stands in this Assembly making those 
kinds of charges without any direct testimony. Why? 
 
Who is Lawrie Portigal? Was he originally hired by the former 
old Tory president of SaskPower? Is this the same Lawrie 
Portigal that received . . . that he received a severance of 
$350,000 from the old Tories? Is this the same Lawrie Portigal 
who the old Tories paid $50,000 more a year to be 
vice-president of SPC than the NDP paid Jack Messer to be 
president? 
 
Who are the past and present shareholders of DEML? Will that 
list include former old Tory bagmen? Will the list include old 
Tory Assembly members and senators? And will that list 
include prominent old Tory supporters? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the new/old Tories tried to deny the 
Liberal opposition the opportunity to ask these tough questions. 
That may very well suggest, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the 
new/old Tories are afraid of the skeletons that will be 
uncovered under proper Public Accounts Committee procedure. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the public will hold the new/old Tories 
responsible should the Crown Corporations Committee prove to 
be less effective than the proper forum of Public Accounts. That 
forum has now been denied because the new Tories are afraid 
of the old Tories’ sins. Who is Edgar Bergen and who is calling 
the shots? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, regardless of past mistakes, regardless of 
past mistakes, regardless of treacherous politicians, rural 
Saskatchewan needs the attention of this government. Rural 
Saskatchewan can’t afford to take any more hits. Something has 
to be done to create economic activity outside of the cities of 
Saskatoon and Regina. All levels of government have to be 
brought to a table in a total team approach, to focus if our rural 
communities are going to survive and prosper into the next 
millennium. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the safety of our citizens, which is the 
responsibility of our Justice department, is of utmost 
importance and an issue that has recently come to the attention 
of this Assembly, and suddenly the Justice department 
recognizes there is a need to have special police task forces. 
There’s a need for more than that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
(1545) 
 
There is also a need, not for more beds for young offenders — 
there is a need for some meaningful programs for these young 
people who have stepped off the straight and narrow. There is a 
need to take them into a custody, into an environment where not 



March 31, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 365 

 

only do they recognize the need for some help that they 
desperately need, but programs which will teach them that there 
is a difference between right and wrong and that if they are in 
custodial premises then that is not the place that they would 
want to spend the rest of their lives, young and old. 
 
Those are the kind of things we need from this government, not 
promises of more walls and more beds. We need some 
meaningful programs and the offer of facilities that do exist that 
this NDP government has refused to even consider which are 
already in place, and which would be ideal for the types of 
programs that young people are crying out for — crying out for. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, until rural Saskatchewan is recognized in 
this kind of a debate document, it is not possible for me or my 
colleagues to support it. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to rise today to address the Assembly at the beginning 
of this session — I believe it’s the second session of the 
twenty-third legislature — to rise on behalf of the people of the 
Cannington constituency, the constituency that I am very 
pleased to be able to represent on behalf of those good people 
who chose me to represent them. 
 
The Cannington constituency, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is in the 
south-east corner of the province. It’s mainly an agricultural 
area but has significant resources with oil and gas. And, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, some of that oil and gas revenue, the 
accumulation of it, and the drilling that goes along with 
gathering that oil and gas, causes a great deal of problems in the 
area also. 
 
And I listened carefully while the Minister of Highways was 
talking about her . . . in her address. And I listened carefully, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, to see whether or not there was going to 
be any good news for the areas of this province where all of the 
heavy traffic related to the oil industries takes place. 
 
And one of those areas, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the Cannington 
constituency. And I listened carefully because our roads, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, in that area take a real pounding from the 
heavy oil traffic, from the loads of oil that are hauled from the 
producing wells to the pipeline terminals to be shipped. And 
nowhere in her speech, Mr. Deputy Speaker, did I hear a single 
word saying that there was going to be any assistance to rebuild 
those road structures — to rebuild those road structures. 
 
In fact I brought pictures into the Assembly here a year ago 
about Highway 361 where a semi-trailer truck was stuck in the 
middle of the highway on Highway 361. And yet the minister 
never said a word about providing any assistance in those roads. 
 
And those are some of the things, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that fail 
in this particular budget speech. It does not provide the 
necessary infrastructure funds to keep that infrastructure in 
place for those areas of the province that are generating the 
income that this government is using to try and balance its 
books. 
 
Roughly 50 per cent of the oil and gas money, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, comes out of Southey, Saskatchewan; Cannington, 
Estevan, Weyburn-Big Muddy, the Moosomin constituencies. 
Yet very, very little of that money is being returned to keep that 
infrastructure in place and that has to change, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. That infrastructure has to be maintained if those 
industries are going to remain viable. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, talking about the oil and gas industry 
brings us to another gas industry that’s been mentioned a time 
or two in this Assembly in the last couple of weeks. And that 
would be the Channel Lake Petroleum company, which was put 
in place, as we understand it, Mr. Speaker, in theory to produce, 
buy, and sell gas to SaskPower for the electrical generation 
systems within SaskPower. 
 
But it seems that all of a sudden Channel Lake was doing more 
than just providing gas to SaskPower. They decided to get 
involved in a little gas arbitrage, of buying and selling gas. 
 
Now that seems to have been a real problem because it wasn’t 
under control. Or if it was under control, the ministers of the 
Crown opposite continue to claim that they knew nothing about 
it. There’re innocent lambs, Mr. Deputy Speaker, being led to 
the slaughter by Jack Messer. Because obviously, Mr. Messer 
knew something about it because he was the head of Channel 
Lake Petroleum; was also the president of SaskPower 
Corporation. 
 
Now the way the structure has been set up in this province is 
that a minister has been responsible for those Crowns such as 
SaskPower. So there was a minister opposite, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, who was to be Jack Messer’s boss. But yet 
supposedly, in this case, the boss knew nothing about what the 
employee was doing. So somebody, Mr. Deputy Speaker, has to 
be responsible for this. 
 
Now obviously if the boss didn’t know what he was . . . what 
the employee was doing, the boss was negligent in the 
performance of his duty. If the boss is negligent, then the people 
who own the company — because in this particular case the 
minister responsible does not own SaskPower — the people 
who have shares in that company should be able to fire him. 
 
But they’re hiding, Mr. Speaker, they’re hiding and claiming 
ignorance. Even the Premier is claiming ignorance of this 
particular affair. In fact, when asked the questions, when asked 
the questions, he says, I don’t remember. 
 
I’d like to read a little article from the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix 
of today from Randy Burton, “Straight talk,” because it talks 
about some of those things about “I don’t remember.” It’s 
called “Great memory lapses in history.” 
 

Rock star David Bowie on his history of drug abuse: “I 
can’t remember most of the ’70s.” U.S. President Ronald 
Reagan on whether he had any involvement in the 
Iran-contra arms for hostages deal, responded, “I can’t 
recall.” The Saskatchewan Premier on whether he stepped 
in to save SaskPower president Jack Messer’s neck four 
years ago said, “I don’t remember that.” 
 

So Mr. Randy Burton says: 
 



366 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 1998 

 

Let’s see now. Bowie was high most of the ’70s. Reagan 
may have been suffering from Alzheimer’s in the ’80s. 
What’s the Premier’s excuse, if not political amnesia? 
 

Seems that the members opposite are not particularly happy 
about Mr. Burton’s comments. Perhaps it strikes a little too 
close to home. Perhaps it strikes what he writes in another area 
of his column where it says, “no place left to hide,” talking 
about the NDP government. He says: 
 

What’s more, the government has been injured in a critical 
area, in the perception that the NDP is an effective 
manager of government. 
 

That’s what Mr. Burton has to say, and I believe that he’s 
correct in that. That indeed while the members opposite have 
prided themselves on being effective managers of government, 
how they prided themselves on establishing a Gass Commission 
to review what the previous government had done, I wonder 
what future commissions like the Gass Commission will have to 
say about the management that the NDP Party has provided to 
this province for the last six and a half years. 
 
We know what the people have to say. We know what the 
people have to say because the Leader-Post and the 
Star-Phoenix have done a poll to determine what the people 
have to say. And the people have to say that they don’t believe 
that this government has done an effective job, that they believe 
that a public inquiry is the proper manner, the proper method to 
which to get the bottom of Channel Lake. Unfortunately the 
current government is more interested in not allowing that to 
happen rather than allowing it to happen. 
 
Our colleagues to the left — and I have to say, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that they certainly are a long ways to the left — the 
Liberal Party . . . In fact is, they may very well be to the left of 
the NDP even. They believe that they can provide the proper 
opposition to the government, but it seems that the people at 
large don’t agree with their assessment. In fact is, most Liberals 
who still claim to be Liberal and who say they may vote 
Liberal, don’t believe that they are doing the proper job. 
 
When asked which party has provided the most effective 
opposition to the government in the past six months, 42.8 or 9 
per cent chose the Saskatchewan Party while only 29.5 per cent 
said it was the Liberals. I think that’s a pretty telling statement, 
Mr. Speaker, a pretty telling statement. 
 
When asked whether or not the people of the public approved of 
the stalling tactics — our billabuster that the Saskatchewan 
Party employed for a period of time — when asked whether 
they approved of that, Mr. Speaker, 48.3 per cent said yes they 
did, 48.3 per cent. Again, 50 per cent, roughly, of the people. 
Not of all the people, but of those who had heard about it and 
had formed an opinion, said they approved of it. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think those indicate that the government 
opposite is on the wrong track. And it certainly indicates that 
the Liberal members of this House are on the wrong track. 
 
Again another article dealing with that very important issue, 
Channel Lake. And it needs to be discussed as part of the 
budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because the Crowns represent 40 

per cent — 40 per cent — of the entire economic wealth 
generation of this province. And yet that 40 per cent is very, 
very difficult to find out what’s going on behind the veil of 
government secrecy. 
 
So that’s why it needs to be discussed, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
That 40 per cent should be contributing a lot more to the 
economy of Saskatchewan than it does. This year the 
government pulled a hundred million dollars, a hundred million 
dollars out of CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 
Saskatchewan) for a roughly $7 billion investment. 
 
Now even if you went to the bank and deposited $7 billion and 
drew a modest interest rate, let’s say 5 per cent, you would 
generate $350 million, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And yet the 
Crowns return to the province of Saskatchewan a hundred 
million and don’t even pay any taxes at all. No property taxes to 
the towns and villages and cities in which their equipment is 
residing in. They do pay . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Grants in lieu. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Oh, this member speaks up and says 
grants in lieu. Well the government had been promising $12 
million in grants in lieu, and what did they come up with? What 
did they come up with? What did they come up with? About 3 
million — about 3 million. Couldn’t even keep the promises 
they had made a year ago on that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Couldn’t even keep the promises they made a year ago. 
 
It sort of reminds me of the promise that they made on the 911 
proposal. The member from Indian Head-Wolseley was talking 
about the 911 proposal and how great that was going to be for 
all of Saskatchewan. Well it was about two years ago that they 
first made their announcement on the 911 proposal, and they 
were going to provide, at the same time as that was made, 
approximately a $10 million contribution out of Liquor and 
Gaming to the municipalities for the funds that were raised in 
that area in those communities. Well it didn’t happen; 911 got 
lost and so did the $10 million. 
 
(1600) 
 
Last year the government comes back and says, well we didn’t 
give you that $10 million last year but what we’re going to do is 
we’re going to take that $10 million and we’re going to put it 
into the 911 program this year. Well that was last year. That 
was basically what they said. So what happened? Again the $10 
million disappeared and so did 911. Well I think what we need 
here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is somebody to phone 911 and send 
out a rescue party for 911 because it keeps getting lost. 
 
This government makes sure it keeps getting lost, but now what 
they’re doing is they’re siphoning another $8.4 million out of 
the taxpayers’ pockets with the promise that at some point in 
time we will have a 911 system. Well this is the third budget in 
a row they’ve announced 911. I wonder how many more years 
they’re going to siphon money out of the pockets of 
Saskatchewan taxpayers before it actually becomes a reality. 
 
Well as my colleague says, they’ll only be able to do it for 
another year because that’s how long this government is going 
to last. One more year and we’ll be done with them. 



March 31, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 367 

 

Mr. Johnstone from the Leader-Post had another comment that 
he had to make and perhaps the member from Regina Victoria 
would be interested in this one. It says: “Sask. the banana 
republic of the North.” And the member opposite is proud to be 
a banana republic. And what he says: 
 

So which bogus review process is better? The 
NDP-dominated Crown corporation committee, or the 
NDP-dominated public accounts committee? 
 
Either way, the government will be investigating itself, 
rather than the full, independent inquiry called for by the 
Saskatchewan Party, former SaskPower president Jack 
Messer and a large number of Saskatchewan taxpayers. 

 
So you think World’s Largest Banana Republic is too 
harsh, too unflattering to be the new licence plate slogan? 
(Well) How about Arkansas North? 
 
In both cases, you have a predominately rural population 
and agriculture-based economy, run by self-perpetuating, 
almost incestuous government and business elite. 

 
Well I think that cuts to the core of what the members opposite 
can describe themselves as. He goes on to relate a number of 
the different companies which he includes in those lists, but I 
won’t bother mentioning them, Mr. Speaker; they know who 
they are and they were listed in the paper as such. 
 
An Hon. Member: — We don’t know who they are. Read them 
out. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Oh, the member opposite is one of those 
NDP members, Mr. Speaker, who has a problem with reading. 
Perhaps he was part of that SaskPower board that couldn’t read 
the contract, Mr. Speaker. Perhaps the member from Regina 
Victoria was one of those who didn’t read the contract . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well, Mr. Speaker, perhaps the 
member from Regina Victoria will join in this debate, because 
when the opportunity arose to read the contract to make the 
determination whether or not $5.2 million was disappearing, 
going up in smoke, never to be seen again, out of the 
government coffers, the members opposite couldn’t be bothered 
to read the contract. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of our Liberal colleagues had a 
few comments to make here during his speech — that I would 
like to take the opportunity to respond to — when he was 
talking. And he talked about old Tory appointments. Well, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I would like to talk about the same thing — 
old Tory appointments. And to take a look at the member from 
Melville’s political career. 
 
See, Mr. Deputy Speaker, he was appointed or brought into 
Saskatchewan Crop Insurance by his good friend, Gerry 
Muirhead; and Gerry Muirhead, as you well know, was a 
minister in the Grant Devine Conservative government. 
 
Now whether the member from Melville got his job by political 
appointment or not, I don’t know. But the minister of the time 
in charge of Crop Insurance, Gerry Muirhead, was a very 
political minister, so he may have got it in that particular 
manner. 

Then later in his career — the member seemed to move around 
a lot — he ran for the nomination under the Reform Party of 
Canada banner, which he proceeded to lose at that particular 
point in time. He later ran as the Liberal candidate for the 
Liberal Party in the constituency of Melville, which he won and 
now sits in this seat since 1995. So perhaps the member from 
Melville would describe what kind of political animal he his, 
whether he’s a Conservative, a Reformer, or a Liberal member. 
 
And while the member was talking about openness, he was 
talking about the PC metro trust fund. He was talking about 
how it needs to be opened up. Well while he was the leader the 
first time, because he’s the leader the second time now, but 
when he was the leader the first time of the Liberal caucus, he, 
or perhaps the member from Shaunavon it was — Wood River 
now, it was Shaunavon at the time — said that the Liberal Party 
was an open party, that their books were open for anyone to see, 
their financial records. 
 
So a staff member went over there to have a look at these books 
that the Liberal Party said were so open. So when the staff 
member arrived there and started talking to Emmet Reidy, who 
now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is an NDP hack but who was a 
Liberal hack at that particular point in time — now he’s 
working for the NDP — when he queried him about seeing 
these books that the Liberal leader had said were open, anybody 
could go and look at them, when he went and enquired about 
this, he was thrown out of the office. 
 
It seems, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the Liberal members in this 
House are prepared to say one thing and do something different 
when actually asked to follow through on those commitments. 
 
I brought up an issue last week, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on health 
care, about the lady who had her gall bladder operation in the 
Plains hospital and was later that day discharged and who had 
to spend the night in the Howard Johnson Hotel. And it’s a very 
tragic story, Mr. Speaker. No one should be put in that position 
of going through major surgery and immediately discharged 
from the hospital. 
 
So I received a letter, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Why is the member on her 
feet? 
 
Ms. Lorje: — With leave, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to introduce 
guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Ms. Lorje: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I have many 
wonderful constituents in my riding of Saskatoon Southeast and 
many of them have made very major contributions to the public 
life in this province. One of the most famous of my constituents 
is present in your gallery, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I would like 
all members to please give a warm and cordial welcome to Mr. 
Stirling McDowell. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



368 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 1998 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
received a letter from the husband of the lady who was staying 
at the Howard Johnson health care clinic. So, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I would like to read that letter to you and to the 
members of this House so that they can gain an understanding 
of what the people of Saskatchewan are feeling and what is 
happening to them. 
 
The letter is addressed to the Premier and to the Minister of 
Health: 
 

Tonight I write to you on this Howard Johnson stationery 
from the hotel, room 504, in downtown Regina. My wife 
lays on the bed at this moment, uncomfortable and in pain 
because she had major surgery, gall bladder surgery, at 
about 10 a.m. today at the Plains Health Centre. 
 
Originally she had been slated to stay in the hospital 
overnight to recover, be under observation for any possible 
complications, and to receive proper medication to 
facilitate her recovery. However, due to a lack of beds at 
the Plains Health Centre, nor were there any available at 
the Pasqua or General hospitals, she was told she would be 
discharged tonight at the latest possible time in the event a 
bed came open or her condition worsened. 

 
Gentlemen, tonight my wife left the hospital doors 
hunched over in pain in a wheelchair, clutching her purse 
to her stomach for support of her raw stomach muscles. 
Only 12 hours previous she was just beginning gall bladder 
surgery. Not even half a day passed after surgery under 
general anesthetic and I had to take her out because there 
were no beds. 
 
Her surgeon, Dr. Cuddington, would have preferred to 
keep her in overnight, but couldn’t for two reasons: one, no 
beds were available in this city; two, it seems health 
ministry regulations require doctors to get patients out the 
door as soon as possible. 

 
And I think that addresses clearly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what 
the people of this province are feeling about the health care 
system, particularly the health care system in the city of Regina 
as it represents southern Saskatchewan. 
 
The health minister says 675 beds are enough. He said that’s 
what we have right now, 675 beds; that’s what we’ll have after 
the Plains hospital closes. But these people, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and many others across southern Saskatchewan say 
that 675 beds is clearly not enough. 
 
So when the Minister of Post-Secondary Education strips all the 
hospital beds out of the Plains hospital and turns it into 
classrooms, where are the patients going to go? Where are they 
going to go, Mr. Deputy Speaker? To the Howard Johnson? 
Because that’s the only places that they’re going to receive care. 

At least the people in the hotels are caring enough to look after 
these people, which is more than can be said for the Minister of 
Health. 
 
Further in the letter, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Frith says: 
 

Mr. Premier, Mr. Minister of Health: Today I sat in the 
waiting area by the admissions desk at the Plains Health 
Centre and I overhead distressing news. People were being 
turned away because of no beds at any hospital, not just the 
Plains, but at any hospital. At one point the Pasqua had 
five beds available but there were many people on the 
waiting-list to see who was most critical. 
 

Triage I believe it’s called, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 

Now I ask you gentlemen, how do you justify the closure 
of a hospital with vital importance to the southern residents 
of this province? The three hospitals in Regina now can’t 
accommodate the patient load. How do you expect only 
two slightly expanded units to accomplish the task. 

 
Patient care is already suffering. How much worse must it 
get? Even with the expansions at the Pasqua and General 
hospitals there are reports there will be fewer beds than 
currently in the city now. Fewer beds for people like my 
wife who need proper post-operative care instead of, here 
— here’s four pain killers in an envelope; don’t lose it, or 
tough luck; take care, good luck, goodbye. 
 

And the member from Weyburn-Big Muddy thinks that these 
people don’t understand the health care system. No, Mr. 
Speaker, these people have experienced the health care system 
and clearly understand it. And it’s members like the member 
opposite who don’t understand what her government is doing to 
the people of Saskatchewan. She doesn’t care. 
 
Further in the letter it says: 
 
"So here we are" . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, we just 
heard another one chirp up from Lloydminster . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Another one speaks up. Again, a member says, 
you don’t care. Well we do care, Madam Member, we do care. 
Because what you are doing to the people of Saskatchewan is 
not what they voted for you to do and it’s not for what they 
voted for Tommy Douglas to do. You have forgotten. You have 
ignored and you do no longer respect what Tommy Douglas 
was trying to do for the people of this province. You’re more 
concerned about making sure your political appointees like Jack 
Messer and Gordon Nystuen have good jobs, not that the people 
of Saskatchewan have proper health care. 
 
(1615) 
 
So Mr. Frith says: 
 

So here we are in a hotel room. I’d never have been able to 
get in if my in-laws hadn’t reserved and paid for it. 
 
I’ve got a question for you. Why is this government doing 
such a dastardly deed to the taxpayers of this province? 
Why are you wasting $90 million to add fewer beds to two 
hospitals in a not so easily accessed area of Regina and 



March 31, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 369 

 

spending at least $20 million on shutting down the Plains 
Health Centre which is only 20 years old instead of 
spending only 65 or 70 million to renovate, modernize, and 
remove the health risk of the Plains Health Centre. Mr. 
Premier, Mr. Minister, why the colossal waste of 
taxpayers’ dollars? 

 
Well, Mr. Frith is right. The government didn’t have any money 
available to upgrade the Plains Health Care Centre but all of a 
sudden they found $30 million to turn it into a school. But 
they’re still leaving the asbestos in there. I gather the asbestos is 
not safe for patients but it is safe for our young students. 
 
Now perhaps the Minister of Health can explain how asbestos is 
safe for young people. I guess they’re just not interested, Mr. 
Speaker. Whatever it takes to look good is the only thing 
they’re interested. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Frith goes on to say: 
 

Ever since my wife, children, and myself have moved to 
this province in August, 1997, I’ve seen nothing but 
financial waste by you and your government. 
 
You throw money around at different problems but you 
miss the mark on where it should be going. When that 
doesn’t work, you initiate a surcharge, an administration 
fee, or a reconstruction fee. Oh, we’re back to SaskPower 
again to recoup your losses. You can’t run a business that 
way and survive; nor can you run a government that way 
and expect re-election. 

 
Fiscal mismanagement — there’s a word that the NDP used to 
use a lot. Well it’s coming back, Mr. Speaker, with their name 
attached to it. Fiscal mismanagement — Channel Lake, the 
Guyana fiasco, the closure of the Plains Health Centre — by 
your government, Mr. Premier. And the closure of the Plains 
will be some of the major nails in the coffin of your 
government’s demise. 
 
Mr. Frith writes: 
 

I promise you this, Mr. Premier, Mr. Minister of Health, 
unless the Saskatchewan NDP place a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre and make it an election 
issue, you will never have my vote or my wife’s. Do the 
right thing, stop the closure of the Plains Health Centre. 
 
Sheldon Frith, Redvers, Saskatchewan. 

 
Well I think, Mr. Speaker, this letter clearly spells out the 
failings of this government when it comes to health care. When 
it comes to health care, Mr. Speaker, they’re not particularly 
that people actually have access to health care. They’re more 
interested in their buzz words like “wellness.” 
 
Well I’ve talked about a number of members in the House, Mr. 
Speaker. I listened when the member from Indian 
Head-Wolseley spoke and he had some interesting things to say 
. . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Well what was wrong with my speech. 
Wasn’t it . . . 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Well one of the other members chirps 
up, well what about my speech? Well his speech wasn’t worth 
listening to, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Indian Head-Wolseley . . . or 
Indian Head-Milestone, I guess, talked about his $11 fees, the 
$11 big game hunting fee and how great it is, how great it is, 
Mr. Speaker, that he’s removing that fee. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
what would have been really great is if he hadn’t put it on in the 
first place. 
 
We, Mr. Speaker, we pointed out all the problems last year that 
were going to happen if he implemented this fee: that hunters 
weren’t going to buy game licences; that people were going to 
be unhappy about this fee being tacked on them when others in 
society were not paying their share. And they were not prepared 
to make that sacrifice and give the government another $11. 
 
So we had a 15 per cent drop in hunting licences for 
white-tailed deer. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Marvellous. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — And what was the result of that? The 
member from Regina Dewdney says marvellous. We have more 
deer out there now eating farmers’ grains and running into cars 
and costing SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) more 
money. But the minister from Regina Dewdney is happy about 
that. 
 
It’s obvious that in his constituency he doesn’t have a whole 
bunch of white-tailed deer running around getting in the road of 
his constituents’ vehicles. You know, Victoria Park, Victoria 
Park, Mr. Speaker, is a large park in the city, one of the largest 
parks in a city, but I suspect, Mr. Speaker, that there isn’t a 
single white-tailed deer in the park. 
 
So the member from Regina Dewdney and his constituents 
don’t have to fear running into one of those white-tailed deer as 
they drive around the city on their Sunday afternoons. 
 
But if you live across rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, that is a 
critical danger. That is. Many people are injured and millions of 
dollars worth of vehicle damage and personal damage is caused 
by white-tailed deer. 
 
And the member opposite doesn’t care because it doesn’t affect 
his constituents. Well it affects the constituents of every rural 
member. And every time the member from Regina Dewdney’s 
constituents want to drive out to visit their grandparents out in 
the country — because, Mr. Speaker, there are no jobs out in 
rural Saskatchewan; they all have to move into the city — so 
the member in the Regina Dewdney’s constituency when they 
drive back out to rural Saskatchewan to visit their grandparents, 
they’re in danger, Mr. Speaker, of striking those white-tailed 
deer. 
 
The other time, Mr. Speaker, that that member’s constituents 
are in danger is when they pack up their belongings, Mr. 
Speaker, and head for Alberta. That’s another time. But then 
perhaps the member thinks that a good time for them to run into 
deer, because then they can’t get out of the province quite as 
quick. Because, again, the members opposite are not 



370 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 1998 

 

particularly concerned about the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
The member from Indian Head-Milestone . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Isn’t there an MLA that lives in B.C. 
(British Columbia)? 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Yes, in fact, the member . . . my 
colleague is right — one of the members of this House has even 
moved to British Columbia; represents her constituency from 
Kelowna. You know, perhaps she had better watch those 
white-tailed deer as she’s driving back and forth to B.C. 
because there’s a lot of them out there. Once you get out to the 
west side of the province, there’s mule deer to worry about, and 
they’re even harder on vehicles. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Who are you talking about? 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Who am I talking about . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Which member? Well it’s one of the 
government members. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Now the Chair is much pleased 
to see the enthusiasm for debate that exists in the House, 
however, I recognize as well that all hon. members will, I’m 
sure, want to have their remarks put on the record when they 
make them so that they can be observed by the people of the 
province. 
 
And I also will want to remind the hon. member for 
Cannington, as he well knows being a veteran member, that the 
appropriate way of debate in the House is to direct your 
comments through the Chair. And I’m sure that he’ll want to 
pursue his debate with that kind of format. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. Again I want to comment on some of the 
comments made by the member from Indian Head-Milestone 
when he talked about Saskatchewan having the lowest taxes in 
Canada. And when he said that, I had to scratch my head and 
say, what are you talking about? What are you talking about? 
Saskatchewan? 
 
The government tries to pull a fast one here. It says, you know, 
we’ll lower the . . . yes, here it is. Saskatchewan income tax 
number two. That’s number two in highest, not in lowest. The 
government opposite tried to pull a fast one in saying, well 
we’re going to lower our income tax by one and a half per cent. 
Well what it meant, Mr. Speaker, is that they kept it at the same 
level as what they had previously in relationship to Manitoba 
and Alberta. 
 
But we were still, Mr. Speaker . . . Before they lowered it, we 
were the highest income taxed province in Canada and now we 
have lowered it slightly. We haven’t changed our relationship to 
Manitoba and Alberta, which are significantly lower than we 
are, but we’re now lower than Newfoundland. And I guess 
that’s something to be proud of — we’re lower income taxed 
than Newfoundland. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Not by much though. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Not by much, as my colleague says. 

And perhaps it relates to the fact that we’re both agrarian 
provinces. Newfoundland farms fish; Saskatchewan farms the 
land for grain. But at the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, and the 
government members seem to be proud of this — the Minister 
of Finance certainly was proud of it — that we’re still a welfare 
state, that we’re still getting $300 million from the government. 
 
The previous member who was the Finance minister, currently 
the House Leader for the government, didn’t want our economy 
to improve too much because we would quit getting money 
from Ottawa, from the federal Liberal Party. She wanted us to 
stay a welfare state. 
 
And the member from Saskatoon who’s now currently the 
Finance minister has achieved that. He has achieved that, Mr. 
Speaker, because we went from a $30 million, I believe it was, 
payment from Ottawa to a $300 million payment. So he 
succeeded in ensuring that we remain on welfare. And I think, 
Mr. Deputy . . . Mr. Speaker — I don’t want to demote you — 
Mr. Speaker, that that simply isn’t good enough. 
 
And you know, the members opposite know, that when we look 
at our neighbour to the west, when we look at our neighbours in 
Alberta, when we look at our families that are living in Alberta 
— our sons, daughters, brothers, cousins, nephews, nieces, 
grandparents, grandparents indeed because even the 
grandparents are leaving Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker —they are 
succeeding much better than the people living in Saskatchewan. 
And the matter . . . Another member, the Minister of Education 
doesn’t believe the grandparents are leaving for Alberta. They 
are, they are. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Ray Howe, Ray Howe, vice-president of 
the Wheat Pool, where did he retire to? 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Ray Howe moved to Lethbridge. There 
was a member here who just retired from SaskPower, Mr. 
Speaker. Makes a good living on his pension, but his wife is 
very meticulous. She keeps track of every nickel they spend, 
and she has for years. She has the records. So they have been 
living in Medicine Hat now for a few years. Again, keeping 
track of every nickel they spend, that he spends. 
 
And Mr. Speaker, do you know what the conclusion they have 
come to is that they net — they net — $10,000 a year better off 
in Alberta after paying their hospitalization fees, after paying 
for those humongous licences that the members opposite are 
always talking about. They net out $10,000 a year better off 
living in Medicine Hat. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we simply can’t continue that way. We 
simply can’t continue that way. Those people, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order. Order. I think the 
hon. member from Cannington doesn’t need aid and assistance 
from his own colleagues. And the hon. members on the 
government side will want to pay attention, I’m sure, and enter 
into debate at the appropriate time. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
thank you for intervening there because I haven’t even gotten 
into my speech yet with all the interruptions. 
 



March 31, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 371 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, again about the member from Indian 
Head-Milestone discussions about the taxes, the level of 
taxation in this province. It’s not just the income tax that you 
have to look at though, not just the income tax. Take a look at 
the cost we pay at SaskPower. The increases that we have had 
over the years. Under the good management of Jack Messer that 
the government keeps promoting, costs for SaskPower have 
gone up 25 per cent — 25 per cent for SaskPower alone. 
 
SaskTel rates have gone up. SaskEnergy rates have gone up. 
And SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance), Mr. Speaker, 
SGI has gone up dramatically and the deductibles have . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I will ask all hon. 
members, I will ask all hon. members to come to order. Allow 
the debate to continue in an orderly kind of manner. And I 
would ask the hon. member’s colleagues to allow him to be 
heard when he’s entering into debate on the floor. 
 
(1630) 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. One of the 
issues that the Minister of the Environment brought up was 
Tetra-Paks. Now this was quite awhile ago that the government 
opposite decided to start charging an environmental fee on 
Tetra-Paks. And I believe they were raising somewhere in the 
neighbourhood of 3 to $4 million a year on these Tetra-Paks. 
But they were never, Mr. Minister, never providing any 
recycling for those Tetra-Paks. 
 
So they probably collected roughly $20 million since they 
started charging the environmental fee on Tetra-Paks. And 
finally, Mr. Speaker, finally they recognize that they have to 
start providing a service for this. Sort of reminds you of the 911 
scenario where they’re going to start charging us money for 911 
but never providing the service. 
 
Hopefully they’ll provide that service within the four or five 
years. They’ll have generated $40 million and they should have 
enough money socked away by that time to actually, maybe, 
provide a little bit of service for that. But it seems to take them 
at least five or six years to get around to doing these things. 
Unfortunately in the case of this government, Mr. Speaker, they 
don’t have four or five years to get 911 in place. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, let’s talk a little bit about some of the other 
areas that the budget has failed in, some of the areas that the 
government is making their projections about how good it’s 
going to be for them in Saskatchewan when all of these fairy 
tales come true. 
 
Because indeed, Mr. Speaker, they are fairy tales when you 
look at the unrealistic expectations and projections they have 
placed on the price of oil in generating roughly $500 million for 
this province. The province last year in their budget said that 
their expectations for the average price of crude oil would be 
$20. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as we know, as this budget 
cycle ended, the price of oil was in the 13 to $14 range — 13 to 
$14. And it has come back a bit since then, Mr. Speaker. We’re 
in about the $15 range now. 
 
But that’s not what the government has projected. The 
government is using a figure of $17.25 a barrel for oil. So 

what’s going to happen if that doesn’t happen . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Yes. The member opposite says, don’t worry 
about what the oil prices are going to be, and one of my 
colleagues hollers . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The member 
from Lloydminster doesn’t believe that the price of oil actually 
has an impact on this budget. And I guess that perhaps explains 
why their numbers never seem to add up when it comes to those 
things. And she is supposed to be representing a constituency 
that produces the oil. That’s where the upgrader is. 
 
If that spread differential is not very good between medium and 
light crude, that upgrader that they’ve been bragging so much 
about — that actually was invested in by the previous 
government but they want to take the credit for it — if that 
spread differential isn’t there, those taxes are not going to be 
collected, Mr. Speaker. They aren’t going to have that revenue 
to finance this budget. 
 
So I’ve got a report here, Mr. Speaker, from the Royal Bank 
that talks about that one year projection for more oil. And the 
Royal Bank’s projection is $16 average for the year — a dollar 
and a quarter less, a dollar and a quarter less, Mr. Speaker. So 
already we’re going to see a significant decrease in the tax 
collected and royalties. 
 
When that price drops, you also see something else. Two other 
things happen, Mr. Speaker. One, you don’t get the oil 
companies bidding on the land sales, so again the government 
takes a loss there, and over the last few years, they’ve generated 
2 to $300 million on that area; that is going to decrease. 
 
And the second thing that happens, which is even more serious, 
is that as the price of oil decreases, it becomes no longer 
economical to operate some of the wells and so the companies 
shut them in. When they break down, they simply do not fix 
them. 
 
So not only then does the government lose their portion of the 
royalty, but you lose the labour that is needed to maintain that 
and the income taxes off of that. You lose the sales of 
SaskPower; you lose the sales of SaskEnergy; you lose the fuel 
sales necessary for the transportation system to carry that oil 
and to take the people there to do the work. So it’s a multiple 
loss situation, Mr. Speaker, and this government is trying 
desperately to ignore it because their projections are way too 
high. 
 
They needed to put those projections so high, Mr. Speaker, so 
that the member from Saskatoon who is the Finance minister 
could claim that he had a balanced budget. If that level of 
estimates for the oil prices had been at $16, as recommended by 
the Royal Bank, I seriously doubt whether this budget would 
have been balanced. 
 
It may have been balanced though, Mr. Speaker, if the 
government had siphoned some more money out of Liquor and 
Gaming because there is money there. There is money at Liquor 
and Gaming and they could have pulled more money out of 
that, Mr. Speaker. But what happens though, Mr. Speaker, if the 



372 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 1998 

 

money out of Liquor and Gaming is used this year, then the 
government wouldn’t have it available to use during an election 
year. An election year, money is very important to all of the 
members opposite. 
 
The other thing that would happen if the oil prices have been 
listed at $16, it would have meant we would have gotten more 
money — welfare money — from Ottawa because oil prices are 
written into the formula to determine how much grant is sent 
out by Ottawa. 
 
One of the other areas, Mr. Speaker, where we don’t see the 
performance matching the government’s expectations is in the 
uranium royalties. The uranium prices have decreased, Mr. 
Speaker. The projection which . . . the government projected 
last November there would be $18 million lower than they had 
forecast previously. Again the foundation on which this budget 
has been built, Mr. Speaker, has been very weak. It’s built on 
sand and, Mr. Speaker, that sand is washing away. 
 
The only area where the government seems to have made a 
projection that is into a rising market has been in the potash 
area. They collected $35 million more last year than what they 
had projected. But this clearly does not offset, Mr. Speaker, the 
losses they suffered last year in oil and gas nor the potential 
losses that they stand to suffer this year if the prices of oil does 
not rise up to the 17-plus level that the government has been 
projecting. 
 
The government did lower the royalty rates, Mr. Speaker, both 
on potash and on oil and gas. On the oil and gas level they 
lowered it only on new production, but it takes the revenues 
generated from the old production to pay for the new 
exploration and the new drilling. If those monies aren’t 
available, then that doesn’t happen, Mr. Speaker. Again, that is 
going to harm our economy. So while the government has 
lowered the rate, it’s certainly been valuable but more needs to 
be done. 
 
But there’s one area there, Mr. Speaker, one area where the 
government failed to lower the rates and that was in the coal 
industry. Now we don’t sell a lot of coal outside of 
Saskatchewan but we do sell some. So if the government 
lowered the royalty rate, we would take less revenues from the 
oil industry . . . from the coal industry’s exports. 
 
But the major consumer, Mr. Speaker, of coal in this province is 
SaskPower. The major consumer of coal in Saskatchewan is 
SaskPower. So when you have a high royalty rate, or you don’t 
change the royalty rate in relationship to other minerals 
produced, including oil, only one person is paying that and that 
is the taxpayer of Saskatchewan when they pay their power bill. 
 
Now, now what’s been happening? The member from 
Rosetown says, well, that’s Jack’s idea. Well Jack did issue a 
complaint in that area. Because while he couldn’t seem to get 
through to the government that there needs to be a lowering of 
the royalty rates, what he did do is he imported coal from 
Wyoming and said that the coal from Wyoming was more 
economical than the coal from Saskatchewan. And it’s probably 
true. It’s probably true. 
 
But why is it true? It’s true because of the royalty rates that we 

charge in Saskatchewan, royalty rates charged by the 
Government of Saskatchewan on coal produced in 
Saskatchewan, sold to the Saskatchewan Power Corporation. 
Now if that’s not an incestuous relationship, I don’t know what 
is. 
 
Because at the end of the day, the only person paying that 
royalty, that high royalty charge, is the taxpayer of 
Saskatchewan. Now the members opposite don’t seem to be 
particularly concerned about the taxpayer, and we can certainly 
see that, Mr. Speaker, when they charged a billion dollars a year 
more in taxes since they’ve been in government — a billion 
dollars a year more since you’ve been in government. And 
that’s what they’re charging in taxes. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, they would rather, with SaskPower, export 
those jobs to Wyoming and Montana than give the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan a break. So we have coal in Saskatchewan, we 
have the transportation method of getting the coal from the 
mines to the coal plants, we own the coal plants, but we would 
rather buy our coal from Wyoming because it’s cheaper. 
 
It’s cheaper because of our royalty rates. It’s cheaper because of 
our power rates . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Now I think all hon. members will 
want to allow the budget debate to proceed in an orderly 
manner. And I would ask for the cooperation from all hon. 
members, both the hon. member’s own colleagues as well as 
members on the opposite side of the House. And I simply ask 
for the cooperation of the members. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So we have a 
situation where the coal comes . . . the power company says we 
can’t afford to buy coal from Saskatchewan producers because 
it’s too expensive. It’s too expensive because of the royalties; 
it’s too expensive because of the electrical charges; it’s too 
expensive because of the gas rates; it’s too expensive because of 
the fuel taxes; it’s too expensive because of WCB (Workers’ 
Compensation Board) charges; it’s too expensive because of the 
labour regulations in Saskatchewan. 
 
All of those things have contributed to the cost of coal to the 
power companies in Saskatchewan. So unless this government 
opposite is prepared to deal with those costs, to lower their take 
to allow the Saskatchewan coal companies to continue selling 
coal to SaskPower, we will be losing the jobs, and Wyoming 
will be benefiting, Mr. Speaker. And the government and the 
Minister of Energy and Mines and the Finance minister have 
completely ignored the issue, Mr. Speaker, and do not want to 
deal with it. 
 
Go back to the oil industry, Mr. Speaker. It’s an industry I’ve 
had a little bit of experience with. I worked in the oil patch for 
20-some years. And when we look at it, Mr. Speaker, we had 
3,993 drilling licences issued last year and that is going to 
decrease dramatically. In fact, Mr. Speaker, the first three 
weeks of the new year, drilling licences were down by 24 per 
cent — 24 per cent, Mr. Speaker. According to Ross Barwick of 
Venables Machine Works in Saskatoon — a company that 
produces oil tanks, Mr. Speaker — his comments about the 
downturn in the oil industry was: 
 



March 31, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 373 

 

We were going full bore in 1997, and the first day of the 
first week in January we were asked to cut our production 
in half. 

 
A 50 per cent reduction. So will this company be able to 
maintain their employment levels, Mr. Speaker? No they will 
not. 
 
In February of this year, PanCanadian Petroleum — I worked at 
one time for PanCanadian Petroleum — they cut 200 jobs, 200 
jobs in the Weyburn area. The member from Weyburn-Big 
Muddy, now what did she say to the Minister of Finance to see 
to it that these jobs stayed in Saskatchewan? I doubt she said a 
thing, not a thing, Mr. Speaker. Not a thing — because why 
wouldn’t she say anything. She’s so far back at the cabinet table 
she can’t even see the Minister of Finance. Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
(1645) 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — With leave, Mr. Speaker, to introduce 
guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce through you and to you to all of my quiet colleagues 
in the House, Don Taylor, in the Speaker’s gallery, who is the 
director for division 1 for the Saskatchewan Association of 
Rural Municipalities, which we fondly know as SARM. And I’d 
like all the members to join me in welcoming him to the House 
today. Don. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, this government is very dependent on resource 
royalties, and while they have made a small step in the right 
direction on those royalties, they have missed some major areas 
such as coal, and the royalty changes they have made in the oil 
and gas industry in a downturn are not going to be significant 
enough, I believe, to have a major impact. 
 
I had the opportunity two weekends ago, Mr. Speaker, to attend 
a conference in Calgary, and while we were there we talked to a 
number of people in the oil industry and we asked them, at the 
present oil level, what are the future prospects for the oil 
industry on the short term — we’re talking one year or so — in 
western Canada, particularly in Saskatchewan? And their 
response was that if the price of oil drops any lower, there will 
be major shut-downs. 
 
One of the people we were talking to said that over the past 

three or four years the major executives in that corporation had 
always had their doors open in their offices. They were never 
closed. And the last two weeks those doors have been closed 
the full time. There was lots of meetings going on and they 
were making the decisions as to who was going to stay on 
working and who wasn’t. So if the prices increase, Mr. Speaker, 
those jobs, most of those jobs, will continue. But if the price of 
oil drops, those jobs will be gone and the oil industry will 
dramatically reduce its levels in Saskatchewan. 
 
And just as an aside, Mr. Speaker, the conference that we were 
at in Calgary was dealing with property rights, and I know 
that’s something that the government opposite doesn’t want to 
talk about. But one of those issues that was raised at that 
conference was the gun control issue, which this government 
has supported, the fight against the gun control, but which 
seems to have died down in their estimates, which seem to have 
gone no place — it’s at court — and we don’t hear anything out 
of the government at all any more on that particular issue. 
 
The other area, Mr. Speaker, that dealt with . . . one of the other 
areas that was dealt with in that conference was the grain issues, 
on whether or not farmers actually own their own grain. 
Because the courts have determined that if you grow wheat, you 
grow durum, if you grow barley, then you don’t own it. You 
can seed it, you can cultivate it, you can spray it, you can pay 
all the expenses, but at the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, the 
farmer does not own those grains. And there was a court 
decision made on that. 
 
And in fact the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool was involved in a 
court decision. They had all of this grain on hand in their 
elevators and they tried to do some inventory adjustment for tax 
purposes to say that there had been some shrinkages, therefore 
they had some economic losses that could be written off on the 
taxes. 
 
Well the Canadian Wheat Board said no, you don’t own that 
grain. It belongs to the Canadian Wheat Board. You cannot 
make any adjustments for income tax purposes. 
 
So now we find out who does own the grain. Ralph Goodale, as 
the minister responsible for the Canadian Wheat Board, perhaps 
he owns it. And the Minister of Agriculture for Saskatchewan 
supports him in that particular view — that that grain is owned 
by the Canadian Wheat Board, not by the farmer that grew it, 
cared for it, stored it, or hauled it, but strictly owned by the 
Canadian Wheat Board. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, that was a little bit about the conference I 
attended in Calgary. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, one of the things that this government has 
been doing this year has been covering up its losses in those 
revenue-generation areas, because of the drop in oil, by drawing 
heavily on the Crowns. 
 
I can remember sitting at Crown Corporations, which is 
meeting this week, but over the last six years sitting in Crown 
Corporations and the government kept saying no, we don’t have 
a formula for paying out revenues from CIC from the Crowns, 
but our goal is to pay $50 million a year. And that’s basically 
what they’ve been paying over the last year — $50 million a 



374 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 1998 

 

year. 
 
All of a sudden this year, Mr. Speaker, they draw $100 million 
out. And why did they draw $100 million out of the Crowns? 
Because the resource revenues did not pay them what their 
projections were. They projected $20 million last year, didn’t 
make it. They projected seventeen and a quarter this year, Mr. 
Speaker, and they’re not going to make it. They’re going to 
have to draw again on the Crowns and on Liquor and Gaming. 
 
When the previous administration was doing those very similar 
things, drawing down the Crowns, the members opposite 
criticized them and described it as a shell game that weakened 
the competitive positions of the Crowns. That’s how they 
described it. They described it as a shell game which weakened 
the competitive position of the Crowns. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we have similar concerns, but for different 
reasons, for different reasons. They’re drawing heavily from the 
Crown reserves, which lowers their value for any potential 
privatization. It lowers the economic value of those Crowns. 
 
I remember a report a couple of years ago where when asked 
what was the value of SaskTel, what was the value of SaskTel, 
and they said well, it ranges somewhere from 700 to $900 
million. Well if you’re making an evaluation . . . If I have to do 
an assessment on my farm, the tax man wants to know what it 
is. He doesn’t want me to say, well it’s between 70 and 90, you 
know. No, he wants to know. But the government didn’t want 
to provide that kind of information, Mr. Speaker, because they 
didn’t want to be held to that. And now they’re diminishing 
those values by drawing them down, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well, anyways, Mr. Speaker, this government is running on 
borrowed time and they will soon run out of those particular 
monies to prop up their failing economic forecasting and their 
failing economic engines. 
 
I’d like to deal with another portfolio, Mr. Speaker, that I have 
the privilege of being the critic for, and that is the Environment 
— the Environment, Mr. Speaker. And there’s no doubt that as 
part of the reaction to diminishing . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Yes the member from Rosetown did indeed have that up, 
and every service station owner in this province fears the name 
of the member from Rosetown. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government is proposing to nearly double its 
royalties from forest products. They’re doubling their take from 
the forest industry at a time, Mr. Speaker, again when the 
revenues in that industry do not mandate that those kind of 
resources be drawn from them. They’re going from 3.8 million 
to $7 million, Mr. Speaker — $7 million. 
 
Now they passed some legislation two years ago about the 
forest industry which has still not yet been implemented. But 
why, Mr. Speaker? Why haven’t they implemented this? 
Because the public . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Now hon. members I think will all recognize 
that the House is getting a tad disorderly here, and I would ask 
for the cooperation of all members. There’s no need to be 
shouting — order — there’s no need to be shouting across the 
floor to one another. And it is getting very difficult for the Chair 

to be able to hear the hon. member’s for Cannington’s remarks 
in debate. And I’ll ask for the cooperation of the House, from 
all members of the House. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. One of the 
environmental concerns which arose in my own constituency 
and in the member from Moosomin’s constituency this past 
winter and Christmas time was action dealing with wolves — 
was a major problem in the area, Mr. Speaker. A number of 
farmers were losing animals. One farmer lost a $25,000 elk, he 
lost a number of horses and a number of cattle and a number of 
that person’s neighbours were also losing animals. 
 
And it was a great deal of difficulty . . . It was only with a great 
deal of difficulty, Mr. Speaker, that the department for the 
environment, SERM (Saskatchewan Environment and Resource 
Management), was prepared to deal with that. They dragged 
their feet for a considerable period of time before anything 
happened, Mr. Speaker. Fortunately there eventually was some 
remedial action taken place that provided some relief. 
 
But the government needs to implement a policy on dealing 
with wolves, Mr. Speaker, and I didn’t hear that any place. And 
I specifically didn’t hear it when the minister for the 
Environment spoke, because he was quite familiar with this 
particular incident; it was close to his area, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So that’s another area in which there needs to be some action 
taken, because we are getting into a situation where there are 
excess wolf populations in particular areas. They are harmful to 
trapping, to hunters, to outfitters, farmers, and people in the 
logging industry. 
 
It affects people, Mr. Speaker. The safety — just the very safety 
of people in rural Saskatchewan. One of the people in the 
affected area, Mr. Speaker, phoned me up and said they went 
outside one particular morning after a fresh snowfall and there 
were tracks of three wolves walking right through the yard, 
right in the area where their children — their young children, 
ages about 6 to 10 — walked out to the road to school. And 
there were wolves between their gate and their house sometime 
during the night. And this was causing a great deal of concern, 
Mr. Speaker, for those people in the area. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, that’s the problem that came out of the area of 
Kennedy. Now I have some more words that I’m sure the 
members opposite are waiting with bated breath to hear. I will 
forego the opportunity this evening to do that but will 
commence up to their adulation tomorrow afternoon. So at the 
present time, Mr. Speaker, I would move that this debate be 
adjourned. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, I assure the member that we 
will be waiting with bated breath for further remarks from the 
member from Souris-Cannington, but until that time comes, I 
now move that the House do adjourn. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:57 p.m. 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................345 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................345 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................345 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................345 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................345 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................345 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................345 
  Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................345 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................345 
  McPherson.................................................................................................................................................................................346 
  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................346 
  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................346 
  Goohsen .....................................................................................................................................................................................346 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ..........................................................................................................................................................................................346 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Crown Corporations 
  Lorje...........................................................................................................................................................................................346 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Goohsen .....................................................................................................................................................................................346 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................347 
  Lorje...........................................................................................................................................................................................367 
  Teichrob.....................................................................................................................................................................................373 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Poll Results 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................347 
 New Saskatchewan Business Ambassadors Program 
  Kasperski ...................................................................................................................................................................................347 
 Economic Developer of the Year Award 
  Renaud .......................................................................................................................................................................................347 
 Disney Buys Saskatoon Movie Rights 
  Lorje...........................................................................................................................................................................................348 
 Remote Housing Program 
  Johnson ......................................................................................................................................................................................348 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Inquiry into Channel Lake 
  Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................348 
  Lingenfelter ...............................................................................................................................................................................348 
 Saskatchewan Health Information Network Appointment 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................349 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................349 
 Escape from North Battleford Facility 
  Heppner .............................................................................................................................................................................350, 352 
  Serby ..................................................................................................................................................................................350, 352 
 Plains Health Centre Closure 
  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................350 
  Crofford .....................................................................................................................................................................................350 
 Rural Health Care 
  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................351 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................351 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 SIAST Wascana Campus 
  Crofford .....................................................................................................................................................................................352 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................353 
  McPherson.................................................................................................................................................................................353 
  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................353 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Kowalsky ...................................................................................................................................................................................354 
 



 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 
  Bradley.......................................................................................................................................................................................354 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................359 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................361 
  D'Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................365 
 
 
 


