





























































Hansard: May 04, 1998


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 917 
 May 4, 1998 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 

Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 
present a petition on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan 
regarding the closure of the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition has been signed by people from the 
city of Weyburn and also from the community of Yellow Grass. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise again 
today to present a petition and the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people that signed the petition are from 
Moose Jaw; they’re from Verwood, Norwood, Rockglen, 
Limerick, Assiniboia, and all throughout the land, and I so 
present. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This afternoon I 
present petitions concerning the congestion to the highway 
entrance to North Battleford. The prayer for relief reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly maybe pleased to relocate Highway 40 at the 
intersection to the Yellowhead Highway No. 16 to east of 
the David Laird Campground in order to alleviate the 
congestion at the entrance to the city of North Battleford. 
 

Your petitioners come from North Battleford, Battleford, 
Delmas, Meota, and Glenbush. I so present. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I join with my 
colleagues here today bringing forward petitions to hopefully 
prevent the closure of the Plains hospital. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 

so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed these petitions that I 
have are from Gravelbourg, Assiniboia, and the Bengough area 
of the province. I so present. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan who are concerned 
about disenfranchised widows and widowers. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to have The Workers’ 
Compensation Board Act amended for the disenfranchised 
widows, widowers of Saskatchewan whereby their 
pensions are reinstated and the revoked pensions 
reimbursed to them retroactively and with interest, as 
requested by the statement of entitlement presented to the 
Workers’ Compensation Board on October 27, 1997. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

There’re coming in fast and furious from all around Regina. 
Thank you. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly on the 
following matters: to save the Plains Health Centre; to put 
a moratorium on the closure of the Plains Health Centre; 
and to relocate Highway No. 40 to alleviate congestion at 
the entrance to North Battleford. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Whitmore: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Through you and 
to you, Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce an individual in 
the west gallery; someone who takes a very keen interest in 
politics in Saskatchewan and someone from my constituency, 
Melissa McDowell. And I would like all members of the 
Assembly to welcome her here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today we have two 
very special guests with us in your gallery — Carol Wright and 
Mark Olson. I’d like to ask to have them stand. They’re integral 
players in collecting some 70,000 signatures to date on a 
petition calling on the federal government to change the Young 
Offenders Act. As members of the Legislative Assembly, it is 
our job to raise political awareness to serious problems such as 
youth crime, but individuals such as Carol and Mark give freely 
of their time and money to correct what they see wrong in 
society. 
 
I would like all members of the Assembly to join with me in 



918 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1998 

welcoming them and thanking them for the effort they’ve put 
into the democratic process. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
I’d like to introduce to the Assembly through you a very special 
guest who is at the bar. He’s our former MLA (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly) from Swift Current, former minister of 
Crown Investments Corporation, one of the first, original 
members of the 1991 Treasury Board who along with the 
member from Regina Dewdney, began the fiscal turnaround of 
the province. It’s my pleasure to introduce John Penner. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce to you and through you to the legislature today, guests 
of ours. In the east gallery is Heather Prystupa of Regina, here 
to watch the proceedings with us. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
I’d like to introduce to you and through you to the Assembly, a 
visiting scholar from Shandong University. He’s a visiting 
scholar here at the Faculty of Education. It is Mr. Zhen Qian. 
He’s accompanied by Dr. Paulette Van der Linde. 
 
I’d ask both to stand and be recognized by the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today it’s my pleasure 
to introduce to you and though you to members of the 
legislature, a friend of mine, a student at the school of 
journalism here in Regina and a person who has just returned 
from down east, working with I believe it was the Department 
of Justice, the national Department of Justice. 
 
Members, please join me in welcoming Sabrina, Sabrina 
Cataldo. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce 
to you and through you to all members of the legislature, Mr. 
Gary Carlson, who is one of my constituents. But he’s a friend 
of Saskatchewan, has been working in very many volunteer 
organizations for many years. But one that doesn’t get 
mentioned often — but I think should get mentioned — is his 
organizational ability in the Saskatchewan homecoming 18 
years ago. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker it’s 
my pleasure to introduce to you and to members of the 
Assembly, a friend of mine, Father Jozef Nabywaniec. Father 
Joe, Mr. Speaker, is originally from Przemysl, Poland, which is 
on the Polish-Ukrainian border, and has been in Canada for the 
last 11 years, 9 of which have been here in Regina where he 
works for the archdiocese. I’d like to welcome Father Joe here 

today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Violence Against Women 
 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today is the first day of 
the week set aside to raise awareness about the many women 
who are battered by their husbands or partners. Mr. Speaker, I 
think we can all agree that family violence is one of the worst 
forms of abuse anybody can experience. Our hearts go out to all 
the women, children, and men being beaten by those who 
should love them and protect them the most. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, sending out our best wishes is not enough. 
They need our support in many ways. We must support these 
people by ensuring that there are safe houses for them to escape 
to their . . . their critical moment of need. We must support 
shelters such as the Prince Albert emergency women’s shelter, 
that it is in real danger of closing because of this government’s 
refusal to fund it. 
 
As leaders of this province, we can’t sit back and let this 
happen, because if we do we are furthering the very problem we 
stand here and discuss today. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, I would challenge the Minister of 
Social Services and the minister responsible for the Women’s 
Secretariat to sit down and develop a long-term solution to 
ensure long-term sustainability of the Prince Albert shelter. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Purple Ribbon Awareness Week 
 
Ms. Stanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. May 4 to May 10 has 
been proclaimed Purple Ribbon Awareness Week in 
Saskatchewan. This is an opportunity to raise awareness of 
violence against women in our society. 
 
This is a time to recognize that we all have a responsibility to 
take action to stop violence and abuse. Education and 
prevention are the most effective ways of breaking the cycle of 
violence and there are community-based programs throughout 
the province that are working towards the goal. 
 
But as individuals we can also take steps to change attitudes and 
behaviours. We can teach our children that violence is 
unacceptable; that it is an abuse of power and trust. We can 
commit to non-violent problem solving and discipline. 
 
We can support women in our communities who are dealing 
with a violent relationship. We can ensure that we never blame 
women for the violence in their lives. We can talk to them about 
their experience, their fears, and the barriers they face. Violence 
continues to be a reality for too many women and men and 
children in our province. 
 
And let me just say, Mr. Speaker, that the P.A. (Prince Albert) 
home is being funded for women and will continue to be 
funded. Thank you. 



May 4, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 919 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Cluff Lake Mine 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d just like to 
thank a company for inviting me last Tuesday and Wednesday. 
I went for a tour of the Cluff Lake mine site. And the Cogema 
company of Saskatoon took a whole bunch of northern leaders, 
mayors, and chiefs, and they also invited me as MLA to come 
along to tour the Cluff Lake mine site. 
 
And of course some of the tour was based on some of the 
concern that has been expressed through the media in terms of 
workers’ safety and environmental protection and northern 
participation. 
 
And I want to assure the members of the Assembly that the trip 
was very worthwhile. There’s a lot of positive developments 
happening at the mine site. And I must say that I was very 
impressed with the amount of work that was being done out in 
Cluff Lake by the number of northern people. 
 
And in closing, Mr. Speaker, I also want to say we had the 
opportunity to hop in these very low-lying trucks and drive 300 
feet down into the earth, and they gave us a demonstration of 
blasting while we were down there. And I want to assure all 
members of the House, that really is an experience you may or 
may not want to take part in. 
 
And I must say that the mining industry certainly offers a 
tremendous amount of benefit to Saskatchewan, to the country, 
and that I want to thank Cogema publicly for their hospitality 
and their generosity during my visit. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mental Health Week 
 
Ms. Murray: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Canadian 
Mental Health Association is a non-profit organization that 
promotes issues related to mental health through public 
awareness and education. May 4 through May 10 is Mental 
Health Week in Canada. This year’s theme is “Making Mental 
Health Matter.” 
 
The Canadian Mental Health Association has 15 branches in the 
province with over 300 volunteers. Making mental health 
matter is dependent on communities supporting their local 
branches. The Regina branch will be holding their 12th annual 
mayor’s luncheon to raise public awareness and funds for the 
promotion of mental health issues and to assist people who have 
mental health needs. 
 
The mayor’s luncheon will be held at the Beverly Hills 
ballroom at the Regina Inn at 12 noon tomorrow, May 5. The 
master of ceremonies is Sheila Coles and the speaker is Mayor 
Doug Archer. Tickets are available at the door. 
 
The Minister of Health, and the Minister of Post-Secondary 
Education and Skills Training and I are looking forward to 
attending; and we encourage all of you to attend and support 

this important cause. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Geriatric Assessment Program 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There is much 
that is wrong with the Saskatchewan health care system and 
much that needs improvement. 
 
Occasionally though, bright spots emerge. One such bright spot 
is the geriatric assessment program at Saskatoon’s City 
Hospital, headed by Dr. Earl DeCoteau. I don’t know if I ate 
peanut butter for lunch or not, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It is all too seldom that credit is given where credit is due. This 
program takes a holistic, multi-disciplinary team approach 
which includes the clients as part of the team. The service 
provided is consistently courteous, individualized, and 
thorough. Clients are kept well informed about what is being 
considered and the rationale for decisions made. They feel cared 
for in every sense of that word, Mr. Speaker. The top quality 
geriatric care provided at Saskatoon City Hospital should be 
available throughout Saskatchewan, and our seniors deserve 
nothing less. 
 
I salute Dr. DeCoteau and his staff today for their dedication 
and exemplary service to Saskatchewan elders. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Lake Diefenbaker Potato Corporation 
 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There is much 
that is right about economic development in the 
Rosetown-Biggar constituency. I want to congratulate the 
people of Lucky Lake and the Outlook area and the Lake 
Diefenbaker Potato Corporation that has begun construction on 
a new flaking and dehydration plant. The plant has a start-up 
cost of $4.2 million and is part of a planned $36 million 
expansion. 
 
Last year these same people built a fresh-pack plant in Lucky 
Lake. Several years ago the people of that community started 
with a hundred acres of potatoes, then 4, then 8, then 25. This 
year they’re going to be growing 5,800 as a corporation, and 
other independent producers are going to grow another couple 
of thousand. 
 
This is indeed economic development the way it should be. 
 
Currently the plant employs approximately 75 full-time and 65 
part-time people. However thanks to this new expansion, at 
least 125 new, full-time jobs and 100 seasonal jobs will be 
created in Lucky Lake, Beechy, and Outlook areas. 
 
Plant officials estimate $30 million in gross sales for the ’98-99 
crop. Profits from the crop will finance a planned expansion to 
8,000 acres by the year 2000. In addition, the company plans to 
create a trucking division to transport its products to the 
north-western United States. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s the kind of good news that Saskatchewan 



920 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1998 

has from corner to corner. I’m proud to call this one home. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Revision of Young Offenders Act 
 

Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today the 
Saskatchewan Party will be tabling copies of some 70,000 
signatures on a petition calling on the federal government to 
completely re-overhaul the Young Offenders Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I present these petitions on behalf of Carol Wright 
and Robert Fortin of North Battleford who have given countless 
hours of their own time and dollars to ensure that their elected 
representatives take responsibility for the deadly serious 
problem of youth crime. 
 
Last week we saw the federal Justice minister make a very 
meagre gesture to appease the growing support for reform to the 
Young Offenders Act. These changes are simply not good 
enough. We need real change and we need it now. We need to 
change the Act before one more car is stolen or one more 
person has to pay for the federal government’s lack of action 
with their life. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, I would like to challenge all members 
of the Assembly who have not signed the petition to do so. And 
I would call on all members to put aside their political 
differences and stand united behind Carol Wright, Robert 
Fortin, and the 70,000 people who have signed this petition, and 
call on the federal government to start listening to the people of 
Saskatchewan and almost every other province and territory of 
this great country. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Polonia Dance Ensemble 10th Anniversary Concert 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Yesterday at the Performing Arts Centre 
here in Regina, almost 400 people attended the 10th 
Anniversary of the Polonia in Concert performance of the 
Polonia Dance Ensemble of Regina, Mr. Speaker. They were 
treated to a variety of lively Polish folk dances which included 
national dances such as Krakowiak, and regional dances of 
Slask, Lublin, Wielkopolska, Warmia, Kurpie, and Sacz. This 
year’s guest group was the Miorita Roumanian Dancers of 
Regina, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Polish.) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Compensation for Hepatitis C Victims 
 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today my 
questions are for the Minister of Health. Mr. Speaker, today 
CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) Newsworld is 
reporting there must be something wrong with the phone system 
in Saskatchewan. Because whatever you, the Minister of 

Health, and the other Health ministers decided on the phone 
Friday morning had nothing to do with what happened Friday 
afternoon. 
 
Yes, there was no change in the . . . you said there was no 
change in the province’s position. You said there was no push 
from the provinces for an expansion of the compensation 
package. But Friday morning while you were on the phone, the 
Premier of Ontario said his province may join the class action 
suit against the federal government. And today Ontario 
announced it will unilaterally compensate all persons who 
contracted hepatitis C prior to 1986. 
 
Mr. Minister, your failure of leadership last week on the 
hepatitis C compensation package complicated and confused an 
already badly bungled process. Mr. Minister, will you finally do 
the right thing — expand the hepatitis C compensation package 
to include all victims who contracted the disease through tainted 
blood transfusions? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the member 
opposite, first I want to say that he is correct that yesterday or 
on Friday I’d had a discussion with all of the provincial Health 
ministers across the country, and all but one were on that 
conference call. And when we concluded our discussions at 
about 1 o’clock our time, the decision that all Canadian Health 
ministers has made were three points . . . four points. 
 
One is that we would continue to ensure that the $1.1 billion 
compensation package for individuals between 1986 and 1990 
would be honoured. But secondly, that what we would be doing 
is putting some additional resources where possible into 
ensuring that quality health services in each of the provinces, 
both Health and Social Services, were being met. 
 
Thirdly, that we had all agreed that there would be not an 
additional call on Ottawa at this particular point, for additional 
compensation outside of the window which we all agreed on. 
 
And finally, that all of the provincial Health ministers would be 
asking the federal government to put additional funding in to 
expand the amount of revenue that they provide for all of us 
across the nation to improve the health services of the country. 
 
That’s the discussion that I came away with, with the Health 
ministers across the country on Friday morning. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
minister’s response is just a reflection of his dismal 
performance last week and it’s totally unacceptable. Your inept 
management has made a really bad situation a lot worse. 
Hepatitis C victims were looking for some leadership and 
compassion, and Canadians expect nothing less. But, Mr. 
Minister, what we got last week was mass confusion and chaos. 
No leadership, no compassion, no consideration for what is the 
right thing to do. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you today end the confusion? Will you do the 
right thing, expand the hepatitis C compensation package to 



May 4, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 921 

include all victims who contracted the disease through tainted 
blood? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, first I want to say to 
the member opposite that I have not been informed by any of 
the Canadian Health ministers and/or Minister Rock that in fact 
there has been any change to the package that was put together 
for the period of 1986-90. I have not heard from any of the 
provincial Health ministers across the nation to say that that 
package needs to be disrupted or changed in any way, shape or 
fashion. 
 
Now I say to the member opposite that today’s announcement, 
which I have just recently seen, from Ontario places a different 
kind of complexion I think on the future of how each of the 
provincial governments across the land and the federal 
government will look at expanding, if you use that term — if 
you use that term — into the future. 
 
Now what I will need to do is to demonstrate the kind of 
leadership that you talk about continues to exist, and that is to 
ensure that I have that kind of an audience with all of my Health 
ministers across the nation, and to have a discussion with Mr. 
Rock to see what kinds of implications this now provides for us 
as all Canadian Health ministers and not just Saskatchewan 
and/or Ontario. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A further question. This 
one to the Premier. Mr. Premier, last Tuesday the NDP (New 
Democratic Party) voted down an expansion of the 
compensation package for hepatitis C victims. But on 
Wednesday, Ontario, Quebec, and B.C. (British Columbia) 
decided to oppose the federal government’s woefully 
inadequate compensation package; a package, Mr. Premier, 
your Health minister took a lead role in negotiating. And on 
Friday your Health minister met with nine other provincial 
Health ministers and decided to do nothing. But now, Mr. 
Premier, Ontario is promising to unilaterally expand the 
compensation package; B.C. is considering a motion to 
compensation pre-1986 victims; and now Nova Scotia is likely 
to do the same. 
 
Mr. Premier, it is high time you admit your Health minister’s 
management of the hepatitis C file has been an unqualified 
disaster. Mr. Premier, will you now fire your Health minister 
for incompetence and take over the leadership on this issue? 
And will you do the right thing, push for an expansion of the 
hepatitis C compensation package to include all victims who 
got the disease through tainted blood before 1986? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the member 
opposite that leadership of the Canadian Health file was one 
that I had received endorsement from from all of the Canadian 
Health ministers, not only on Friday but received that 
endorsement from all of the Canadian Health ministers and Mr. 
Rock over the process of negotiating this agreement. 
 
And so I say to the member opposite that if there’s a change 
today in the way in which the compensation package needs to 

proceed, that kind of direction I will need to receive from all of 
the Health ministers across the nation. Because I provide only, 
Mr. Chair, only provide the figurehead for them to ensure that 
the kinds of process that they want me to take them down, I can 
speak on their behalf. 
 
And I say to the member opposite that if you want to talk about 
leadership, if you want to talk about leadership, you need to 
look within the ranks of your own party where you have 
individuals who are in the ranks of your own party who have 
done tremendous damage not only to themselves but to the 
parties that they’ve come from. Now if that’s the kind of 
leadership that you’re accustomed to having, Mr. Speaker, this 
is not the kind of leadership that this member here provides. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Surgery Waiting-lists 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, if 
the Premier isn’t going to fire the Health minister over his 
bungling of the hepatitis C package, he should be fired for 
double-doctoring. 
 
On Friday he made the startling admission to the SMA 
(Saskatchewan Medical Association) conference that he is on 
the waiting-list — on three waiting-lists — for knee surgery. 
The minister said he’s on waiting-lists in Saskatoon, Regina, 
and Yorkton health districts. 
 
One of the doctors at that conference quickly pointed out that 
that’s an abuse of the system and if he were to refer patients to 
specialists in three different districts, that would grossly inflate 
utilization of medical services. 
 
Mr. Minister, you talk about reducing over-utilization and yet 
you yourself are on a bunch of different waiting-lists. Mr. 
Speaker, what kind of example is he setting? Mr. Minister, can 
you explain to us why you, as the Health minister, are on three 
different waiting-lists? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I’d be happy to explain the 
situation to the member opposite. And what I want to say first 
of all to the member opposite is that, first of all I tried to make 
the point with the doctors the other day that we have a number 
of people in this province who are in fact on more than one list. 
And what happens, Mr. Speaker, is that as an individual you 
don’t get on to that list on your own. That referral needs to be 
provided by someone from the medical community. 
 
Now I might, Mr. Speaker, have asked for an opportunity for 
more than one consult. And I want to say to the member 
opposite that the example that I provided, the example that I 
provided was in relationship to an experience that I have some 
familiarity with. And the familiarity with takes me back some 
years, where in fact I was injured in a very serious hockey 
accident — which a number of people can relate to who are in 
this House — and had, Mr. Speaker, my injury reviewed by an 
individual specialist, later then referred to someone else for a 
second opinion. 
 



922 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1998 

And that’s how it is, Mr. Speaker, that I was on two lists in this 
province some time ago. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Minister, there’s many people in 
this province have serious problems, and they’re only on one 
waiting-list. They don’t have the luxury of being Health 
minister. 
 
The minister, as minister, you can’t seem to get your story 
straight. First you say you’re on three waiting-lists, then you 
say you’re on one, and now you admit that you’re on at least 
two. So we don’t know if you’re double-doctoring or 
triple-doctoring. But one way or another, you’re abusing the 
system. 
 
The minister shops around for surgeons like the Deputy Premier 
shops around for lawyers. 
 
Mr. Minister, how can you possibly expect other people to 
curtail their utilization when you’re abusing the system? Or do 
you expect special treatment because you’re Health minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — To the member opposite, first of all I want 
to say to the member opposite that — and I reiterate to you 
again and to the media and to all of my friends who are paying 
attention to this issue — is that I am on no waiting-lists. I am on 
no waiting-lists. 
 
And I say to you and I say to you and I say to you, that the 
example that I was using, the example that I was using was an 
incident that occurred to me several years ago, to ensure that I 
could make the same point that you make. And the point is this: 
that today in the system, today in the system what we have is 
that we don’t have a pure way of determining whether or not 
somebody is counted once or twice for a procedure. And that’s 
the point that I was making. 
 
So as you and members of the opposite party go around the 
province talking about the expanded list that we have, that there 
are people who are actually on that list who were counted more 
than once. And that’s the point that I was trying to make to the 
medical . . . to the Saskatchewan Medical Association; that’s 
the point I try to make to you. And it looks like it’s not really 
sinking in with you either. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
Friday the real opposition, the Liberal caucus, revealed that the 
average wait for elective surgery at St. Paul’s Hospital in 
Saskatoon is 370 days. 
 
We have also revealed that more than 6,600 people — 6,600 
people — occupy waiting-lists in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Lyle Prystupa of Regina is a perfect example of 
our health care’s gone bad. He underwent surgery in February 
to remove a rectal abscess and now is in need of reconstruction 
surgery but has been placed on a non-urgent list. 

Mr. Minister, Heather Prystupa, in the gallery today . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . please bear with me. Mr. Speaker, 
Mr. Minister, Heather Prystupa has joined us in the legislature 
today. Will you tell her why her husband can’t get the surgery 
that will end his suffering? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I want to say to the member opposite in 
the same fashion that I’ve answered the member’s question in 
the past — that in this province we have three procedures under 
which people are categorized for, which are emergency, urgent, 
and elective. And those are the three procedures under which 
the needs that people have and the priorities in which they 
receive their care across the province are determined. And that 
determination is made in three levels. It’s made by the family 
practitioner; it’s made the specialist; and in conjunction it’s 
made with the institution in which you have chiefs of staff to 
practice. 
 
And through that process, they determine what needs that 
individual has on that priority list. Now if an individual 
member’s health needs change during a period of time, they can 
move up within the list or they can move down within the list. 
And that determination is made by a team of professionals who 
have a better presence of what the medical needs of individuals 
are than you do, or I do, and in some cases the individual who 
that procedure is being performed on. 
 
So I need to take the opinion of those individuals who are 
practising in the field to provide the sense of what their needs 
are at that particular time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
when are you going to stop blaming health care professionals? 
They can’t make a decision when there aren’t beds for them and 
you know that. There’s been too many cases brought forward. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the condition of Lyle Prystupa went from bad to 
worse over the weekend. He was admitted to surgery last night 
because he was encountering severe pain. Doctors discovered 
that his wound was infected and is now septic, meaning that the 
infection has spread throughout his entire body. 
 
Mr. Minister, where is the compassion in our health care system 
when people are forced to endure this kind of pain and suffering 
ongoing? Would you allow your family members to go through 
this? 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order, order. Now I want to 
caution the hon. member before I permit the minister to respond 
that the question is directed to members of the Executive 
Council in question period, must be directed to them in the 
context of their responsibilities of Executive Council. Only that 
is acceptable, and any questions directed outside of that will not 
be accepted and the member will pass his opportunity to ask 
questions. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to assure the 
member opposite that we work as hard as we can within the 
government, within the health care system and the professionals 
who work in it, to ensure that people are well served in the best 
capacity that the health system can provide that. 



May 4, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 923 

And I say to the member opposite that on no occasion in this 
province — and I stress this again — where somebody requires 
emergency services have emergency services not been provided 
to them where their life is at risk or threatened. That happens 
every day across this province and health professionals respond 
fully and accurately and completely. 
 
And so for the member for a minute to suggest that there are 
people who are practising today in the field who don’t view 
those responsibilities seriously or fully is inappropriate, and it 
doesn’t meet the standards that we have in this province. 
 
I say to the member opposite that I recognize that from time to 
time we have pressures in the system and say that. And your 
good doctor was on the steps of the St. Paul’s Hospital on the 
weekend, of which they asked him to get off and move away. 
And they told him that because he was providing information 
which wasn’t right. 
 
And when you take a look at the information from the 
Saskatoon Health District, they say this: “Begg said while the 
district is concerned about the long waiting lists” which is . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Next question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There’s one 
other point that makes this issue sickening. When the NDP 
brought in its version of a health care reform, it was based on a 
wellness model. We heard this would be a win-win situation; 
treating patients early would have obvious health care benefits 
and it would have great savings for the whole system. 
 
Mr. Minister, wellness appears to have gone out the window 
when people are forced to endure a month of pain and agony, 
then must be admitted to their emergency room because 
infection has spread throughout their body. 
 
Mr. Minister, what immediate steps are you taking to get a 
handle on these waiting-lists, other than your own? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I say to the member opposite that I’m not 
on a waiting-list in Saskatchewan. And I want to make that, I 
want to make that . . . to the member again one more time so he 
understands that. 
 
But I say to the member opposite, say to the member opposite 
that across the province today this government has provided 
$1.72 billion to enrich and enhance the quality of health 
services around the province. And the member opposite knows 
that just recently I was in your community, was in your 
community and we signed an agreement with the folks at 
Ponteix. And the people at Ponteix said, we have an 
appreciation for the way in which our health services are 
provided today in your community — in the community that 
you’re in, Mr. Member. And they stood up and they applauded 
when you spoke and I spoke about the quality of health care 
services in Ponteix today. 
 
And just a couple of days ago we were in Shaunavon, we were 

in Shaunavon. And we talked about the opening of a new 
facility in Shaunavon. And my good member from Swift 
Current was there. But you weren’t there — you weren’t there 
for the opening of that, because it’s a good news story in your 
own community and you can’t stand good news stories around 
your community. Because you’re too busy, you’re too busy 
going around the province talking about what isn’t working in 
health care, as opposed to looking at the wonderful piece of 
work that’s happening in the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Health Information Network 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I hate to say we told 
you so, but we told you so. 
 
The Saskatchewan Medical Association says it can’t support the 
draft health information protection Act which will be 
introduced during this legislative session, because of privacy 
and confidentiality concerns. 
 
My question is to the Minister of Health, Mr. Speaker. We have 
raised concerns about this issue many times in the past years but 
you refuse to listen. Mr. Minister, why do you refuse to address 
these privacy concerns before starting to spend millions of 
dollars on the Saskatchewan Health Information Network? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve said to the member 
opposite on a couple of occasions now that in this province 
we’ve made a decision that we’re going to spend in the 
neighbourhood of $40 million, $40 million on a new program 
which will in fact enhance the quality of health care services 
into the future. And we’re not doing it alone. 
 
As I say to the member opposite, we’re doing it in concert with 
what’s happening to the east of us, to the west of us, and we’re 
doing it in concert with what’s happening across the nation 
today, to ensure that we have new technology that addresses the 
needs of diagnostic services, of treatment services, in particular 
to rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And when we look, Mr. Speaker, at ensuring that we provide 
quality health care services across the country, we need to be in 
touch with what the realities of today’s situation is. And new 
technology is the reality of today. 
 
And so I say to the member opposite, as much as we provide 
home care services, expanded acute care services, funding for 
doctors, and funding for nurses, and funding for long-term care 
services, we also look at the new, expansive procedures that are 
happening across the country which is information technology, 
which we think will provide services to your community and 
my community, who are rural fellows, in a better fashion than is 
received today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Diagnostic Testing Waiting-lists 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is to the Minister of Health. 
 



924 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1998 

Mr. Minister, there are various kinds of ultrasounds used to 
assist physicians in diagnosing their patients. Carotid 
ultrasounds are ordered by physicians to help in the prevention 
of strokes. As of the second week in April there were 631 
people on the waiting-list for carotid ultrasounds at the Plains 
hospital. That is the equivalent of one year’s waiting-list. Mr. 
Minister, why is this happening and is this acceptable to you? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I want to say to the member opposite that 
across the province today we’re providing a whole host of 
diagnostic testing in many communities — out of Saskatoon, 
out of Regina, out of Prince Albert. And when the member asks 
the question about whether or not I’m satisfied today with the 
fact that some of those, some of those waiting-lists are a bit 
longer than what they should be, I say to the member opposite 
that those are the kind of things that we’re working on. 
 
When I say to you that we have an expanded MRI (magnetic 
resonance imaging) program coming to Saskatoon in the next 
. . . or to Regina in the next little while, that will assist us in 
reducing some of those waiting times people are waiting for, for 
diagnostic services. 
 
Recently we opened a CT (computerized axial tomography) 
scan in Prince Albert. And we also opened the new satellite 
renal dialysis services in Tisdale. And soon in Yorkton. 
 
And as we continue to provide those broad range services 
outside of rural . . . or to rural Saskatchewan, many of those 
diagnostic services will make their way into those communities 
to reduce the waiting-lists that you’re talking about, which is 
my objective and I know is yours. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, for a 
government that is supposed to be promoting wellness, this 
doesn’t make any sense. The financial cost on the system of 
recovering from a stroke can be as much as $100,000 a year. 
The human cost can be lengthy rehabilitation, a lifetime of 
disability which robs the victim of the joy of being able to fully 
contribute to society. 
 
Or the cost can be loss of life. In many instances, this 
tremendous cost can be prevented and the first step is the 
ultrasound test which is one one-hundredth of the cost of a year 
of rehabilitation. 
 
Mr. Minister, the people of this province are losing on both 
sides of this equation — in human cost and in financial cost. 
Mr. Minister, stand in your place and explain the logic of this. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I thought that in my first response I 
indicated to the member that the process of ensuring that we 
have growth in diagnostic services around the province is an 
objective that we have, and highlighted for the member 
opposite all of the various different procedures that we have 
implemented over the last two years to ensure that rural 
Saskatchewan people in particular have the ability to get those 
kinds of tests so that they don’t have to make the long trek to 
the larger centres, which I’ve outlined; and that we’ve put a 
significant amount of resources in the last little while into the 
two larger centres of Saskatoon and Regina to ensure the very 

kind of things that you’re talking about can be enriched and 
expanded and better provided. 
 
So as much as the member opposite says that there’s more to do 
— and we recognize there’s more to do and collectively 
through the work of the Saskatchewan Association of Health 
Organizations and through the physicians and the specialist, 
we’re going to try and grow and promote those areas, Mr. 
Speaker, as best we can to ensure those kinds of services that 
you talk about are well met to Saskatchewan people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Plains Health Centre Closure 
 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
question is for the Premier or his designate. I’ve been speaking 
out against the closure of the Plains hospital since it was first 
announced by this NDP government some four years ago. 
People from every part of Saskatchewan have joined the call to 
save the Plains. And many, many compelling arguments have 
been made and everyone just heard another from the member 
for Humboldt. 
 
In four years this Assembly has never been given the 
opportunity to vote on this government’s decision to close the 
Plains hospital, and I believe that that is wrong. MLAs have a 
right; they also have a responsibility, Mr. Speaker, to represent 
their constituents and vote on this very, very important issue. 
 
So, Mr. Premier, today the member for Humboldt and I are 
joining for the call for a free vote on the future of the Plains 
hospital. And I ask you, sir, will all government members and 
all opposition members in this House be allowed a free vote 
tomorrow on the future of the Plains hospital? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I want to say to the member opposite that 
— and I’ve said this many times over and I’ve said it at the 
public meetings — that the decision to move the Plains Health 
Centre and all of its services to the other two facilities was 
made in 1993. It was made in 1993 when the member opposite 
was the Leader of the Liberal Party. And I can’t recall for a 
moment where the member opposite said that she was going to 
call on the retaining of the Plains Health Centre as a health 
facility for Saskatchewan. Can’t remember. 
 
And when the member opposite was asked whether or not she 
would in fact keep it open she said what she would do is 
another study. That she would do another study, is what the 
member opposite said. So today for the member opposite to 
stand up as an independent member and say that she’s going to 
move on a different process simply is not credible — simply is 
not credible. 
 
And I say to the member opposite, we have had an election 
since 1993 on the Plains Health Centre and health services in 
this province. We’ve had that. And I say to the member 
opposite, you need to be true to what you said in 1995 during 
the election. And your statement today is not true to what you 
said. 
 



May 4, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 925 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 44 — The Municipal Employees’ Pension 
Amendment Act, 1998 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that Bill 
No. 44, The Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 
1998 be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Referral of Estimates to Standing Committee on Estimates 
 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
before orders of the day to move, seconded by the member from 
Prince Albert Carlton, by leave of the Assembly: 
 

That the estimates for the Legislative Assembly, estimates 
for the Ombudsman and Children’s Advocate, and 
supplementary estimates for the Legislative Assembly, 
being Vote 21, and the estimates for the Provincial 
Auditor, being Vote 28, be withdrawn from the Committee 
of Finance and referred to the Standing Committee on 
Estimates. 

 
Leave granted. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — I would like to request permission to present 
a motion of urgent and pressing necessity. 
 
The Speaker: — The hon. member for Rosthern requests under 
rule 46 to introduce a motion of urgent and pressing necessity. 
I’ll ask the hon. member for Rosthern to very, very briefly 
describe to the House the reason for making the case of urgent 
and pressing necessity and to very briefly advise the House of 
the motion he wishes to introduce. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And I’ll try and do both of those 
quickly and together. Essentially the motion requests that this 
Assembly support a major reform of the Young Offenders Act 
brought about by the petition initiated by the people from North 
Battleford and some 70,000 signatures. And that those reforms 
must include amendments to the Young Offenders Act that 
involve all aspects — rehabilitation, security of the public, and 
the concept of consequences. And that this motion and 
transcript of this debate be forwarded to the federal Minister of 
Justice, Prime Minister of Canada, and all party leaders in the 
House of Commons. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 46 
 

Reform to the Young Offenders Act 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Over the past 

number of months I’ve been able to attend numbers of meetings 
in various communities in Saskatchewan dealing with the 
Young Offenders Act which has sort of been initiated primarily 
in the event that took place in North Battleford. 
 
However, the event that took place in North Battleford that 
seems to have initiated this has been built on other things that 
have happened in our province that I think come to people’s 
minds very quickly. We think of situations in Kyle. We think of 
a number of situations that developed in the city of Regina, and 
Martensville. 
 
And we think of ongoing, other things, Mr. Speaker, such as the 
fact that we have a city in this province that is now the break-in 
capital of Canada. We have a city in this province that is the 
car-theft capital of Canada. And I think those things need to be 
addressed, and much of that can be addressed through the 
Young Offenders Act. 
 
And I guess in key we think that Saskatchewan legislators — all 
of us of all parties and independent individuals — must stand 
united in calling on the federal government to change the 
Young Offenders Act. And I think the federal government 
needs to see that every province — and this province in 
particular, Mr. Speaker — that we stand together regardless of 
our political stripes and backgrounds to say that the Young 
Offenders Act must be changed, and it must be changed 
substantially. 
 
Last week Justice Minister Anne McLellan announced she was 
considering changing the Act to allow for the identification of 
some 17- and 18-year-old . . . 16- and 17-year-old offenders. 
That’s a start but it isn’t anywheres near good enough. The 
limits that were set on that are not the kinds of things that the 
people of Saskatchewan are asking for. They’re not the kinds of 
things that the 70-plus thousand people that signed that petition 
across Canada are asking for. It’s something that I think was 
thrown out there, Mr. Speaker, to try and hope that the people 
of Canada would say okay, we got something; let’s see how it 
works. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the people of Canada have seen the Young 
Offenders Act work for a long time, and they’re not at all happy 
with it, and they want it changed. In fact as the petition says, 
specifically they would want the whole thing scrapped and 
build a brand-new one from the ground up to make it the kinds 
of things that the people of this province and this country want 
it to be. So just manipulating with it, tampering with it, is not 
good enough. 
 
The petition drive initiated by the people of North Battleford 
has substantially increased the level of public debate and 
provided people with an avenue to express their fear and their 
concern to elected officials. This, as you know, Mr. Speaker, is 
by no means the first petition that’s gone across this province, 
this community, or this land. However I believe it’s by far the 
one that has the most names on it. 
 
We had one started in this very city, Mr. Speaker, not long ago, 
that the students from Miller put together that had a very 
impressive number of signatures on there, tens of thousands of 
signatures. When that was sent to Ottawa no one listened, and I 
think we have to keep sending more and more names, and this 



926 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1998 

time we have 70,000. At some point, Mr. Speaker, the federal 
Minister of Justice must listen to the people of our country. 
 
Each and every one of us in this Assembly knows very well 
how the political game works. By introducing minor changes, 
the federal minister can make it appear as if they’re being 
proactive, taking action, before these petitions get there, about 
the problems and hope that the public pressure will go away. 
And that’s why we need to act now and that the pressure we can 
put on by a united front behind this particular piece of 
legislation, this motion, needs to be added to all those petitions 
that we have. 
 
We can’t let this opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to bring about real 
and meaningful change go by because the costs may simply be 
too high. And if we look at the cost of the situations that I 
mentioned that have happened throughout Saskatchewan in the 
last numbers of years, those costs are way too high. We can’t sit 
here, Mr. Speaker, and wait for that to happen time and again 
and again and then say somewheres down the line a decade 
from now or two decades, maybe we need to look at it a little 
again. It needs to be looked at now and it needs to be looked in 
its completeness. 
 
As Saskatchewan Party Justice critic, Mr. Speaker, I’ve had the 
honour and privilege, as I said, of attending the meetings 
throughout this province — North Battleford, Lloydminster, 
tomorrow in Saskatoon, and in Prince Albert on Thursday. And 
the message seems to be the same all over. The meetings are 
well attended and the messages are always loud and clear. The 
message is, let’s do away with the Young Offenders Act and 
put in place a new piece of legislation with tougher sentences 
for youths that commit crime. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in this day and age very often people say, 
well tougher sentences, you’re just being negative, you’re being 
punitive. We can use a different term, Mr. Speaker. We can talk 
about consequences. It comes to the same thing. A good matter 
of upbringing, we always talk in schools, in our homes, in our 
communities, that every deed has a consequence. The 
consequence may be positive or negative depending on what the 
deed is. And I think when we look at the Young Offenders Act, 
Mr. Speaker, we need to look at it the same way. 
 
Youth needs to know very specifically what the effects are of 
the crime they wish to commit. And they need to know those 
clearly. They need to know those will be handed out just the 
way that they are stated. And nothing else but that is good 
enough. 
 
There have been too many patches put on the Young Offenders 
Act piece of legislation to make it work. When you try to patch 
on a patch and the previous patch comes off, you’ve lost it all. 
And I think that’s what’s happening in Canada. 
 
Some of our hon. members in this legislature have said that the 
petition is too extreme for them to support; that they would like 
to temper it. That isn’t where the people of this province are at, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
They have distorted, the members opposite, the intention of the 
petition to bring the elimination of the Young Offenders Act 
with no replacement legislation. That has never been the case at 

all, but it’s just been used as an excuse not to get onside with 
where the rest of the public is at on this issue. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party is suggesting that new legislation is 
drafted and that this new legislation must ensure, Mr. Speaker, 
three things. First and foremost, the Act must properly ensure 
protection and safety for the people in the community. That is 
not happening right now. 
 
People in this province, Mr. Speaker, need to be able to go to 
bed at night, put their head on the pillow, and say I believe I’m 
safe tonight. I believe my vehicle out in the shed in the back is 
safe tonight. And the tires on my vehicle parked out in the front 
are safe tonight. 
 
This isn’t happening, Mr. Speaker. That safety is not there. It’s 
not even seen to be there. We know that in fact it is not there. 
And it doesn’t matter whether we happen to go from North 
Battleford or to Lloydminster, it’s not there. 
 
Number two, Mr. Speaker, the Act must entail adequate 
consequences, that I mentioned earlier, for the young people 
who commit crimes. We can’t continue slapping young 
offenders on the wrist for committing serious and violent 
crimes. 
 
Punishment or the consequence, whichever term that we happen 
to choose to use, Mr. Speaker, must be such that the young 
offenders choose not to offend, and definitely choose not to 
reoffend. 
 
And number three, and I think number three is just as important 
as the other two, Mr. Speaker, we must not ignore the root 
problems that lead to youth crime. Rehabilitation must be kept 
part of the equation when we discuss young offenders. 
 
Rehabilitation is important for numbers of reasons. It’s 
important for the youth themselves, that rather than get 
involved in a life of crime that is continuing, they can become 
contributing members, positive contributing members, to 
society. 
 
The other thing, Mr. Speaker, that makes rehabilitation so 
important is that I believe it is, at the end of the discussion, a 
cost-saving effort. Because if we don’t rehabilitate these young 
people they will continue to commit crimes that are costly on 
the individuals in pain and suffering, and property damage, and 
then the justice system — or as it is the case in our 
Saskatchewan system — our Social Services has to deal with 
those individuals. That’s a very costly procedure. If we would 
have done the best that we could to rehabilitate earlier in life 
those costs would not be there. So it needs to be looked at and it 
needs to be looked at very carefully. 
 
Unlike the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, we believe it is less 
necessary to spell out the absolute details of those reforms. And 
numbers of people, Mr. Speaker, have chosen to step aside from 
this petition for that particular reason. They want to see the 
whole, completed Act, whatever it would be, in its completion. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I think in order to get an Act that represents 
the feelings of people from across this country — because this 
is a federal Act — we need to sit down as people from all 



May 4, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 927 

parties, from all provinces, and from our Northwest Territories, 
to look at what is needed and create one that we can all support, 
that we can all live with, and has that input from each one of us. 
 
(1430) 
 
We can get hung-up at this provincial level over minor 
differences in the platform and party labels, or we can recognize 
that we are calling on the same things. We’re calling on public 
safety; we’re calling on youths to take responsibility for their 
crimes; and we’re calling on rehabilitation for youth in need. 
And for those disposed to be easy on crime, including our 
federal Justice minister, I think we need to ask ourselves who is 
this really helping. 
 
This is certainly not helping the Helen Montgomerys of this 
world. And I fear to think, Mr. Speaker, that if we don’t make 
some serious changes — some major changes — those sorts of 
things will continue to happen throughout not only this province 
but throughout this country. And this is not helping our young 
people, who get away with serious offences without being 
taught that crime does not pay. 
 
Admittedly we’re usually told this is only a small percentage of 
our youth, Mr. Speaker, that commit these crimes, and that is 
true. However that does not reduce the fear; that does not 
reduce the need for more serious consequences for the crime; 
and it also does not reduce the need for rehabilitation. 
 
It is not the number of youth that are committing crimes that we 
need to deal with. We need to look at exactly what we’re doing, 
how effective it is. What’s happening today, and we’ve seen it 
across Saskatchewan and in talking with some people from 
other provinces, it’s happening everywhere else. It’s not 
adequate. It’s not what the people want. It’s not what the people 
of this province are demanding. 
 
And so to that extent, Mr. Speaker, I request support from all 
parties for this motion today. And I read the motion: 
 

That this Assembly supports a major reform of the Young 
Offenders Act as called for in a petition drive initiated by 
the people of North Battleford which has so far attracted 
over 70,000 signatures across Canada; 
 
That these reforms must include amendments to the Young 
Offenders Act to provide stricter sentences for serious, 
violent, and chronic offenders; to strengthen the ability to 
transfer serious, violent, and chronic offenders to adult 
court; and to empower courts to publicly identify serious, 
violent, and chronic young offenders when judged to be in 
the public interest; and 
 
That this motion and transcript of this debate be forwarded 
to the federal Minister of Justice and the Prime Minister of 
Canada and all leaders of the House of Commons. 
 

I so move, and it is seconded by the member for Cannington. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
rise today on this very important debate dealing with young 

offenders. We have seen too many examples, Mr. Speaker, 
where a few youth have blackened the name of all of our youth 
— and it is only just a few youth that are creating these 
problems, Mr. Speaker, but we must also deal with these few 
youth that are causing the problems. 
 
We’ve seen the examples of North Battleford and the 
unfortunate murder there. In my own constituency we’ve had a 
number of break-ins around the areas, and again it’s been only 
very few of the youth in the area involved but it makes 
everyone else frightened and everyone suspicious of the youth 
that are involved. 
 
And it’s just not one economic strata, Mr. Speaker. We have 
seen, with the auto thefts in Regina, that it’s not someone 
stealing, like Jean Val Jean for a loaf of bread, to feed their 
children. But it’s done as a lark, as a means of proving their 
virility to their peers. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it’s not those of the lower economic strata. 
Indeed many of these are middle-class and upper middle-class 
and well-to-do youth who obviously, Mr. Speaker, have too 
much time on their hands. Mr. Speaker, it’s to those in 
particular that we must send the messages that this behaviour is 
totally inappropriate. 
 
When my colleague talks about the three points that he wants to 
bring forward . . . and the need for the youth that are involved in 
these types of crimes — rehabilitation, Mr. Speaker, we 
definitely need to rehabilitate these youths. We don’t need to 
send them to prison to be trained to become professional 
criminals; we need to rehabilitate them. 
 
We need to provide safety for the citizenry of Saskatchewan — 
indeed all of Canada — that we can leave our homes without 
fear that they’re going to be broken into. We can leave our 
automobiles on the streets of our cities without fear that they’re 
going to be broken into. We can leave our automobiles on the 
streets of our cities without fear that they’re going to be 
vandalized. We, each and every one of us, need to know that 
our streets and our roads and our country lanes are safe for 
ourselves and for our children and our property, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, to the youth that are committing these 
crimes: while there is a need for rehabilitation, they must also 
understand that there are consequences, that they will be held 
responsible for their own actions. And one of the things that 
needs to contemplated is some compensation, Mr. Speaker, for 
their victims. 
 
When they vandalize somebody’s home the property that is 
destroyed needs to be replaced, the property that is stolen needs 
to be replaced. And, Mr. Speaker, if that home-owner happens 
to have insurance then somebody has to pay for that increased 
insurance cost. All of these items must be brought to bear on 
those youth offenders who repeat. 
 
The first time, I’m prepared to admit that maybe this youth 
made a mistake. But when they become habitual, repeat 
offenders that is when those consequences, Mr. Speaker, must 
take place so that the youth understands that there is a price to 
pay and that price isn’t only being paid by the victim; that the 
perpetrators of the crime also have to be a part of paying for 



928 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1998 

those consequences. They have to . . . the consequence has to 
affect them personally but they also have to compensate the 
victim for their losses. 
 
That’s why, Mr. Speaker, I believe it’s very important that this 
motion go from this Assembly today to the government in 
Ottawa, to the Solicitor General, and to all the ministers of the 
Crown, to the Prime Minister, who have to deal with this 
because this is indeed a federal issue, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s incumbent on the Liberal government in Ottawa to deal 
with this issue today and not simply to put it off for the next 
decade. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to be able to 
participate today on behalf of the government caucus in the 
motion that is before the House — to do so briefly, but to pick 
up essentially on the themes which are in the motion and that 
we’ve heard from the two members that have spoken to the 
motion. 
 
I want to recognize the observation made by the member of 
Rosthern that here we are dealing with a significant issue that 
faces not only Saskatchewan but all provinces, and in some 
ways, supersedes some of the partisan differences that we often 
have. There will be, Mr. Speaker, obviously nuances of 
difference in strategies and programs and changes that we might 
recommend, but there is, I believe, within this Chamber, 
reflective I think of the population of Saskatchewan, a 
unanimous desire that change needs to be made to the Young 
Offenders Act as one tool — one tool — in dealing with those 
young people who run afoul of the law. 
 
I also want to pick up on another theme right at the outset that 
both the member from Cannington and the member from 
Rosthern identified in their remarks, and that is to put this 
debate and all discussion of young offenders in a proper 
perspective, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We need always and constantly to remind ourselves that the 
vast, vast majority of Saskatchewan young people are good kids 
— good young people involved in all of the activities, normal 
activities of growing up, as every generation of young people 
have. They’re active, they’re participating in activities, they’re 
exploring, they’re studying, they’re in band programs, they’re 
in hockey rinks, they’re in curling rinks . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Contributing to society. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Contributing to society, as the member 
from Indian Head says. The vast majority of Saskatchewan 
young people we are very, very proud of. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know the member from Moosomin and other 
members of this House, for instance, just several weeks ago, 
two weeks ago maybe, attended to an event over at the Centre 
of the Arts. It was called the honours band program, produced 
by cadets from across western Canada. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, that night in the Centre of the Arts we were 
able to see, I would wager two galleries full of cadets in 
uniform; maybe 2 to 300 cadets in the galleries watching the 
performance; another hundred cadets on the stage providing us 

with one of the most delightful musical programs that I’ve been 
privileged to witness for a long time. Mr. Speaker, there were 
more cadets in uniform in the Centre of the Arts that night than 
there are young offenders in open or closed custody around 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And that very same night, as some members will remember, 
just across the city of Regina there were 2,000 — 2,000, Mr. 
Speaker — aboriginal youth at the Indian Winter Games. 
Aboriginal youth from all over the province — 2,000 of them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are 94,000 young people in Saskatchewan in 
the young offender age group — the category of age that we 
describe as young offenders — there are 94,000 of them in 
Saskatchewan. Today in custody, open and closed custody, 
there will be some number, 400-plus. So that represents, Mr. 
Speaker, less than 1 per cent. 
 
I think it’s very important at the outset of the debate that we 
recognize that we are here talking about a very small group of 
young people in our province. However, that said, there are 
those — and we all recognize that there are those who cross the 
line — who cross the line, come in conflict with the law. 
 
Now again just to put that in perspective, of those young people 
who do come in conflict with the law, the vast majority of 
young offenders only experience the young offender system 
once. The majority of young offenders only experience the 
system once. They may be dealt with by probation, they may be 
dealt with by custody, they may be dealt with through a 
sentencing circle or a family group conference. Their lives are 
turned around; we only see them once. So again, to put that 
perspective. 
 
However even with that said, there remains that small group of 
young offenders who seem to have lost all respect for 
themselves, who have lost respect for others, who have lost 
respect for the law. They become a danger to themselves. They 
become a danger to their friends. They become a danger to 
others and our communities. And it’s their repeat offences and 
their serious offences, Mr. Speaker, which leave communities 
feeling unsafe and unsure. 
 
And to this very small group of young people, we must as a 
society pay a very certain and very special attention. They do 
become the repeat offenders. And the level and the nature of 
their crime becomes increasingly serious, and as a community, 
as a society, as government, as a province, as a nation, we must 
intervene. 
 
One tool in that intervention, Mr. Speaker, but one tool, is the 
Young Offenders Act. It is clear to many of us that that tool has 
lost some of its effectiveness. It has lost the confidence of the 
general public. It has lost the respect of some youth. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, we have joined with the people of 
Saskatchewan in proposing some very significant changes to 
the Young Offenders Act to toughen that Act and to hopefully 
restore public confidence in that Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just want to outline very briefly the amendments 
that we have proposed to the Young Offenders Act, that we 
have communicated on several occasions now with the federal 



May 4, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 929 

government. They are the following, Mr. Speaker: 
 
Number one, we would recommend that where there is a 
concern about public safety, that the courts be allowed to 
authorize the publication of names of and information about 
serious, violent, or chronic offending youth after conviction and 
where there is a public safety concern; and further, to allow the 
court to authorize release of information about individuals 
about to be released into the community where the individual is 
found to pose a significant risk. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, we have proposed that the Young 
Offenders Act should be amended to ensure that all youth aged 
14 and over, charged with murder, attempted murder, 
manslaughter, or aggravated sexual assault will be transferred to 
adult court unless there are compelling reasons not to do so. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, to further enhance public safety, we are 
pressing the federal government to identify public protection as 
the primary purpose of the legislation and that distinct 
sentencing principles be included to the Act to help direct the 
youth court when sentencing serious, violent, and chronic 
young offenders. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have communicated with the federal 
government the views of the people of Saskatchewan in 
February as part of the ongoing and regular omnibus public 
survey that is conducted by government. We asked a number of 
questions of thousands of Saskatchewan people. Their 
responses to these proposals, Mr. Speaker, the results were 
dramatic: 76 per cent of those who responded supported the 
statements in principle; 87 per cent of the respondents 
supported the statement that youth court should be allowed to 
release the names of young offenders where deemed 
appropriate; 90 per cent of respondents strongly supported the 
statement that sentencing guidelines under the Young Offenders 
Act be changed to toughen sentences for serious, violent, or 
chronic offences; and 86 per cent of the respondents strongly 
supported the statement that in some cases, offenders over the 
age of 14 accused of murder, attempted murder, manslaughter, 
or aggravated sexual assault should be tried in adult court. 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is I believe, a unanimous sense within this 
Chamber and amongst the people of Saskatchewan that 
significant change needs to occur to the Young Offenders Act. 
The federal parliament is currently sitting. The federal 
parliament has the opportunity now to make those changes and 
I am hopeful that all members will be able to support the 
resolution that’s before us today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with that said, I want to close simply again by 
saying and reaffirming that those who are involved in serious 
crime as young people are very small, small in number, and the 
vast, vast majority of Saskatchewan young people are young 
people that we as a legislature and we as a province are 
extremely proud of. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, both as Justice critic for the 
Liberal opposition and also as the MLA for North Battleford, I 
am pleased to enter into this debate this afternoon. 
 
First of all, it is now over 10 years since the Mulroney 
Conservative government introduced the Young Offenders Act. 
It is an appropriate time for a thorough review to see its 
strengths and its weaknesses and to gauge public opinion and 
public support for what has happened. 
 
I think it has to be said, I think it has to be said at the outset that 
the Young Offenders Act has unfortunately resulted in an 
erosion of public confidence that public security and safety is 
given sufficient merit and priority. There is a widespread 
feeling that whatever we have in the Young Offenders Act, it 
must underline the basic principle that young people, like all 
other people, are accountable for their actions; and furthermore, 
that law-abiding citizens have a right to expect that their 
government will, to the fullest extent possible, protect them. 
 
There are some obvious sections in the Young Offenders Act 
which need to be changed and improved and in some cases 
abolished. The most obvious one is that the names of some 
young offenders must become public and information on them 
must be available, in some cases, to the general public for 
repeat, serious, and dangerous offenders; and in others 
information must be made available at least to certain specific 
groups. 
 
I know that teachers in my home community have expressed 
grave concern that teachers are not told about the records and 
court orders of young people in their classroom. Teachers 
especially must know what they are dealing with in their 
classrooms. So there are some cases where the information 
ought to be public. There are other cases in which the 
information must at least be made available to certain specific, 
necessary groups, such as I say, our teachers. 
 
My only concern about this resolution — and frankly it’s a 
good resolution, I’m pleased to support it — but my only 
concern with it is that in passing resolutions to the federal 
government in this or any other matter, we should not lose sight 
of the fact that there is much which we can do as provincial 
legislators and as a provincial government. And let us not just 
simply try to shuck off our responsibilities onto others. 
 
What are some of the things we can presently do, Mr. Speaker? 
One, the Young Offenders Act presently provides for transfer of 
offenders from the youth court to adult court. In other provinces 
this is being done. In Saskatchewan it is done in murder only. 
We don’t bring applications for any other young people. It is 
now within the power of our provincial Justice minister to issue 
a directive to his prosecutors that where there is a chronic 
offender who has been before the youth courts time and again, 
routinely, our prosecutors should request a transfer application. 
 
The second point and the one which touches most particularly 
on the tragedy in North Battleford: it is the provincial 
government and the provincial government alone which decides 
what will be a place of custody. If they decide in their wisdom 
— or lack thereof — that an older woman with no training, little 
support, and little back-up will have her home designated as a 
“custody facility” then that is what will happen and that is what 



930 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1998 

did happen. 
 
If the provincial government decides that the regulations for 
those custody facilities will simply be the same regulations as 
those for homes for the mentally challenged or the elderly, then 
that is within their power. However the provincial government 
can, if it so desires, say that custody facilities are a special 
category which will be dealt with in a special way; they will not 
be lumped into group homes for the mentally challenged and 
we will not arbitrarily designate senior citizens’ homes as 
custody facilities. 
 
In this regard the Liberal opposition proposed a couple of 
months ago that the Dundurn Training Center, the former 
Dundurn army camp, would be a good facility for youth open 
custody. Incredibly, the Minister of Social Services said he was 
not in favour of that because he feared the level of security and 
supervision at the Dundurn Training Center was not sufficient 
for youth open custody. 
 
Well maybe the Dundurn Training Center isn’t sufficient level 
of security, but a woman’s private home is. I don’t understand 
that; I don’t think the people of Saskatchewan will understand 
that. 
 
Finally there is the issue of fetal alcohol syndrome which I 
spoke on last week. Unfortunately no amount of custody, 
counselling, police, or court work can address this terrible 
problem of fetal alcohol syndrome — which is a growing 
problem in our province — it has to be stemmed at source. We 
have no programs to stop this problem at source. Once it has 
occurred, it is irreversible. 
 
And the Young Offenders Act will not and cannot deal with it 
no matter what we do with it. So we have to try and deal with 
fetal alcohol syndrome at source and I see, unfortunately, no 
policies to try and deal with that terrible problem. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, my friend from Rosthern 
mentioned the young offenders meetings which have been held 
through this province. I have also been in attendance at the one 
in the Battlefords and it was certainly a very worthwhile 
procedure and process. But may I say that we as public 
legislators are in a difficult role. It is our responsibility to listen 
to members of the public and try and reflect their views in this 
House. 
 
However I was concerned in the Battlefords when one of the 
invited panellists at the Battlefords meeting, one of the ones 
who had been invited by the organizers of the meeting, said that 
what we need is a court-house tree and a court-house horse and 
at the end of the trial we whip the guy out of the courtroom, 
string him up, put him on the horse, and kick the horse’s rump. 
 
This comment notwithstanding the fact that we now know there 
have been at least four Canadians in recent years convicted of 
first degree murder who subsequently turned out to be innocent. 
That comment drew a sharp rebuke from Val Montgomery, the 
daughter of the woman in North Battleford who was so 
tragically killed. 
 
And I think that comment underlines that while we, as public 
officials and public representatives, have a sacred duty to listen 

to and reflect the views of our constituents, we do not aid when 
we try to feed public hysteria and create public alarm in the way 
which was done with that comment. 
 
So while we must always be open and thoughtful and caring 
and listening, feeding public hysteria is not a service to the 
people we attempt to serve. Thank you. 
 
The division bells rang from 2:55 p.m. until 2:57 p.m. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 33 
 
Flavel Van Mulligen Wiens 
MacKinnon Lingenfelter Shillington 
Mitchell Atkinson Whitmore 
Kowalsky Crofford Calvert 
Trew Lorje Scott 
Cline Hamilton Stanger 
Wall Ward Murray 
Langford Thomson Bjornerud 
Toth D’Autremont Boyd 
Gantefoer Heppner Hillson 
McPherson McLane Julé 
 

Nays — nil 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — I hereby submit the answer to question 59, 
and with leave of the Assembly, the answer to question 60 as 
well. 
 
The Speaker: — With leave, the Government Whip provides a 
response to both questions. Is leave granted? Leave is granted 
and the answers to questions 59 and 60 are tabled. 
 
(1500) 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 38  The Highway Traffic Amendment Act, 1998 
 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise 
today to move second reading of The Highway Traffic 
Amendment Act, 1998 which sets out the rules of the road for 
motor vehicles on our highways in the province of 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, it also governs vehicle 
impoundment programs for individuals operating motor 
vehicles while prohibited or disqualified from driving. 
 
Mr. Speaker, presently The Highway Traffic Act contains 
minor anomalies and inconsistencies in rules of the road. In 
particular the Act is silent on the use of two-way left turn lanes 
now utilized in many communities in our province. The first 
proposed amendment will update these rules, permitting drivers 
to cross a solid white line into a two-way left turning lane to 



May 4, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 931 

make a left turn at an intersection or at a curb crossing. 
 
A further amendment will address the inconsistencies in The 
Highway Traffic Act concerning the movement of traffic at a 
red light. Mr. Speaker, currently the Act allows drivers to turn 
right at an intersection when a traffic light is red or when there 
is a red light in conjunction with one or more green arrows. 
This reference to a red light in conjunction with one or more 
green arrows is inconsistent with another provision in the Act 
which requires drivers at a traffic light to . . . at a traffic light 
displaying green arrows to turn only in the direction indicated 
by the arrows. Mr. Speaker, the proposed amendment will 
eliminate this inconsistency by clarifying the rules of the road 
for the turn on a red traffic light. 
 
A third amendment will address the current provision in The 
Highway Traffic Act regarding permission from the Highway 
Traffic Board to carry certain passengers in a vehicle that 
require operating authority certificates. Currently the Act 
requires drivers of such vehicles to obtain permission from the 
Highway Traffic Board to carry passengers other than the 
owner or an employee of the owner of the vehicle. This 
requirement was established for safety reasons. However, most 
transportation companies now have internal rules regarding 
transportation of passengers, making this provision no longer 
necessary. The amendment will eliminate the need for 
permission from the Highway Traffic Board to carry 
passengers. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, The Highway Traffic Act makes no 
provision for an appeal of the decision of a hearing officer 
regarding impoundment of a vehicle. In certain circumstances, 
individuals whose vehicles have been impounded may apply to 
a hearing officer to have vehicles released. An amendment to 
the Act will allow people whose vehicles have been impounded 
to appeal to a hearing officer a decision of the Highway Traffic 
Board. This will result in a two-level appeal process to enhance 
the fairness of the system. 
 
All these amendments will serve to correct and clarify 
provisions in the Act. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move the 
second reading of An Act to amend the Highway Traffic Act. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, just a few 
comments before I move adjournment of the debate on this 
motion. 
 
While as the minister is saying that the Bill before us appears 
only to make minor or non-controversial revisions of the road, it 
seems to me that there are enough here that . . . and some of 
them that I’m not exactly sure of, that we should take the time 
to study and certainly review before we allow further debate or 
actually allow to get in to major debate. 
 
And I guess one of the things, when you’re looking at the Bill, 
enabling a driver to cross the solid line between lanes when 
utilizing the two-way left turn lane, we need a little clarification 
of what that really refers to or means. When you’re talking 
about a solid line it would seem to me that if you’ve got a 
turning lane you wouldn’t have a solid line, but you would have 
certainly lines that would indicate there that this is a turning 
area and not a normal, through piece of lane or traffic flow. 
 

So there seem to be just a few, what seem to be fairly simple 
and straightforward . . . but I think at the same time take a little 
bit more time to study. Because even just going over some of 
the comments of what the minister is saying, what the 
legislation is talking about there, it’s a little hard to digest 
exactly what the piece of legislation or that clause or that item 
in the section in the Bill is talking about. And we would want to 
take time to make sure we understand it more clearly before we 
get into committee. 
 
There’s one area that I think a lot of people in Saskatchewan 
would be looking for and it would seem to me if we’re doing 
some major changes and bringing The Highway Traffic 
Amendment Act up to date, one area that seems to be fairly 
silent in this piece of legislation is a call from many residents of 
the province for increased speed limits on our divided 
highways. And that’s an area that we probably want to ask the 
minister as well about, even I believe the recommendations of 
. . . regarding traffic flow are suggested on divided highways 
that there would be certainly an appropriate . . . could be a move 
to increase those traffic speeds somewhat. 
 
But in regards to the legislation we have before us, it would, it 
would seem to me and it would appear that it would be 
appropriate for us to review this a little more in depth before we 
certainly get into further debate and in-depth debate into Bill 
No. 38, Highway Traffic Amendment Act. Therefore at this 
time I move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 39 — The Vehicle Administration 
Amendment Act, 1998 

 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise 
today to move second reading of The Vehicle Administration 
Amendment Act, 1998. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) is the 
administrator of the Act which governs motor vehicle and 
driver licensing, and includes provisions for the disqualification 
of drivers from driving. The Act, Mr. Speaker, presently 
permits the minister responsible for SGI to enter into agreement 
with other provincial or a territorial government, and with 
agencies and bodies outside and within Saskatchewan, to carry 
out the duties imposed upon SGI under the Act or under the 
regulation. 
 
The first proposed amendment will enable the minister to enter 
into such agreements with the Government of Canada, and the 
government of any other country or jurisdiction within that 
country. This amendment was requested by the Department of 
Justice to help enforce payment of outstanding fines for the 
Criminal Code driving offences throughout Canada and 
possibly in the United States in the future. 
 
Another proposed amendment to the Act will add psychologists 
and addiction counsellors to the list of health care professionals 
from whom an applicant or, or a holder of a driver’s licence, 
may be required to get a report. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since the new drinking and driving legislation was 
passed in 1996 — and I might add, Mr. Speaker, that your 



932 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1998 

involvement in the help of getting this legislation was very 
much appreciated — psychologists and addiction counsellors 
play an important role in the rehabilitation of drivers convicted 
of drinking and driving offences. Therefore their opinions may 
be important in determining driver fitness. 
 
To further improve the driver safety on the Saskatchewan roads, 
Mr. Speaker, we are proposing to amend the present wording of 
the Act, which allows only Canadian convictions to be counted 
in determining suspensions for drivers convicted of serious 
driving offences. An amendment will allow driver convictions 
and suspensions in the United States as well to be counted. 
 
And finally, to make the Act more uniform and fair, we are 
proposing changes to both the appeal procedure and the 
availability of appeals for roadside licence suspension. The Act 
presently gives only new drivers — those with less than two 
years driving experience — the ability to appeal roadside 
suspension for a blood alcohol content of .04. An amendment 
will enable all drivers to utilize the same appeal process and 
procedure for such roadside suspension. All of these 
amendments will facilitate ongoing programs, they will 
contribute to the continuing effort to improve driver behaviour, 
and importantly, safety on Saskatchewan roads. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 
Vehicle Administration Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, just a few 
comments in regards to The Vehicle Administration Act we 
have before us, just having been presented by the minister. 
 
As I was listening to the minister and just perusing the Bill 
somewhat, it certainly would appear that the amendments that 
are being brought forward are amendments that really are meant 
to address some of the areas that people have in the past . . . 
who have allowed individuals, I guess, in the past to move from 
one province or even, as we’ve seen, out of country. And if you 
do find yourself in a situation where you have faced 
convictions, where there’s traffic violations, or whether it’s 
drinking and driving, or whatever the circumstance, that those 
have not shown up in the province you reside in. 
 
As a result, if you’ve broken the law in one area, you can come 
back and continue to drive like the rest of us who have upheld 
the law and with the same . . . without any consequences or 
even without any costs associated to that. 
 
And I think in general, as most people would look at this piece 
of legislation, they would say that’s appropriate, it’s a good 
piece of legislation. Because what it does, as I understand it or 
what it’s intended to do, is certainly hold people accountable for 
their actions regardless of where those actions take place. 
 
And I think it just reminds us on a daily basis if we happen to 
disobey the law, there’s going to be consequences to pay; and if 
we certainly abide within the law we have over a period of time 
an opportunity as well to remove any demerit points that may 
certainly gather against our licence. 
 
But it doesn’t . . . this piece of legislation goes beyond just the 

provincial but it certainly moves beyond the borders of this 
province and certainly inter-country as well, to say that the law 
is the same as it is here in Saskatchewan, if you’re driving here, 
as if you were driving in Manitoba or even into North Dakota, 
or any part in the States. And I don’t think people will have a 
major problem with that. However, I think it would be 
appropriate for us to review that to a minor degree before we 
move into further debate as well. 
 
I did like the fact as well the minister talked about the appeal 
process, expanding that. I think it’s appropriate that there is a 
firm and a clear and a fair method whereby people can appeal 
convictions or fines or suspensions or whatever they may be 
facing, and it would be appropriate that we would allow that to 
follow through and certainly enhance the appeal process so that 
there’s fairness at the end of the day. 
 
With that in mind, Mr. Speaker, I certainly can appreciate the 
comments that have been raised by the minister of the reasons 
behind The Vehicle Administration Act for 1998. However at 
this time, to allow for the debate on the issue, I would move 
adjournment of debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 32 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Scott that Bill No. 32 — The Wildlife 
Amendment Act, 1998 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As we only 
adjourned this Bill on Friday for further discussion with 
interested parties, I’ll be moving adjournment once again, 
following a couple of remarks at this point, to give us time to 
get in touch with more people. It seems to be one of the 
concerns that’s usually raised by the government side when we 
deal with this issue, that they feel they have the input from 
everyone and no one else does. 
 
As the minister stated in his short address on this particular Bill, 
wildlife is certainly a cherished and a valuable resource in 
Saskatchewan. And I think it may be one of the few and may be 
even one of the only positive aspects of a fairly small 
population of this province, is that it’s given a good opportunity 
for wildlife to find habitat and to remain a viable resource for 
ourselves and for the tourist industry as well. 
 
(1515) 
 
Our wildlife resources are economically important as many 
out-of-province visitors come to Saskatchewan to take part in 
some terrific hunting and fishing that we have in this province, 
and I think some of our game areas, particularly our deer, have 
been just in excellent order of . . . a source of a boost to our 
economy in that area — if they are willing to brave the 
conditions of the highways and drive over those, looking for 
some game. 
 



May 4, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 933 

But more and more we hear from people who have refused to 
travel Saskatchewan for the purpose of hunting or vacationing 
when we find that some of our regulations are getting a little 
tough or that our highways are getting difficult, and some of 
those are problems that we need to face. 
 
Of course the biggest issue in wildlife in the last year, and I 
think anyone who ever turns their radio or television on to hear 
the news knows what it is — it’s in the area of Metis hunting 
rights and night hunting. And government has rather messed 
that up over the past numbers of years. Been a little slow on 
taking action and not maybe action as complete and 
all-inclusive as it should be. And to that extent there are still 
some serious concerns that our wildlife face. 
 
On the issue of night hunting, government has moved part of 
the way but not the whole way. And it’s good to see the move 
they’ve made. But if we’re going to go ahead and take care of 
the situation, we should have dealt with it in total and removed 
night hunting completely and in total, out of this province. 
 
The government has banned use of artificial light sources in the 
act of night hunting. This goes to the issue of saving our natural 
resources. Hunting with the use of spotlights is 
non-sportsmanlike and is responsible for seriously reducing the 
number of big game animals in our province. And we’ve seen 
that specifically with reference to moose and deer in some of 
our areas, as well. The number of moose in particular is 
seriously low in some parts of the province, and I think the 
north-east is probably the one that suffer the most because of 
that. 
 
As well the government has changed regulations regarding how 
far from roads night hunting can occur. I guess that means if the 
deer or moose happen to stop in the middle of the road and look 
at you at night, you’re not allowed to shoot it. But you could get 
off the road with the right kind of lights and go out there and 
have yourself a hunt. And that shouldn’t be allowed anywhere 
in this province, regardless of how far south or north, east or 
west, we go. 
 
We feel, and most people in Saskatchewan feel, night hunting 
should not be allowed in Saskatchewan for anyone, anywhere, 
at any time. It is now an issue of safety, and night hunting is not 
safe. 
 
One of the key things for those of us that have been instructors 
with firearm safety over the last number of decades and, Mr. 
Speaker, on one of those is one of the key roles for safety is 
always be sure of your target and beyond. And it’s very difficult 
to be sure of what’s beyond your target if you’re shining your 
light at a particular animal that may be 50 or 100 yards away. 
And when the bullet passes through the animal or misses it 
altogether, what’s going to be hit on the other side? Who 
knows? 
 
To say we’ll allow this in areas where the population’s a little 
lower is sort of saying, shooting fewer people is better than 
shooting many people. Well I guess that’s a rather bizarre 
conclusion. It may have a morsel of truth there, but is not the 
way we should be fashioning our policies after, and this 
government is doing that. 
 

With regard to what this Bill is, it substantially increases fines 
for breaking the rules and the regulations of this Act. All major 
offences will now have a maximum fine of $100,000, and that’s 
a good change. I think it’s a substantial improvement, 
particularly for those people who are looking at making some 
financial gain from our game resources. I’m talking about 
poaching in particular. That’s a substantial change over the 
current law, and it lays out ranges of penalties for offences 
depending on their seriousness. 
 
We agree with fines for hunting offences, but we will want to 
know from this government which offences it considers most 
serious. Because obviously every offence is not going to have a 
$100,000 fine on it. Which ones will, and what sorts of fines 
will be on all of the other offences? 
 
We hope that the offences relating to night hunting are treated 
with the seriousness they deserve, and so that this government 
hasn’t decided that if you’ve got certain kinds of poaching 
you’re going to get the $100,000 fine, but if you’re night 
hunting a certain distance off the road you get a gentle slap on 
the hand. We need to know that, because that applies both to the 
preservation of our wildlife and the safety of the people of this 
province. 
 
This Bill also strengthens the government’s right to seize 
property such as weapons and vehicles used in hunting. We’ll 
need plenty more information with regards to this increased 
government power. 
 
And there’s a little area of concern over here, Mr. Speaker, 
because someone who may be relatively low on the income 
ladder, Mr. Speaker, may be spending some very hard-earned 
dollars on a good vehicle and a fine rifle, and lose that; and 
someone else comes in to whom money means very little but 
has lots of it, and they have a cheap vehicle and a cheap firearm 
and they lose that. There’s something that is unjust in that sort 
of thing. So that needs to be looked at carefully. We need some 
more information, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There has to be the assurances from government that there are 
precautions against the abuse of these powers. Properties should 
be seized in serious cases, but it is a power that must be used 
wisely, and as I just mentioned, not for minor offences. 
 
We look forward to asking some detailed questions in the 
Committee of the Whole once we have finished our study and 
the consultations that I mentioned earlier on in this Bill. 
 
And so at this point, Mr. Speaker, I move adjournment of the 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 29 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Mitchell that Bill No. 29 — The 
Workers’ Compensation Amendment Act, 1998 be now read 
a second time. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well Bill No. 29, 
Mr. Speaker, deals with The Workers’ Compensation 



934 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1998 

Amendment Act. I doubt if there’s any area that MLAs in this 
province have a more difficult time helping their constituents 
with than The Workers’ Compensation Act. 
 
It seems to be the one that comes up in all of our areas 
frequently, but it happens to be one that seems to be the most 
difficult to get any sort of satisfaction or reaction or even action 
of any kind from, is when we deal with the Workers’ 
Compensation system. 
 
There is certainly a lot of ongoing concern with that particular 
board. And as I mentioned, it deals with the MLAs, it deals with 
people who are injured on the job, and it deals with the 
employers who pay much of the bills for the Workers’ 
Compensation. I think all of those areas are involved in it. 
 
We recall the last number of changes that took place where 
there were some adjustments made to the fee structures for 
employers in The Workers’ Compensation Act and I think we 
found that some of those fee structures, just the research hadn’t 
been done properly on those, and there were individual 
businesses who had to pay a whole lot more than their injury 
record showed. 
 
First and foremost, any changes that are made to The Workers’ 
Compensation Act must, in the end, promote fairness for both 
the employer and the injured worker. A year or so ago we saw 
52 recommendations came forward by a review panel. This 
legislation deals with only a very few. It would be good to have 
seen most of those recommendations coming in, but it seems 
the government has chosen just to pick and choose a few of 
those and then probably be able to tell us that they’ve solved all 
the problems. 
 
Among the things that this legislation does — and I’d like to 
mention a few of those for the record, Mr. Speaker — it 
enshrines the benefit of doubt clause in the legislation. It 
expands the definition of injury to include a disabling or 
potentially disabling condition caused by an occupational 
disease. And I think that potentially disabling one is fairly 
important, because if the person switches jobs, switches 
occupations, and then later on disabling results as a result of the 
original injury, that needs to be left in there. 
 
It increases the lump sum annual payments to $20,000 from the 
current $5,000. And it offers pension contributions to surviving 
spouses who are currently receiving benefits. In the last few 
years, Mr. Speaker, calls to our office from workers who find 
themselves now unfortunately involved in Workers’ 
Compensation through injury have increased significantly. And 
I’m not sure if that’s necessarily because the workplace has 
become more dangerous or what it is, but I think it’s something 
that needs to be addressed. 
 
Some of the people who call our office have become so 
discouraged by the treatment they have received, they have 
become convinced that for whatever reason, the Workers’ 
Compensation Board has a vendetta against them. And I 
personally had to work through a number of those individuals 
who were dealt with in ways that were fairly unfair, and after 
two or three years in some cases, we’ve managed to see the 
board readdress it and make some changes. 
 

The question is, why should it take that long? While I don’t 
think there are any conspiracies against injured workers, I think 
it’s obvious that too many are being caught in the bureaucratic 
web. And it’s the bureaucratic web that seems the legislative 
body, those of us the MLAs, find almost impossible to crack, 
when there are other bureaucratic situations in our province that 
we can usually work with and talk to and in many cases work 
out something reasonable for the people of this province. 
 
We have to treat Workers’ Compensation like any other support 
program. People should have access to it as long as they need it. 
They should be allowed to heal, but once they’re healed they 
must be encouraged to get back to work. And I think the must is 
there because obviously the expense is on the whole economy if 
we don’t make sure they’re encouraged to get back to work. 
There’s no question that just like every other government 
program, some people become overly dependent on this one. 
And there must be enough checks in place to ensure that no 
abuse takes place. 
 
Employers also must be treated fairly. Never again should we 
see what’s happened in the last number of years where massive 
increases in premiums like those we saw recently . . . The board 
has gone some way in bringing about more sensible rate codes 
that have been of some benefit to many but not to all employers. 
There are, Mr. Speaker, still employment groups out there that 
are not being treated fairly because their injury records just do 
not seem to coincide with the rates that they’re being charged 
for the premiums. 
 
And many are worried that the continued expansion of what 
Workers’ Compensation covers will continue to cause 
premiums to jump. So-called grey areas such as stress are now 
covered, and that’s a very difficult one to prove or to disprove, 
Mr. Speaker. And stress, as we know, comes from all sorts of 
sources. So it always will be a difficult one that’s there. It 
would be very difficult to prove that stress is necessarily caused 
by the workplace, and that proof could be very costly in the end 
if we don’t handle it carefully. 
 
The government has to be careful when dealing with expanding 
the definition of injury. We do not want to see Workers’ 
Compensation Board covering those things that are diseases of 
life and lifestyle. This is Workers’ Compensation and to that 
extent must deal with the worker and what’s happened on the 
job. So I repeat: we do not want to see the Workers’ 
Compensation Board covering those things that are diseases of 
life and lifestyle but not necessarily caused by the workplace. 
 
If we continue to move in this direction, we’ll see the amount 
that the board pays out rise dramatically. Employers will have 
to pay for this cost. So employers will have to pay for the 
lifestyles of their employees even though they have no right to 
go ahead and pick and choose on that basis. And this will cost 
jobs in the end. This will hurt employers and employees alike. 
 
And there are a number of other concerns as well that people 
are bringing to our attention. And as I said earlier on at the 
beginning of my time, that it’s one of the issues that I believe 
all MLAs have a lot of correspondence with their constituents 
with and it’s one that there seems to be an ongoing concern. 
 
We’ll need a little more time with this Bill before we’re ready 



May 4, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 935 

to see it move to committee. So with that in mind, Mr. Speaker, 
I move adjournment of the debate at this time. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(1530) 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 17  The Certified Management Consultants Act 
 

The Deputy Chair: — Before I introduce clause 1, I’ll invite 
the minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’d like to introduce 
once again, Mr. Bill Jones, who’s sitting beside me. He is the 
deputy minister of Finance. And immediately behind me is Mr. 
Terry Paton, who is the Provincial Comptroller. And to his left 
is Mr. Jim Fallows, who is the manager of the financial 
management branch of the Provincial Comptroller’s division. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair of 
committees. Good afternoon, Minister, and officials. Welcome. 
 
I would like to go over some of this material in the certified 
management consultants’ Bill. 
 
First of all, this Bill sets up a professional association of 
management consultants. How has this profession been 
governed in the past? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — In the past this profession has had its own 
association through voluntary membership and they . . . the 
Saskatchewan chapter of the Institute of Certified Management 
Consultants was incorporated in 1990. So they are incorporated, 
I presume, under The Non-Profit Corporations Act, although I 
don’t know that for sure. And they are affiliated with a national 
Institute of Certified Management Consultants which has 
existed since 1969. So in other words, they have their own 
organization already and they’re incorporated, but they don’t 
have statutory authority as a self-governing profession and 
essentially that is what this Bill would do. 
 
And essentially the significance of this kind of Bill for them I 
think, would be that it would prevent people other than 
members of their institute from calling themselves certified 
management consultants, which people now could call 
themselves, without the statute. 
 
And I should point out, it will give them title profession, but it 
won’t stop people that aren’t members of their institute from 
calling themselves management consultants or carrying on the 
kinds of businesses that they might; but they just won’t be able 
to call themselves certified management consultants which 
would signify that they were certified by this group. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Will the legislation provide educational 
requirements for this body of people as well? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — The legislation will empower the group 
itself to decide what the qualifications for membership would 

be, so that they would presumably come up with some bylaws 
or rules that would say in order to call yourself a certified 
management consultant you must have attained either a certain 
educational qualification or a certain level of experience or a 
combination of both. But that would essentially be in the 
discretion of the governing body of the profession. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — The people that are in the profession now, 
do they currently call themselves certified management 
consultants or do they go by a different title? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, they currently call themselves 
certified management consultants. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — And I think I heard you say that it would be 
possible to be a management consultant in the broader sense 
without necessarily belonging to this, either the current 
organization or to this organization set up under this legislation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — That’s correct. I might add, a few minutes 
ago I said I presumed they were incorporated under the 
non-profit business corporations Act, and that is in fact correct. 
And what this Bill does, in section 20 is, it says: 
 

No person other than a member shall use the title 
“Certified Management Consultant”, . . . 
 

And so on, but it doesn’t prevent anybody from calling 
themselves something other than that. So that, for example, 
there might be some people who would, as they say, hang out 
their shingle and call themselves a management consultant, or a 
consultant, or whatever. As long as they don’t use the actual 
designation that is set out in section 20, then they would still be 
permitted to do so. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Last year there was a Bill regarding the 
registering psychologists, and I think it was registered and 
non-registered psychologists. Is there going to be . . . is this 
empowered to do the same kind of thing or is the public still 
going to be very much confused about this whole area of 
management consultants, given the fact that people can, using 
your words, hang out their shingle without any recognition by 
this institution? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Chair, this is a different sort of 
protection, but it still provides some protection, but it provides 
more limited protection, if I can put it that way. 
 
I don’t think it will cause a confusion. I think it will do away 
with some of the confusion in the sense that we have lots of 
management consultants out there and when we pass the 
legislation, if it should be passed by this House, then we can say 
to the public that some people have the right to actually be 
certified as management consultants. And the public can judge 
whether that means anything to them — whether the fact that 
somebody has the educational and other qualifications to be 
certified is important to them — and they can go to such a 
person. 
 
Other legislation is a little bit different, like the psychologists, 
for example, or the medical profession or the legal profession, 
in that in those situations unless you’re a member of the group, 
you’re not allowed to give people advice or treatment and 



936 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1998 

charge them for it. So you can’t practice for reward. Because 
the theory is that when you get into that kind of legislation, the 
health disciplines, that you have to protect the public. And 
unless somebody’s actually a member of that kind of 
profession, they can’t practise at all. In this situation . . . Or they 
can’t practise for reward. 
 
In this situation it isn’t like that. It gives the public some 
protection in that they can tell who’s certified and who isn’t. 
But it doesn’t stop the public from going to somebody who isn’t 
certified and, you know, paying them for their services. But 
then the member of the public pretty much, you know, takes 
their chances. I am sure there are people that are perfectly 
reputable that aren’t certified management consultants that are 
practising, and they will continue to be able to do so. 
 
So it provides some level of public protection. But it does not 
go as far as the psychologists and other legislation would, in 
that it doesn’t have the prohibition on other people from 
practising the profession. It simply deals with what they can call 
themselves. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — I would assume, Minister, that part of the 
rationale for this legislation is, is intended to clear up the 
confusion that perhaps can exist out there. It seems that there 
are a great number of people who would loosely call themselves 
management consultants operating across the province. 
 
And maybe it’s a function of the way the world works right 
now, with the complexity of investments and things of that 
nature, that are in the realm of people’s experience, and I would 
think that perhaps this legislation was intended to clear this up. 
 
I still see that there’s a lot of room for a great deal of confusion. 
Once you call yourself a management consultant and if people 
assume that an individual has the benefit of being certified, they 
may place certain responsibilities and trusts in these individuals, 
in an unfortunate way, that would result in potentially some 
very substantial losses. 
 
Do you foresee anything in the legislation that would, by 
granting the certification designation, that would allow for a 
liability insurance or things of that nature to be treated 
differently than someone that isn’t certified? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I think that the public would generally be 
better protected under this legislation for this reason: that if I’m 
looking for a management consultant to assist me, if I go to a 
certified management consultant, I know that a group of people 
with a certain level of expertise have said, okay, this person we 
certify has the credentials to be a management consultant. 
 
So that there’s some onus on the public in the sense that they 
should look at what the credentials of people they deal with are, 
and we will say to them through this legislation, should it be 
passed, you can rely upon these people that are certified, who 
have attained the requisite level of skill and knowledge, and that 
should give you some level of comfort. 
 
If the public deals with people that are not certified, you know, 
they will be doing so in effect at their own risk, in the sense that 
nobody will have said to them, here is somebody that we have 
certified as being competent to be a management consultant. 

And what we’re doing with the uninitiated, I guess, with the 
general public, is saying we will provide a certification system 
through this legislation whereby you can go to somebody who 
has been judged by a group of experts in the field to be certified 
as a management consultant. 
 
And someone who hasn’t had much experience dealing with 
management consultants could take a level of comfort from that 
because you’d know you were dealing with somebody with that 
level of expertise. Beyond that, since it doesn’t prohibit 
management consultants generally from continuing to operate, 
there would be some risk involved in the sense that although 
many of those people will be perfectly reputable and have years 
of experience and do a good job, there may be some people that 
do not. 
 
However this legislation would go quite a bit further than it 
does now if we tried to actually prohibit people from calling 
themselves management consultants or consultants. And I’m 
sure, Mr. Chair, that the member will appreciate that there are a 
wide variety of consultants out there and it would be probably 
be quite impractical to say that, you know, when you’re passing 
The Certified Management Consultants Act that all of those 
people would have to fall within its purview in order to carry 
out their working lives. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — In the present sense, where the institute is 
the body that sets the standard for those people that choose to 
belong to the organization, will this Bill give substantially 
different powers to the institute? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, because it will enable the institute to 
not only register but suspend or cancel the registration of a 
member or discipline them in other ways. And I might add that 
the public will be involved in that too, in that in any of these 
professional Acts that they’re presently being structured, the 
public is getting some representation on the governing body so 
that they can sort of have a window into each profession to 
ensure that the professions are exercising their power in a 
manner that’s consistent with the public interest. 
 
So they will have the power to register or to expel people and 
that will be a statutory power, as opposed to the power they 
now have to do that within a voluntary association. And so they 
will be given the statutory power to decide whether a person 
can call himself or herself a certified management consultant. 
And if they decide that a person cannot do so, then that person 
will not be able to practise using that title. Of course they could 
practise without using the title. 
 
I should add that the exercise of that kind of power is subject to 
certain rules of natural justice and right to be heard, and also 
that there would be some appeal provisions in the event that 
somebody was disciplined by the governing council of the 
certified management consultants institute. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, minister. I’d like to go to the 
disciplinary sections a little later. 
 
In the process of developing this Bill, was the Institute of 
Certified Management Consultants consulted, and were they 
brought into the process, and what type of consulting went on 
with the institute, if that was appropriate? 



May 4, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 937 

(15:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, they were quite extensively consulted 
over the past two years. And in addition to . . . and of course the 
Bill itself is the result of those consultations. And they are 
pleased with the legislation. 
 
But in addition to consultation with them, I should add that a 
number of other organizations were consulted about the Bill 
because we didn’t want to do something in this legislation that 
would interfere with the ability of other types of consultants to 
carry on their practices. 
 
And specifically, in addition to the management consultants, we 
consulted with the association of consulting agrologists, the 
Association of Professional Engineers, the certified 
management consultants themselves, as I mentioned; the 
Saskatchewan Association of Architects, the Association of 
Consulting Engineers, the Certified General Accountants of 
Saskatchewan, the Institute of Chartered Accountants, and the 
Society of Management Accountants. 
 
So as I said to the member a few minutes ago, Mr. Chair, there 
are many consulting professions. So we talked to them all, and 
I’m advised by my officials that none of those professions have 
any concerns with the proposed legislation. In other words, they 
all think that it’s fine and that they can live with it and that it 
won’t interfere with their ability to carry out the practice of 
their professions. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Minister, you also mentioned that there 
were a number of management consultants that are currently 
practising, and in most instances very professionally, that are 
outside of the current institute — independent consultants, for 
lack of a better word. Was there any effort to have consultation 
with those type of individuals? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — The difficulty with that would be that they 
tend not to be represented by any organization, so it’s difficult 
to consult with them in the sense that there’s no organized 
spokesperson on their behalf. But I don’t see that they would 
have any particular reason to be opposed to or have any 
concerns with the legislation in the sense that it really doesn’t 
interfere with them at all. They will carry on under this 
legislation in the same way that they do today. 
 
This legislation will deal with people that are members of the 
certified management consultants institute today, or people that 
want to be in the future. With respect to other consultants, it 
really won’t impact on them in terms of their ability to carry out 
their practice. They will continue tomorrow as they do today. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — For the last several years there’s been a 
number of Bills setting up professional organizations, or 
associations if you like. Does this legislation follow in 
similarity to those other associations or organizations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes it does. One of the things that the 
government has been trying to do, with the help of the 
Department of Justice, over the last five or six years, is to 
standardize the professional legislation so that there are 
equivalent provisions with respect to how you discipline people, 
the rights that people should have before they’re disciplined, the 

rights of appeal, participation of the public in the process, and 
so on. 
 
And one of the reasons why you see new legislation like this, 
but also over the last several years, replacement legislation for 
some professions — I can think of the chiropractors, the 
pharmacists, the physical therapists that have been done, 
occupational therapists and others — is that we’re trying to, as a 
government, bring all the professional legislation to a certain 
standard. And those standards, generally speaking, are intended 
to protect the rights of the members of each profession and also 
to try to protect the public and ensure that the public has some 
input and involvement into the use of professional power. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Is there legislation similar to this in other 
provincial jurisdictions? And if there is, how similar or different 
is what we’re proposing from what is occurring or exists in 
other jurisdictions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — There is legislation authorizing the Institute 
of Certified Management Consultants to be a self-regulating 
body in Alberta, Manitoba, Ontario, and New Brunswick. So 
four other provinces already. So we would be the fifth. 
 
And my guess, without knowing it, is that this is probably a 
movement that’s been occurring across the country for several 
years, so that I wouldn’t be surprised if you wouldn’t see some 
more. So in reality, there does seem to be a trend toward it. And 
this legislation would certainly be similar to that legislation in 
the main respects. 
 
I’m advised that two other provinces, British Columbia and 
Quebec, protect the use of the title, certified management 
consultant, but they do not create self-regulating bodies. So in 
other words they have one provision of this legislation but not 
the rest. 
 
And so four provinces — and if we pass it, Saskatchewan 
would be five — have the full-blown, self-regulatory 
professional legislation. Two provinces provide the title 
protection. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — In terms of registering with the new 
association, will you automatically become a member of the 
new association if you’re currently registered in the institute? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, Mr. Chair, to the member, that is 
correct. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Going back to disciplinary procedures, what 
would be deemed to be considered professional misconduct 
under this Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well among other things, I would refer the 
member, Madam Chair, to sections 26, 27, and 28. One of 
course would be professional incompetence, that the member 
does not display the knowledge, skill, or judgement necessary 
to serve the public. 
 
Another is professional misconduct in the form of any manner, 
conduct, or thing, whether or not disgraceful or dishonourable, 
which is harmful to the best interests of the public or the 
members, tends to harm the standing of the profession, is in 



938 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1998 

breach of the Act or the bylaws, or is a failure to comply with 
an order of the professional conduct committee. 
 
Now in this type of legislation that’s not unique to this Bill. The 
profession itself is entitled to look at the conduct of a member 
and decide that that is something that is . . . displays 
incompetence or amounts to misconduct and to take action 
accordingly. Now if they did so on some unreasonable basis, if 
somebody did something that everybody would agree was 
perfectly rational and normal, but they were disciplined, 
certainly the courts have a supervisory role in that process. 
 
So it’s a very broad description of what could be determined to 
be misconduct. And as I said in answer to the question a few 
minutes ago, the legislation is tending to become more standard. 
This would be consistent language with the language that would 
occur in the Medical Profession Act and a number of other 
statutes as well. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Using the term, certified management 
consultant unlawfully, is it a Criminal Code violation under the 
Act and what would the penalty be for breaking this law? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — It would not be a Criminal Code violation 
because only the Parliament of Canada has the authority to 
define a criminal offence. It would be a breach of provincial 
law. And under section 40 of the legislation it says that: 
 

Every person who contravenes section 20 (the section to 
which the member just referred) is guilty of an offence and 
liable on summary conviction to a fine of: 
 
(a) for a first offence, not more than $2,000; 
 
(b) for a second offence, not more than $4,000; (and) 
 
(c) for each subsequent offence, not more than $6,000 or to 
imprisonment for a term of not more than six months, or to 
both (the fine of $6,000 and imprisonment of up to six 
months). 

 
Mr. Gantefoer: — The legislation grants immunity to the 
council for all acts done in good faith, primarily I think 
investigations and disciplinary procedures. 
 
What determines what indeed is good faith in these matters? 
And when is a member able to take legal action against the 
counsel? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — The member can always take legal action 
against the counsel. And the question of whether the counsel 
has proceeded in good faith or otherwise would always be a 
matter for the court to decide. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — If consultants are a part of a . . . are 
employees of a company, is it the responsibility of the company 
to pay the fees for the member or the individual member? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — That would depend upon the contract of 
employment between the consultant and the company. And it 
could be either. Sometimes a person will be employed who is a 
member of a profession and they’re responsible for their own 
fees. And sometimes — and perhaps usually — the employer 

would pay the fees. But that’s not a matter of law but just a 
matter of private arrangement between the consultant and the 
employer. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Irrespective of who paid the fees, if the 
company terminated the employment of an individual who was 
a member, would they . . . would the individual still be able to 
retain the title certified? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Minister. I have no 
further questions. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 50 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Before I do that I’d 
like to thank the officials for their assistance today, and I’d like 
to thank the opposition for their questions and participation and 
cooperation. And with that, I move that we report the Bill 
without amendment. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
(1600) 
 

Bill No. 16 — The Certified General Accountants 
Amendment Act, 1998 

 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair of committees. A few 
questions on this legislation as well, minister. Have the changes 
that are proposed been made in consultation with the certified 
general accountants professional association? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, Mr. Chair, they have been. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — The changes seem to go back to changes 
that were made in 1987. Can you tell us why at this time we’re 
seeing this amendment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes. I think it was about that time that the 
accredited public accountants joined the certified general 
accountants, and so they all came under the certified general 
accountants and hence, The Accredited Public Accountants Act 
can be repealed and that it’s redundant in that there are none — 
they are now certified general accountants. As a result of that, 
that legislation can be repealed and this Bill does that. 
 
But in addition to that, there are certain titles that The 
Accredited Public Accountants Act prevented people from 
using unless they were certified as accredited public 
accountants. So when we repeal The Accredited Public 
Accountants Act, we have to give . . . continue the prohibition 
with respect to the use of the term, accredited public accountant 
and so on in that they all become certified general accountants 
but it includes the accredited public accountants now. 
 
And also the other part of it really is to simply prohibit the use 
of certain titles that are used but which have not been protected 



May 4, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 939 

up until now, mainly the honorary membership which is given 
out has not being protected, a CGA (certified general 
accountant) honorary. And really that amounts to the entire Bill 
— those changes are all that is being done. 
 
The short answer is it’s to accommodate the fact that the 
accredited public accountants have gone into the certified 
general accountants profession. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. That is all the 
questions I have. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Before I do that, I’d 
once again like to thank the officials for their assistance and 
also to thank the opposition for its input and participation and 
cooperation. 
 
And with that, I’d like to move that we report this Bill without 
amendment. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 30 — The Tobacco Tax Act, 1998 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Before I introduce clause 1, I invite the 
minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. With me still is Mr. 
Bill Jones, deputy minister of Finance, and directly behind me 
is Len Rog, who is the assistant deputy minister responsible for 
the revenue division of the Department of Finance. And 
immediately behind Mr. Jones is Doug Lambert, who is the 
director of revenue programs in the revenue division in the 
Department of Finance. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Thank you, Minister. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, and again welcome to the new 
officials joining us. 
 
On The Tobacco Tax Act I understand that one of the current 
problems with the current method of tax collection is that it may 
be seen as an indirect tax which provinces cannot do. Has this 
been a law that has been challenged on these grounds in the 
past? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Chair, the member is correct that the 
province can only assess a direct tax. The province cannot 
assess an indirect tax so that this Bill will, among other things, 
ensure that the taxation is at the consumer level and the retailer 
— a tax directly put onto them. And that’s what we’re 
attempting to do. 
 
And in specific answer to the member’s question, no there has 
not been any court challenge to the legislation and . . . But 
nevertheless we’re trying to make the legislation comply with 
the constitutional requirements that the tax be a direct tax. And 

that’s one of the things that this Bill does. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Will this Bill change the tax collection 
procedures? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — No, Mr. Chair, in answer to the member, 
the Bill will not change the tax collection procedures. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Has this Bill been brought forward in 
consultation with any other provinces? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — The answer, Mr. Chair, to the member is 
that in general we have discussed a number of the provisions 
with the other provinces but they have not actually seen a copy 
of this Bill that is before the House. So there have been . . . 
there’s been very general consultation. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Is the type of legislation that you’ve put 
into this Bill being contemplated by the other provinces? Does 
it move it towards a similar situation or is it individual? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Chair, I’m advised that all of the 
provinces have legislation that is somewhat similar so that they 
may not necessarily be contemplating passing this kind of 
legislation, the reason being that they would already have it into 
place. And in general, the scheme is similar in each, in each 
province. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Will the consumer see any difference when 
they buy a package of cigarettes or a carton of cigarettes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Chair, in answer to the member, no, 
the consumer will not see any difference in the normal course of 
events. I suppose that one of the things the Bill would do would 
be to make it more difficult for people to illegally import 
tobacco products in that it tries to tighten up the system. 
 
So with respect to the normal consumer, no, there wouldn’t be 
any difference; with respect to others, the enforcement 
mechanisms might be better under this legislation. The goal is 
to try to give the department the tools it needs to stop any illegal 
importation of tobacco products. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — And the Bill provides no change for the 
level of taxation, is that right? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — That’s correct, Mr. Chair. There’s no 
change in this Bill with respect to the tax that is paid for 
tobacco products. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — If in some subsequent budget the 
government decided to adjust the level of taxation, would it be 
necessary to amend the entire Bill? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, that’s correct. You would amend the 
legislation if the tax is raised or, I suppose, decreased. And that 
of course is consistent with the principle that the legislature 
should always have control over taxation levels. Some things 
might be announced in a budget but they really wouldn’t be 
fully authorized until the legislature itself authorized a change 
in the taxation, and that would be true of the tobacco tax Bill or 
any other number of pieces of legislation. 
 



940 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1998 

Mr. Gantefoer: — It’s kind of unique this Bill, as I read it, in 
that it provides provisions regarded to smuggling that were once 
contained in regulations being actually moved into the 
legislation. And this seems to be almost 180 degrees different 
than what a lot of legislation has been coming through where 
most of the stuff seems to go into regulations. Can you tell me 
the significance of that move? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — It was felt that the provisions should have a 
higher profile for one thing. That we should profile in 
legislation the fact that importation of tobacco products without 
due licensing and authorization is an offence. And also this 
particular legislation was . . . well I should say the present 
Tobacco Tax Act was passed in 1965 so that a lot of things have 
happened since then and it was really necessary to do an update 
of the legislation in order to bring it into compliance with the 
current administrative and enforcement requirements. And so at 
the time of doing that, it was felt that it would be in order to 
move some of the provisions from regulations into legislation. 
 
And also, I think it was felt that enforcement provisions should 
be in legislation generally. And with respect to this legislation, 
it would make it easier to ensure that the enforcement 
provisions complied with the Canadian Charter of Rights and 
Freedoms. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Minister, can you briefly explain the 
marking program you talked about in your second reading 
remarks? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, Mr. Chair. In answer to the member, 
one of the ways to combat smuggling is through the marking 
program. Most provinces introduced that in 1994, that is, 
marking programs to help detect packages of tobacco by 
marking them with your provincial name and to ensure that 
only tobacco that is . . . with respect to which tax has been paid 
can be sold in Saskatchewan. And these provisions for marking 
have been contained in regulations and some of the provisions 
are now being moved into The Tobacco Tax Act. 
 
I should say that just about all provinces follow some kind of 
marking program for the reasons that I’ve indicated. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Minister, would you say that interprovincial 
smuggling is a worse problem for cigarettes than cigarettes 
coming in from United States into Saskatchewan? 
 
(1615) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — It’s very difficult to measure the extent of 
tobacco smuggling because the amount of tobacco consumed 
depends on many factors such as changes in consumer 
preferences, concerns with health risks of smoking, and 
restrictions on smoking in public places. 
 
But I would base the answer partly on this fact. Our tobacco tax 
revenue has been increasing on average by about 2 per cent per 
year since the federal government and the eastern provinces 
lowered their tobacco rates. In other words, smuggling has not 
caused tobacco tax in Saskatchewan to go down; it’s been going 
up. And so I think that we’ve been fairly effective containing 
smuggling and fighting smuggling. 
 

I think it’s a sad fact actually that tobacco tax revenue has gone 
up because although we’re, I think, we’re containing smuggling 
largely, some of it takes place, but we’re largely containing it 
— certainly taking action to seize illicit cigarettes. And I think 
in the last four years about 17,000 cartons of illicit cigarettes 
have been seized. 
 
But the reason I say that it’s sad that the tax is going up is 
because it probably indicates that consumption is going up. And 
that’s a bad thing. I think it would be a happy event if 
consumption was going down. And despite the best efforts of 
educators and the Department of Health and the medical 
professions and so on to convince people that they shouldn’t 
smoke, people still are. 
 
And although I think many middle-aged people and older 
people eventually quit smoking, many young people start 
smoking. And we’re of course concerned about the marketing 
activities of the tobacco companies that portray tobacco 
consumption as an attractive lifestyle thing to do. And we want 
to keep fighting that. 
 
Now I’ve gone a bit off the member’s question, Mr. Chair, and 
the answer to the question is we really can’t say for sure 
whether there is more smuggling from the United States or 
other provinces. However, based upon the tax revenue, which in 
one sense is regrettable, it seems that smuggling is quite under 
control more so than the habit of smoking, which appears not to 
be as under control as one would like. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Has the changes that have been made to the 
pricing in the eastern provinces, primarily to get around or to 
minimize the amount of smuggling that was occurring there, is 
there any information that the minister has if the price change 
that occurred has alleviated the problem of smuggling in eastern 
Canada? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I believe that there is information available, 
which I don’t have in front of me today, that the price drop — 
some of which has been reversed recently by the federal 
government; I think they added 50 cents a package to the tax on 
cigarettes a few months ago — but the price drop certainly did 
make a difference in terms of cutting down smuggling. It also 
made a difference I believe in terms of tobacco consumption, 
especially by young people. 
 
So it cut down smuggling but it encouraged smoking by young 
people. So it’s a very difficult sort of trade-off, and the federal 
government obviously recently has decided to increase the taxes 
a bit and presumably they will be monitoring the smuggling at 
the same time. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Is there anything in the legislation that deals 
with the issue that you raised, and that is the apparent increase 
in consumption by young people. And I’m thinking in terms of 
setting age limits of availability or anything of that nature in the 
legislation that deals with the issue that you raised about young 
people’s apparent increase in consumption. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — No, there is not, because the problem of 
tobacco consumption by young people is dealt with in a 
separate piece of legislation which is, I believe it’s called The 
Minors Tobacco Act, and that legislation deals with the issue of 



May 4, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 941 

young people and tobacco. There’s also a companion piece of 
federal legislation that does the same thing. And this legislation 
deals simply with the mechanisms to enforce the tobacco tax. 
 
But I might say that indirectly, to the extent that you strengthen 
this legislation as this Bill seeks to do, then you also, Mr. Chair, 
will cut down on tobacco consumption by young people in the 
sense that the more effective we are in terms of having of a tax 
and enforcing the tax and trying to cut down on smuggling, the 
more effective we will be in preventing young people from 
taking up smoking. Because it has been demonstrated that their 
taking up smoking or not has a lot to do with the cost. If 
cigarettes are cheap and accessible and available to them, 
they’ll smoke; if they’re more expensive they’re less likely to 
start smoking. 
 
So indirectly it is relevant to that issue, but in terms of direct 
application, that is dealt with in a separate piece of legislation. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Does the legislation only affect retailers or 
wholesalers, or does it also affect consumers from bringing in 
product from other provinces, over a certain limit? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, it also enforces limits on consumers. 
Consumers are only entitled to bring in one carton or 200 
cigarettes tax free. And beyond that they would be required to 
pay the Saskatchewan tobacco tax. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Is that a change from the current 
legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — No, Mr. Chair, that is not a change. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Is it virtually impossible or practical to 
enforce that regulation? It would seem to me that there would 
be a great deal of difficulty from ensuring that a person may 
bring indeed more than one carton of cigarettes. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well it is difficult, but it’s like any other 
sort of law. You can’t actually, and you wouldn’t want to — it 
would not be socially desirable to check everybody's car as they 
come across the border from Alberta or Manitoba or the United 
States. 
 
But I think since we all know that we’re only entitled to bring in 
so many cigarettes or so much alcohol, any kind of law like that 
always has a preventive effect in the sense that people know 
that that is the law. And they know that even though it is 
unlikely that they will be stopped or have their vehicle checked, 
that the authorities might stop their vehicle and might check it 
and search it and that they are at risk of, you know, having a 
fine by importing something that they’re not supposed to be 
importing. 
 
And so the member is correct, Mr. Chair, that it’s difficult to 
enforce any law, whether it’s drinking and driving or alcohol in 
the vehicle, or tobacco or alcohol. But that doesn’t mean that 
you shouldn’t have the law or that the law doesn’t serve a 
useful social purpose in the sense that most people (a) will obey 
the law just because they think it’s the right thing to do, and it is 
the right things to do; and (b) even if they’re not wild about the 
law, most people will obey the law because they run the risk of 
getting caught if they don’t. So these laws always serve some 

useful purpose. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — In your remarks, Minister, you said the Act 
is being updated to comply with the Charter of Rights and 
Freedoms. Can you tell us precisely how this is being done? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, Mr. Chair. I would refer the member 
to sections 20 to 24 of the legislation which set out the rights of 
inspectors to search places and vehicles and so on. And 
generally speaking what I would say to the member is that what 
we have tried to do is to set out reasons for which the officials 
could act. In other words, it isn’t reasonable that an official of 
the government or the police go out and simply search 
somebody’s premises or their vehicle without some ground to 
do so. 
 
And so what the legislation seeks to do is to say that the 
enforcement officers should act on reasonable grounds in 
various circumstances. And what it does is to set out that if you 
search or take some action against an individual, that you 
should have some reasons to do so and that there is some 
procedures that apply. And in that sense setting out reasons and 
setting out proper procedures to protect the public at large in the 
sense of having the tobacco tax properly administered and so 
on, but also to protect the rights of the individual — to set out a 
way that there’s a balancing between the interests of the 
government and the interests of the individual to have certain 
legal rights. 
 
And that of course is what the Charter of Rights and Freedoms 
expects us to do in any legislation — to not exercise power 
without a reason to do so. And the provisions have been 
generally rewritten to ensure that they comply with that sort of 
spirit, that the government ought not to act without some reason 
to do so. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Have there been any challenges under the 
current legislation that these changes are meant to address? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — To the best of my knowledge, no there 
have not been any challenges. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — In terms of the investigation, do both the 
province and the federal governments have tobacco 
investigators in the field? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, Mr. Chair, in answer to the member, 
both the federal government and the provincial government 
have officers to enforce their tobacco tax legislation. And we 
seek to cooperate between the two levels of government so that 
we have a federal officer who actually works in our Department 
of Finance here in Regina and out with the officers of the 
province and they try to work together. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Can you tell me, Minister, how many 
charges have been laid in Saskatchewan in the past year 
regarding illegal tobacco importation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I don’t know what the figures would be for 
the last year, but there have been about 30 prosecutions in the 
last four years. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Are these prosecutions under illegal 



942 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1998 

importation, or failure to pay the tax, or both? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Generally speaking the prosecutions are for 
illegal importation, which also involves tax evasion. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — What powers do the inspectors or 
enforcement officials have to enter property for the purpose of 
enforcing the law? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — If I can refer the member to section 19 of 
the Bill, it says that the minister — I don’t think I’ll be entering 
upon anybody’s land to enforce the Act by the way: 
 

. . . an enforcement officer and any person lawfully 
accompanying the minister or an enforcement officer may 
enter on any land, whether or not that land is enclosed. 

 
It goes on in section 20 to say that: 
 

For the purpose of enforcing and administering this Act . . . 
(you) may do the following: 
 

. . . enter, without a warrant, at any reasonable time 
the following premises for the purpose of conducting 
an inspection or examination: 
 

And then it says: 
 

(i) any premises used by a person in connection with the 
importation, storage, transportation, sale or marking of 
tobacco: (or) 
 
(ii) any premises containing any records or property that 
relate to the importation, storage, transportation, sale or 
marking of tobacco; 

 
So in other words, without a warrant you could enter into a 
place of business that deals with tobacco and if you have 
reasonable grounds that a commercial vehicle is carrying or 
transporting tobacco you can inspect or examine the contents of 
the vehicle, and so on. 
 
So with respect to business places or commercial vehicles, there 
are a series of rules set out in section 20. But if you are dealing 
with a person’s home for example, a residence, then you would 
obtain a warrant. 
 
(1630) 
 
And if I can refer the member to section 22, a justice of the 
peace or a provincial court judge would have to be satisfied by 
information given under oath that there were reasonable 
grounds to believe an offence was occurring before issuing a 
warrant to enter and search any place or premise that’s named 
in the warrant. 
 
So in a general way what it says is that if you’re dealing with a 
business you can go in and look around — a business that deals 
with tobacco or a commercial vehicle. If you’re dealing with 
other places — so somebody’s home, farm buildings, buildings 
on their property, so on — then you would have to get 
authorization from a judge or a justice of the peace based upon 
sworn information that there was some reason to do so. 

And also in section 24 it says that if there are reasonable 
grounds to believe that a vehicle may contain evidence of an 
offence, then a vehicle can be inspected. So those are the 
powers that one would have to enter into places or search 
vehicles. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Minister, the fines for breaking this Act are 
being raised substantially. Can you tell us what they currently 
are and what they are going to be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, the fines under the current legislation 
range from $5,000 for consumers and up to $10,000 for dealers 
of tobacco. And under the new legislation, the fines are up to 
$10,000 and/or two years imprisonment for both consumers and 
dealers. And a fine of up to $50,000 in the case of a corporation 
and a fine of up to $1 million for counterfeiting markings on 
tobacco packages. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Are the fines under the legislation related at 
all to the quantity of tobacco involved? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Not specifically within the legislation, 
except in one respect. That is that it is proposed to introduce a 
summary offence ticket provision of $250 plus 15 cents per 
cigarette over 2,000 cigarettes for small quantities of smuggled 
tobacco. 
 
But other than that, the courts would determine the severity 
depending upon the amount of tobacco involved or the record 
that the person concerned had — whether they had done this 
before and so on. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — The Bill also deals with the seizure of 
vehicle thought to be used in smuggling. Is that provision the 
same or different than in the current legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — That, Mr. Chair, in answer to the member, 
is similar to the provision we have in the current legislation. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Just a 
couple of questions, Mr. Minister. You’ve talked to . . . A 
number of times in the Bill here we talk about unmarked 
tobacco. Can you explain to me really what that is and where 
they, where it originates? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — That would be tobacco that does not have 
the Cellophane Saskatchewan marking around it, which the 
member may be familiar with. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — More familiar than I care to tell you, Mr. 
Minister. One other question and this probably ties a little bit 
with it, but when someone is prosecuted for smuggling and 
found guilty — and I know in the past I believe that as much as 
semi-loads has come across — what happens to those tobacco 
products after they’re . . . I’m sure that’s confiscated. Where 
does those tobacco products end up? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — It is seized and eventually when it is no 
longer necessary for the purposes of evidence it is destroyed. I 
assume that it’s burned — it is burned but not smoked. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — It seemed like a terrible waste of money to 
me, Mr. Minister. The news this morning I believe, Mr. 



May 4, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 943 

Minister, and you may have heard it too, that the Americans are 
thinking of really jacking the price of cigarettes up in the States. 
In fact I believe to the extent where they feel they might take in 
as much as a half a trillion dollars extra in taxes. Will that solve 
some of our problems here? Will that help the situation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — In answer to the member, Mr. Chair, yes, 
that would be helpful, because as the member will know, the 
price of tobacco in the United States is considerably lower than 
it is in Canada. So the incentive to smuggle would certainly be 
lessened and that in turn would probably result in the federal 
government increasing the federal taxes and that would assist us 
with respect to solving the smuggling problem but also perhaps 
more importantly, discouraging young people from taking up 
smoking and perhaps encouraging other people to stop 
smoking. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Also in the States 
there was lawsuits down there where people were taking 
tobacco companies to court and I believe even maybe possibly 
B.C. was thinking of the same thing. What is happening with 
that now? Do we know where what state that is at? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — The member is correct, Mr. Chair. The 
Government of British Columbia, through the Minister of 
Health, sometime ago indicated that they would be launching a 
court proceeding to take on the tobacco companies. I haven’t 
heard anything about that since that announcement was made. I 
don’t know whether the lawsuit has started or, if it has started, 
at what stage of the proceeding it is. It obviously has not 
advanced beyond a statement of claim, if that, insofar as we’re 
aware. 
 
I could tell the member that we took the position — and at that 
time I was the Minister of Health — that we should cooperate 
as provinces, and that the federal government also could 
cooperate with us and have one lawsuit on behalf of the entire 
country with the federal government and the provinces. Because 
in view of the, the expense of that kind of litigation . . . And 
when you’re dealing with the tobacco companies, you’re 
dealing with people that have very deep pockets. They have a 
lot of money, and they have a lot of experts at their disposal. 
 
So our view was that rather than the province of Saskatchewan 
and Alberta and Prince Edward Island and so on fighting the 
tobacco companies separately, and each paying to take on a 
major battle with them, it would be more advantageous from a 
financial point of view — and probably from the point of view 
of getting the best evidence together — if the governments 
would act in concert together. 
 
And so that’s what, what we suggested. And I took that up with 
the other Health ministers and the federal Minister of Health for 
discussion purposes. And I believe that it is still a matter being 
discussed and considered at that level. So I don’t think there’s 
anything terribly active happening out of the B.C. lawsuit at the 
moment or otherwise. 
 
But it’s certainly something that we should be looking at 
because as time goes on, some court cases are being determined 
in the United States which may have some — not a binding 
affect on Canadian courts — but may have some persuasive 
value. And, and so we should, we should keep thinking about 

that and perhaps pursuing it. And maybe the tobacco companies 
should be contributing to some of the health costs that are 
caused by the tobacco consumption which they encourage. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I also think in the 
States — and maybe you can bring me up to speed on this — 
but I think they came to some agreement down in the States, 
whether it was private citizen or whether it was the states 
themselves or the federal government that took them to court, I 
think they settled out of court if I understood it properly. Do we 
have any information on that, on what kind of volume of dollars 
that were part of the agreement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — There have been a variety of lawsuits in the 
United States by some states, I think including the state of 
Mississippi and some others who are cooperating with them. 
And some of those lawsuits have been settled but probably not 
all of them. And it seems to me, this is just my recollection, that 
the tobacco companies have agreed to pay some hundreds of 
millions of dollars to some of these government authorities to 
assist with health care costs. 
 
But I’m not sure that there’s been any comprehensive 
settlement in the sense that there may be private individuals still 
pursuing other lawsuits. And there may be state governments in 
the United States still pursuing other lawsuits. 
 
And I think what I’ll do is undertake to ask the Department of 
Finance, in consultation with the Department of Health, to 
provide some more detailed information to the member with 
respect to the status of both the British Columbia lawsuit, where 
that is at today, if anywhere, and also the status of discussions 
with the other provinces of Canada and the federal government 
about the possibility of a combined lawsuit. And also as best we 
can get information, the status of the American litigation and 
where that is at. 
 
So I think what I’ll do is get that information together and send 
that over to the member, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. One other section 
that I was a little bit interest . . . or kind of interested in is when 
you’re talking about the seizure and return of vehicles. And you 
have a number of numbers there in the amount of tobacco or 
tobacco products that would constitute the seizure of a vehicle. 
How did we come to those numbers? Like for what reason did 
we pick out 10,000 cigarettes or whatever? Is there some trend 
there that would lead to that happening? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes. I see looking at section 26 of the Bill 
that . . . First of all I should mention it is similar to the 
provisions of the present legislation. And it permits the seizure 
of a vehicle being used for smuggling large amounts of tobacco, 
which is, for example, more than 50 cartons of cigarettes. And 
that vehicle may be held for up to 60 days and it would be 
returned if a charge was not laid within that time. 
 
This provision, I’m told, was modelled on a similar provision in 
the existing legislation but also the . . . some of the terms of this 
were modelled on the Manitoba legislation. And I think the 
thinking would be that if you’re dealing with a person that is 
just incorrectly and illegally bringing in a couple of cartons of 
tobacco for their own use, that you ought not to seize the 



944 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1998 

vehicle or do something like that; you should fine them or tax 
them or whatever. 
 
But if somebody’s using a vehicle for the business, in effect, of 
distributing tobacco illegally and standing to make a lot of 
money, that they run the risk of losing their vehicle. That is the 
rationale. 
 
So it’s sort of like the difference between, you know, 
possessing illegal drugs for your own use and trafficking. The 
trafficking, which is assumed if you have a large quantity, is 
thought to be worse than the act of simple smuggling for 
yourself. Both of those things are illegal but one is worse than 
the other. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. That’s all of the 
questions we have at this time. I want to take this opportunity to 
thank you, Mr. Minister, and I especially thank your staff for 
this afternoon’s questions. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 37 inclusive agreed to. 
 
(1645) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Before I do that, I’d 
like to thank the officials for their assistance today; and I’d also 
like to thank the opposition for their input into the Bill, 
participation and cooperation. 
 
And with that I’d like to move that we report the Bill without 
amendment and that we ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 17 —The Certified Management Consultants Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 16 — The Certified General Accountants 
Amendment Act, 1998 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 30 — The Tobacco Tax Act, 1998 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:49 p.m. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................917 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................917 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................917 
  McPherson.................................................................................................................................................................................917 
  Haverstock.................................................................................................................................................................................917 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ..........................................................................................................................................................................................917 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Whitmore...................................................................................................................................................................................917 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................917 
  MacKinnon................................................................................................................................................................................918 
  McPherson.................................................................................................................................................................................918 
  Shillington..................................................................................................................................................................................918 
  Trew ...........................................................................................................................................................................................918 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................918 
  Kasperski ...................................................................................................................................................................................918 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Violence Against Women 
  Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................918 
 Purple Ribbon Awareness Week 
  Stanger .......................................................................................................................................................................................918 
 Cluff Lake Mine 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................919 
 Mental Health Week 
  Murray.......................................................................................................................................................................................919 
 Geriatric Assessment Program 
  Haverstock.................................................................................................................................................................................919 
 Lake Diefenbaker Potato Corporation 
  Wiens .........................................................................................................................................................................................919 
 Revision of Young Offenders Act 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................920 
 Polonia Dance Ensemble 10th Anniversary Concert 
  Kasperski ...................................................................................................................................................................................920 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Compensation for Hepatitis C Victims 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................920 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................920 
 Surgery Waiting-lists 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................921 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................921 
  McPherson.................................................................................................................................................................................922 
 Saskatchewan Health Information Network 
  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................923 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................923 
 Diagnostic Testing Waiting-lists 
  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................923 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................924 
 Plains Health Centre Closure 
  Haverstock.................................................................................................................................................................................924 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................924 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 44 — The Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 1998 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................925 
MOTIONS 
 Referral of Estimates to Standing Committee on Estimates 
  MacKinnon................................................................................................................................................................................925 
MOTION UNDER RULE 46 
 Reform to the Young Offenders Act 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................925 
  D'Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................927 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................928 



 

  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................929 
 Recorded division .........................................................................................................................................................................930 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Kowalsky ...................................................................................................................................................................................930 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 38  The Highway Traffic Amendment Act, 1998 
  Lingenfelter ...............................................................................................................................................................................930 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................931 
 Bill No. 39 — The Vehicle Administration Amendment Act, 1998 
  Lingenfelter ...............................................................................................................................................................................931 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................932 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 32 — The Wildlife Amendment Act, 1998 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................932 
 Bill No. 29 — The Workers’ Compensation Amendment Act, 1998 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................933 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 Bill No. 17  The Certified Management Consultants Act 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................935 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................935 
 Bill No. 16 — The Certified General Accountants Amendment Act, 1998 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................938 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................938 
 Bill No. 30 — The Tobacco Tax Act, 1998 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................939 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................939 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................942 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 17 —The Certified Management Consultants Act 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................944 
 Bill No. 16 — The Certified General Accountants Amendment Act, 1998 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................944 
 Bill No. 30 — The Tobacco Tax Act, 1998 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................944 
 
 


