





























































Hansard: March 19, 1998


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 197 
 March 19, 1998 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I have a petition to present on behalf of residents of 
Saskatchewan. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with aboriginal and Metis leaders and wildlife and 
sportsmen organizations in the province of Saskatchewan 
in an immediate effort to end the destructive and dangerous 
practice of night hunting in the province for everyone 
regardless of their heritage. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures to this petition are from the city of 
Saskatoon, Prince Albert, and the community of Vanscoy. I so 
present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find out 
all the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions come from the Moose Jaw and Regina area, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To present petitions as 
well and to read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reach necessary agreements with other levels of 
governments to fund the twinning of the Trans-Canada 
Highway in Saskatchewan so work can begin in 1998, and 
to set out a time frame for the ultimate completion of the 
project. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this petition is signed by individuals from the Eastend area. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 

the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The communities involved, Mr. Speaker, are the town of 
Watson and the town of Quill Lake. I so present. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
a petition and I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And these are signed by people form Melfort and Star City. 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise to 
present a petition on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to put 
an immediate halt to all investment in foreign countries by 
all Saskatchewan Crown corporations and instead invest 
Crown corporation profits in Saskatchewan. 
 

The people that have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
the communities of Carnduff and Alida. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
to present today. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Langbank, 
Kennedy, and Watson. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a petition 
surrounding the whole issue of Channel Lake and Jack Messer 
that I’m pleased to present on behalf of people here today. 
These folks come from Regina and Yellow Grass and I’m 
pleased to present on their behalf. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also present a petition 
on behalf of the citizens of Saskatchewan. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 



198 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 1998 

continued. 
 
And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Limerick, Fife Lake, Crane Valley, Assiniboia, and Bengough. I 
so present. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker I present 
a petition today which reads as follows: 
 

Your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. Assembly 
may be pleased to save the Plains hospital by enacting 
legislation to prevent its closure, and by providing 
adequate funding to the Regina Health District so that the 
essential services provided at the Plains may be continued. 
 

Your petitioners, Mr. Speaker, come from Swift Current, 
Saskatoon, Cabri, and Neidpath. I so present. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
petitions on behalf of citizens concerned about the Plains Health 
Centre closure. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, those that have signed this petition are from 
the south-west of our province. I so present. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise to 
present a petition. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, 
they’re from Hafford, from Saskatoon, and from Speers, and 
from all throughout the land. And I so present. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a petition 
to present today on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition has been signed by the good folks in 
the city of Swift Current. 
 

Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I join with my 
colleagues here today in bringing forward petitions to save the 
Plains hospital. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray, Mr. 
Speaker. 

 
People that have signed the petition are from Limerick, 
Assiniboia, Rockglen, Coronach area of the province. And I 
might add this would bring the petitions near the 100,000 mark, 
that have been presented in this House to date. I so present. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy today to 
present petitions on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reach necessary agreements with other levels of 
government to fund the twinning of the Trans-Canada 
Highway in Saskatchewan so that work can begin in 1998, 
and to set out a time frame for the ultimate completion of 
the project with or without federal assistance. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And I’m happy to present these, Mr. Speaker, on behalf mostly 
today of the people from the community of Abbey, 
Saskatchewan; and of course a few from Cabri and Hazlet. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 
begin construction of the four-lane Trans-Canada 
Highway between Gull Lake and the Alberta border; 
petitions to fund the twinning of the Trans-Canada 
Highway; petitions to save the Plains Health Centre; 
petitions to end the practice of night hunting; petitions to 
cancel severance payments to Jack Messer, and to call 
for an independent public inquiry surrounding Channel 
Lake. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I don’t know 
where to start. But I think rather than introducing many of the 
distinguished guests and friends who are joining us on the floor 
today, I would like to introduce to you and members of the 
Assembly, a group of high school students who have joined us 
today in the government gallery. They’re a group of grade 12 
students from Campbell Collegiate brought here with Mr. Dan 
Fletcher. It’s an annual event for Mr. Fletcher to bring his social 
studies class here to watch the legislature at work, perhaps on 



March 19, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 199 

one of its most important days, and exercising one of the most 
important democratic traditions. 
 
So if you’d join with me in welcoming them, I would appreciate 
it. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure today 
to introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
Assembly and all of our guests, a special person seated in your 
gallery — as all the people here are special — but Jean Shepard 
is one of the legends of country music and she is with us here 
today. And, Jean, if you would just stand up and be recognized. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I say that Jean is a special guest 
because as you will know, she has been one of the legends of 
country music and a member of the Grand Old Opry for many, 
many years. And while I consider myself to be a country 
western fan, I say a special greeting on behalf of my desk mate 
and our Premier, who is the country western fan of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
During her illustrious career, Jean has recorded more than 35 
albums to her credit, had several number one hits. Her voice is 
much appreciated in the business and among her fans. Now 
Jean is here in the province for a special reason because she’s 
hosting the Country Music Association’s Annual Awards this 
Sunday night in Prince Albert. 
 
So, Jean, I would really want to welcome you here today, with 
your husband Benny Birchfield, who in his own right is a 
country western artist as well. Welcome to the province and 
welcome to the legislature. Great to see you here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, if I may, by leave of the Assembly, 
I’d like to extend a sincere welcome to everybody that chose to 
be with us here this afternoon. On behalf of the Liberal caucus, 
the third party, I see that there are friends here from my 
constituency, representatives of district health boards. We have 
some very prominent people in the Assembly today, Mr. 
Speaker. And without naming each and every one, I want to 
acknowledge their presence to be with us here today and I thank 
them for being here. And I’m sure all of my colleagues will join 
me in offering them a very, very warm welcome to be with us 
here today on this important day. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
behalf of the official opposition, I too would like to extend a 
very warm welcome to all of the visitors here today from all 
across Saskatchewan. We know we have very many different 
organizations and governments represented and we want to 
welcome you to the legislature this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to 

introduce to you and through you today, 12 students from the 
Abbey School and their teacher, Alan Colpitts. I trust the notice 
that I have that they’re here because I haven’t been able to find 
them, but there’s such a crowd here I know they’re here 
somewhere. I’d love to have everybody welcome them. They’ve 
probably come two-hundred-and-some-odd miles through 
adverse conditions and we’re happy that they’ve arrived. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

House Proceedings 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the Saskatchewan Party has decided to allow the government to 
deliver its budget today during ministerial statements. Of 
course, that means the official opposition, the third party, the 
independent members, will be given equal time to respond. And 
I know that you will see that all members of the opposition in 
their seats are listening with great interest to the minister as he 
delivers his budget speech. I hope the NDP (New Democratic 
Party) members will extend the same courtesy when opposition 
members are speaking. 
 
As you know, Mr. Speaker, this hasn’t always been the case. 
Last year when the official opposition was delivering its 
response, we saw a number of NDP members and supporters 
get up and leave. Mr. Speaker, I just want to make the point that 
all members of the opposition will be in their seats to listen to 
the Finance minister, and we expect the same courtesy from the 
members and the supporters of the NDP. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Prince Albert Credit Union Expansion 
 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, this being budget day, it’s 
especially a pleasure to bring good economic news from Prince 
Albert. Daryl Snider, president of the Prince Albert Credit 
Union, recently announced a $3 million expansion to its 
facilities. Mr. Snider said, and I quote: 
 

We believe this announcement is yet another clear 
demonstration of our commitment to the Prince Albert 
community. 
 

When finished, the expanded building on 28th Street and 2nd 
Avenue West will house the Credit Union business centre, the 
teleservice staff, and regular South Hill operations. The Prince 
Albert Credit Union will also have a new, computerized 
banking system up and running this fall, and Sid Adams, Credit 
Union general manager, said employees will be retrained to 
accommodate changes with no job losses. 
 
He further said the renovations are a key move for the Credit 
Union to position itself for the new millennium. Obviously, Mr. 
Speaker, our credit unions believe the progress seen in the past 
few years in Saskatchewan will continue into the new 
millennium and, Mr. Speaker, I along with my colleagues on 
this side of the House, intend to continue our work to see the 
progress seen in the last few years in Saskatchewan continued 
into the 21st century and beyond. 



200 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 1998 

For the Prince Albert Credit Union, that means more clients, 
more business, and better services based on public confidence. 
My congratulations to the Prince Albert Credit Union board, 
staff, and management. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Channel Lake Pollution 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Speaker. This afternoon I 
want to tell you about the aquatic life of a small polluted lake in 
northern Saskatchewan called Channel Lake. This lake, Mr. 
Speaker, has a number of unusual fish species. The largest used 
to be the Conservative catfish. This fish once ruled the lake. It 
is primarily a bottom feeder. Mr. Speaker, environmentalists 
were concerned that it was becoming extinct. In a plan to revive 
it, they have recently changed the name. 
 
Another species, Mr. Speaker, is the red sucker. They appear to 
be numerous at the moment but long-term projections for their 
survival are bleak. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, there was the jackfish. This fish was a 
terrible “messer”. This fish pretended it was a red sucker and 
liked to boss the other red suckers around. The red suckers gave 
him everything he wanted until they realized he was destroying 
their own chances of survival. 
 
They tried to give the jackfish one last, enormous feed in the 
hope that he would quietly leave the lake. But rather than clear 
the water, the departure of the jackfish has made the lake 
murkier and smellier than ever. The Liberals say, let’s get to the 
bottom; let’s drain the lake; let’s find the true source of the 
pollution. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskEnergy’s Commitment to Science Education 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As you are aware, 
March 16 to 22 is Education Week in Saskatchewan. Yesterday 
morning the Deputy Premier announced that SaskEnergy will 
reaffirm its long-standing commitment to science education for 
Saskatchewan youth through a $150,000 investment. 
 
Seventy-five thousand has been designated for the 
Saskatchewan Science Centre to assist in developing a new, 
permanent energy exhibit. This will provide a forum in which 
children can get excited about and interested in learning about 
energy. Another 75,000 has been committed to provide 
sponsorship for science fairs for the next three years.  
 
Saskatchewan students have always competed at a high level. 
And the allotment of 25,000 per year will help our students to 
continue and expand this proud tradition. SaskEnergy has 
committed substantial funds towards the promotion of science 
and education for Saskatchewan youth. In addition, SaskEnergy 
employees from across the province are involved in 
volunteering for science fairs and other community 
partnerships. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we approach the 21st century our labour force 
will become more technologically based. By providing our 

youth with the opportunities of strong scientific backgrounds, 
we are ensuring they can compete at the highest of levels in the 
job markets of tomorrow. 
 
Once again I’d like to thank SaskEnergy for their commitment 
to scientific education. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Billabuster 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I don’t 
know whether you’ve seen today’s Star-Phoenix or not, but I 
want to congratulate the Star-Phoenix — I believe it’s a Conrad 
Black paper — for an excellent example of balanced journalism 
on today’s front page. The one headline reads: “Holding the 
floor; legislature’s agenda derailed in protest.” And I think it’s 
an excellent article about the Saskatchewan Party’s 
“billabuster” over Channel Lake. 
 
And right next to that article, right next to that article, Mr. 
Speaker, is an equally excellent article about the NDP’s 
response: “Chimps go bananas after early wake-up call.” 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

New Era in Grain Storage 
 
Mr. Renaud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is a good news 
announcement relating to the new era in grain storage and 
handling. 
 
I would just like to mention that there is some cause for 
nostalgia as the growth and changes in our economy also brings 
changes to the Saskatchewan landscape. 
 
United Grain Growers has announced that it plans to construct a 
$9 million high through-put elevator in Valparaiso. The facility 
will have storage capacity of 18,200 tonnes; it will have the 
capacity to load 104 rail cars in a mere 48 hours. 
 
UGG (United Grain Growers) plans to make the new elevator 
one of the primary servers in the north-east part of our province. 
Construction is to begin later this spring and will employ 65 
people during this phase. Eleven full-time jobs will be created 
to staff the high through-put elevator, and by the summer of 
1999 the new concrete elevator will be fully operational. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government has always had faith in the people 
of Saskatchewan. UGG’s $9 million investment shows that 
corporations share our confidence in the people and in the 
economy of the best province, and in the best country in which 
to live. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Tory Studies 
 

Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I think 
it’s important today that the new Tory caucus provide for this 
House a study indicating how many studies they would like to 
see conducted. 
 



March 19, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 201 

The Finance critic for this lot met with the media this morning 
to provide an embargoed response to today’s provincial budget 
— and I’ll be careful not to get into the details of the budget, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
But when questioned what the new Tories would do about 
taxes, he suggested that only a study would best determine what 
taxes should be cut. 
 
When questioned about health care, he suggested a study would 
best determine if there are problems in the health care system. 
 
When questioned about the Plains Health Centre, he suggested 
that would have to be part of the study to determine whether 
there are problems in health care. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan, and the Liberal 
opposition, don’t need a study to show that health care is in 
crisis. We don’t need a study to prove that the Plains Health 
Centre is needed. The Plains Health Centre must be saved. 
 
We don’t need a study to prove that families are being gouged 
by our Crowns. These are things that you know if you’re truly 
in touch with the people and you’re listening to what they have 
to say. To the new Tories I say, turn up the volume. Or perhaps 
you’ll like to study that first as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Funding for Medical Research 
 

Ms. Lorje: — I have good news — good economic news from 
Saskatoon. Late last week the Minister of Health announced 
$200,000 in funding to support eight research projects 
associated with the College of Medicine at the University of 
Saskatchewan. Not only will this additional investment help 
support current research, it will help U of S (University of 
Saskatchewan) researchers to compete for future grants from 
the Medical Research Council. Saskatchewan Health has 
contributed more than $4.6 million in ’97-98 to support health 
research. This funding represents a 47 per cent increase in 
external health research funding since 1991-92. This is a clear 
commitment on the part of our government to health research in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
In addition to this announcement, the very next day the Minister 
of Economic and Co-operative Development announced that 
$1.5 million is being provided through the strategic initiatives 
fund for a new biotechnology initiative at the University of 
Saskatchewan. This initiative is part of our government’s 
commitment to a strategy of investing in innovation to create 
jobs. 
 
It will ensure that a stream of well-qualified graduates will be 
available to support local biotech industries. 
 
The strategic initiatives fund helps Saskatchewan develop the 
infrastructure and the skill needed for the economy of the 
future. This fund does not finance individual projects, it helps 
strategic training programs and . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The hon. member’s time has expired. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Premier’s Alleged Remark in the House 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 
the Premier. Mr. Premier, yesterday in this House, you made an 
inappropriate and offensive remark about other members of this 
Assembly. You know what you said. You know it was over the 
line. And you know the right thing to do. 
 
Mr. Premier, you’ve been here a long time. And I think you 
have more respect for this place than what you showed 
yesterday. Will you do the right thing today and apologize? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker. I’m going to answer this 
question by posing a question. Knowing full well what the 
Liberal member from the Battlefords said publicly about the 
alleged remark and what the member from Regina said about 
the alleged remark, my question to the acting leader of the 
so-called Saskatchewan Party is this . . . the really Conservative 
Party. If you heard what you say you heard, tell the House why 
it is that you didn’t get up on a point of privilege at the first 
opportunity and raise it with the Speaker while I was here and 
you were there. Why did you not do that? And why did you 
instead never raise it in this House except to go outside on 
television to make up that allegation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the official opposition 
exercised its right to hold up the business of this House by 
ringing the bells, a tactic used effectively by the Premier 
himself in 1989 when he was leader of the opposition. 
 
And how did the Premier respond to the question, exercising its 
legitimate legislative rights? He called us “brown shirts” — 
“brown shirts,” Mr. Speaker. A clear reference to fascism and 
naziism. And then he sent the Provincial Secretary out to take 
the fall for him. 
 
Mr. Premier, the Provincial Secretary did the right thing and we 
accept his apology. Mr. Premier, the Provincial Secretary 
wasn’t the only person who made that remark. Will you follow 
his example and apologize to this House? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve indicated outside 
the House and inside the House that I did not make the remark 
that the member refers to. 
 
But it’s significant to note that he didn’t answer my question. If 
you were so offended, why didn’t you get up and raise it on a 
point of privilege when you should have, as the rules dictate 
you should do? And I’ll tell you why you didn’t do it. Because 
it didn’t happen and you know it didn’t happen. What you did 
is, you went outside and you made it up. 
 
And don’t say that what we did in 1979 even approximates 
what you’re trying to do with the budget. What your member 
behind you did was draw a line in the sand. You have said — 



202 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 1998 

and so far as we know this is the situation of this moment — 
you would not allow this budget to be read today. That’s your 
line in the sand. That’s what your member behind threatened. 
 
You tell me that’s democracy. I say that is a high act of 
undemocracy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Tax Relief 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Finance. Mr. Minister, today is 
budget day and everyone in Saskatchewan is asking the same 
question. Will the NDP continue to gouge us with sky-high 
personal, corporate, and sales taxes? Will the government 
continue to bombard us with increasing power bills, higher 
natural gas charges, higher vehicle insurance costs? 
 
Mr. Minister, your government’s approach to balancing the 
budget has been to gouge Saskatchewan taxpayers at every turn. 
In today’s Leader-Post you admit your government has pushed 
taxes through the roof in this province. Mr. Minister, are you 
going to get serious about reducing taxes this year or is it going 
to be more of the same empty NDP rhetoric followed by more 
crushing taxes and utility bills? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I want to tell this House 
and the people in this House who know it, and the people who 
may be watching on television who know it, thanks to their hard 
effort and cooperation and support, we have overcome a huge 
mess which we inherited in 1991 created by those people over 
there, where this province was on the verge of bankruptcy. 
 
We are now on the right track. We still have a debt of $12 
billion, thanks to those people opposite there. We’re paying 
$770 million a year in interest payments. And last year we 
reduced the sales tax by two points. We are on a track, which is 
the correct track, of now saying to the people of Saskatchewan, 
we’ve been able to now see some daylight and to provide 
opportunity for themselves, their families, their homes, their 
hospitals, their roads. 
 
We are rebuilding Saskatchewan after nine years of destruction 
by that Tory Party over there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, the minister is always talking 
about creating jobs. Well here’s a little piece of untendered 
advice — the kind that the NDP like most. If you are serious 
about creating good jobs, making the province more 
competitive and growing the economy, then cut taxes — plain 
and simple. 
 
Mr. Minister, you admit in the media this morning that your 
government has already driven taxes up so high in 
Saskatchewan that it’s going to take awhile to bring them back 
down. Well, Mr. Minister, you don’t have much time left. 
People in businesses are voting with their feet. They are leaving 
for Alberta, where the NDP can’t pick their pockets. 

Mr. Minister, will you be announcing today, specific, long-term 
plans to cut taxes for people and businesses in Saskatchewan, or 
will there be more of the same? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know where the 
hon. member from Melfort has been living, on what planet he’s 
been living the last 10 or 15 years, but ever since we assumed 
office in 1991 — notwithstanding the strait-jacket that the 
people of this province were imposed upon; a strait-jacket of 
$15 billion and the highest debt of any province in Canada — 
ever since we assumed that, we’ve provided tax cuts on a 
selected basis to business all the time. There’s been a tax 
reduction in every budget even during the dark, dark days of 
deficit. 
 
The facts are that more people are working in Saskatchewan 
today than ever before. The facts are that the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan are now seeing an in-migration. 
During your period it was a vast out-migration to Alberta 
because of your mismanagement and your deeds. 
 
The facts of the matter are that more people today are working 
in Saskatchewan than ever in the history of this province since 
1905. We’re on the right track. We’re doing the right thing for 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday the Toronto Dominion Bank predicted a downturn in 
the Saskatchewan economy for 1998. One of the reasons was 
the bank’s estimate that oil prices will average no more than 
$15 a barrel this year. 
 
In today’s Leader-Post you are reported as saying, the 
government expects oil prices to average $18 a barrel. Mr. 
Minister, even the most optimistic industry analysts are 
predicting oil prices won’t move past the $16 price this year. 
 
Mr. Minister, are you basing your oil revenue projections in this 
year’s budget on clearly unrealistic estimate of 17.50 to $18, as 
mentioned in the paper this morning, or more realistic industry 
standards? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to say — of 
the many things I’m proud about this government’s 
accomplishments since we assumed office in 1991 — I’m very 
proud to say that our projections of estimates with respect to 
revenues . . . and by the way, our projections with respect to 
expenditures have been pretty well bang on since 1991. They 
haven’t been identical, but they’ve been pretty well bang on. 
 
These are projections and they have been cautious, and they’ve 
been moderate, and they remain that way, and they’ve permitted 
us to balance the budget and to eliminate the deficit. Now with 
respect to this year, we followed the same model with respect to 
oil projections. In fact yesterday the value of oil went up about 
a dollar, I think it was. Even the Premier of Alberta, Premier 
Klein, said that he has to be aware of this factor, and so do we 
have to be aware of this factor. 
 



March 19, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 203 

Here you are criticising us about the possible loss of revenue, of 
oil revenues, while at the same time you’re going to be going 
around outside there after the budget saying that we should 
have cut the budget taxes by $200 million in the absence of 
revenue and somehow spend more and somehow balance four 
budgets. I tell you, anybody who would buy that would re-vote 
back in the Conservative Party. Not in your lifetime will the 
Conservatives be re-elected to the treasury benches on that kind 
of forecast. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Plains Health Centre Closure 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, over 
the past few weeks we have seen two members of the Regina 
Health District Board of Directors call for the government to 
reverse its decision to close the Plains hospital. 
 
Mr. Minister, the people of southern Saskatchewan are really 
concerned that your government has turned its back on them. 
They’re concerned that the acute care services just won’t be 
there in time of emergency. Mr. Minister, the Saskatchewan 
Party has been calling for a moratorium on the closure of the 
Plains hospital until the health system can be reviewed. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you be allocating funds in today’s budget to 
ensure the Plains hospital remains open until the health system 
can be completely reviewed and people of southern 
Saskatchewan can be assured that emergency health facilities 
are there for them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — You know something, Mr. Speaker, I 
never thought I’d get up in this House and agree with my friend 
from the Liberal Party. There they go — they’re back at it 
again, they’re back at it again. They want another study — 
another study. This member doesn’t understand that we’ve 
moved on now to rebuilding the finest health care system in the 
province of Saskatchewan’s history. They have forgotten that 
we have now renewed our health care to the point where in the 
province of Saskatchewan, we are the model for the other 
provincial governments of this country. 
 
Doctor Rob Wieler of the Saskatchewan Medical Association 
says this. He says that our government’s actions in the Speech 
from the Throne will achieve a more stable and secure working 
environment for physicians and, quote, Mr. Speaker, “improved 
patient access to quality care.” 
 
We are building world class health care facilities at the General 
and Pasqua. Not only for Regina but for all of southern 
Saskatchewan as a result of . . . (inaudible) . . . That’s what 
we’re doing. 
 
And finally, before I take my place, if you don’t believe me, all 
you have to do is pick up today’s Globe and Mail. And what are 
the doctors in Alberta doing, and what are the doctors in 
Ontario doing? They’re going on full strike, because that’s what 
Tory governments do — not NDP governments, who support 
medicare and health care. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Health Care Funding 
 

Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I won’t be asking for any studies, 
but as I was driving to the legislature this morning, I heard the 
Minister of Finance suggest that people shouldn’t judge the 
NDP government on today’s budget but on what they’ve 
delivered since coming to power. 
 
Well let’s examine what the NDP has delivered in the area of 
health care. You’ve shut down hospitals, waiting-lists are at a 
full-time high, patients lying in hallways of our hospitals 
because there are no extra beds. And the amazing thing is that 
you refuse to acknowledge there is a problem. 
 
Earlier this week we told the House that at least on two 
occasions in the past 10 days, there was not one available 
hospital bed in the entire city of Regina. Instead of treating this 
with the seriousness it deserves, the Health minister has a 
bureaucrat suggest that we are misleading the public. 
 
Mr. Premier, in past budgets you’ve essentially told the people 
to take two aspirins and call again in a year. Is today’s budget 
just more of the same? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, you’re right — I did use 
that phrase. But I used it about your party leader and your 
party’s position on health care, which boils down to, take two 
aspirins and call me in the morning. That’s basically the 
tradition of the Liberal Party. 
 
Look, you said, you said, wrongly so — and this was answered 
by the Minister of Health yesterday, and you repeat it again 
today — there wasn’t a hospital bed available in Regina. That’s 
absolutely incorrect. It’s false. It’s absolutely and totally 
incorrect. I’m telling you we are building in Regina — go down 
and take a look at it — at the General and the Pasqua, hospitals 
which are going to serve Regina and southern Saskatchewan to 
a very top quality. 
 
And while I’m on my feet and before I take my place, we’re 
doing it all the while that the federal government funding on 
health care has been cut back from 50 cents to 13 cents on the 
dollar. Every Premier in Canada — every Premier in Canada — 
Liberal, NDP, PC, even Allan Rock, says join together and urge 
the federal Liberal government to restore funding to medicare. 
If we had some assistance from you people, we could do a heck 
of a lot better. 
 
But I’m telling you, we've got the best quality health care 
anywhere in Canada right here in Saskatchewan, no thanks to 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, obviously the Premier isn’t getting 
the same kind of letters and phone calls that we are; people that 
can’t find their way to the General Hospital in downtown 
Regina because they have to travel in from rural Saskatchewan 
on roads that just about make them sicker by the time they get 
to the city. 
 



204 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 1998 

Budgets are about choices, and this NDP government certainly 
has an opportunity to show where our priorities are, but I’m not 
holding out much hope. And do you know why? Because to 
date, the NDP has only demonstrated a commitment to party 
friends, like Messer, Ching, and Nystuen, but the commitment 
to the average Saskatchewan family has been jack. 
 
Mr. Premier, the people of Saskatchewan deserve an 
explanation. Why do you place a greater priority on serving up 
plum jobs to your party friends than proper health care and 
keeping the Plains hospital open? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I can give this answer 
forever; I’ll repeat it again. Because what the Regina District 
Health Board is doing is reorganizing, and are now completing 
this organization, placing emphasis on the General and Pasqua 
with respect to more beds, more technology, to provide — I 
repeat again, not only for Regina, but for southern 
Saskatchewan — the finest health care system that we can 
afford to have. 
 
You say letters? Well I have a letter here in the Regina 
Leader-Post dated March 13, 1996. This is a letter; it’s open 
knowledge, quote, one Pat Edenoste writes: 

 
We are very fortunate to have in Regina an 
administration with vision and a medical staff that is 
committed to providing all of southern Saskatchewan 
with quality health care second to none. 
 

Edenoste is Ward 2 rep on the Regina and District Health Board 
from Earl Grey, Saskatchewan, if you don’t believe me — from 
Earl Grey, Saskatchewan. 
 
And I want to say this about the Liberal government one more 
time because it’s a serious issue. When we invented medicare in 
this Legislative Assembly right here in 1962, we funded it 100 
per cent from the taxes of Saskatchewan. We did it for five 
years. Then Ottawa came in at 50-cent dollars and we had 
national medicare, and that was a great thing. And today Ottawa 
has cut back from 50 cents to 13 cents, and we have back-filled 
and we have simply maintained it. 
 
But what’s more serious in Saskatchewan — the quality of 
health care is superior here — what is more serious is for 
Canada, at 13 cents some of the premiers are saying in this 
country, we are going to go it alone. And if the federal . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order, order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the government 
would have adequate money for proper health care if it wasn’t 
for the bad deals that we’re making all around the countryside 
and the money they were giving away to their friends. 
 
In today’s budget, Mr. Speaker, the government will have the 
opportunity to properly invest in health care, to stop bed 
closures and clear up waiting-lists that former NDP 
governments would find embarrassing and totally unacceptable. 
 
Mr. Premier, what will your priorities be? Will they address the 

true health care needs of Saskatchewan people or will the 
people of our health care system once again be told to take an 
aspirin and call again after the next election? 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would like to remind the Premier that there 
are other letters from medical professionals who have written to 
the same newspaper that you are quoting from. Read those 
letters as well, Mr. Premier. Those are the people that speak for 
the sick and elderly here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Yes, I’m not going to repeat the 
absolute, complete misinformation — I could use a word but I 
don’t want to be unparliamentary — misinformation with 
respect to the health care beds that you say. I won’t get into that 
area. I want to tell you that the person that I quote here you 
should know. Pat Edenoste . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Pardon me. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Doesn’t speak for us. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Doesn’t speak for you? Liberal 
candidate for you in the last election and she doesn’t speak for 
you? Who does she speak for? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Who does she speak for? What do you 
Liberals do if you don’t agree with somebody? — They don’t 
speak for you any more? Or do they join your cousins over 
there? 
 
And what colour these cousins are wearing today we don’t 
know — sometimes it’s red coat, sometimes it’s blue coats. All 
we know is that they are turncoats; we know that’s for sure . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . What is our approach? We’re on the 
right track. It’s a balanced approach and it’s investing in people, 
and health care’s right there at the top of the list. That’s our 
approach. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskPower President’s Severance Package 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, the Deputy Premier 
admits that in the December session he made what turned out to 
be misleading statements to this House. He says he did that in 
good faith because he in turn was misled by Saskatchewan 
Power leadership. 
 
My question for the Deputy Premier is: how do you personally 
feel about paying a big fat severance cheque to a man you say 
induced you to make false and misleading statements to this 
House? Is that not an acute embarrassment to you, that one of 
your officials put you in that position and now you’re still 
paying him a quarter-million-plus? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, as I’ve indicated to 
the member a number of times, including my statement made 
last Tuesday — a week ago Tuesday — to the Assembly, I said, 



March 19, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 205 

and I want to quote again from the statement I made, that: “We 
obviously made mistakes and we deserve our share of 
criticism.” We tabled the documents. 
 
And when it relates to severance, I made it very clear that we 
gave the file to Milt Fair, the former CEO (chief executive 
officer) of the Wheat Pool, who in conjunction with legal 
counsel, said this was a severance package that was in order. 
 
This, I say again, is a legal matter, not a political one, which 
when you first asked the question, you agreed with. I wonder 
what day, sir, you changed your mind on this issue — because 
this is a legal issue, not a political one. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, the greatest defence we have 
heard from over there about the whole Channel Lake fiasco and 
the Messer severance is that they haven’t acted on any lower 
moral plane than that of the Conservatives when they were in 
office. 
 
My question for the Premier, in view of the statements in this 
House saying, well this is no worse than George Hill, this is no 
worse than the Tory contracts and what they got away with, my 
question for the Premier is this: how do you feel — how do you 
feel about setting up the defence for your government that it is 
operating in the same moral equivalent as the Tories. How do 
you think this feeds public cynicism about the leaders of 
Saskatchewan. What does this do about setting a new tone for 
Saskatchewan when the biggest defence you can come up with 
is, we’re no worse than Tories? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I say to the member 
opposite, you have to ask yourself who had four members leave 
their caucus to go and join the Conservative Party. That’s what 
the public of Saskatchewan is asking. After they promised the 
Liberal Party, the member from Melfort — I’ve got the list 
here; I’ll show it so anyone who cares to see it — where he 
promised weeks before that he would be loyal to the Liberal 
Party, then jumped ship. Where did he go? He went to the 
Conservative Party. 
 
But I want to say on the issue of severance, I thought the 
Leader-Post in the editorial on March 14 said it most clearly. 
They said: 
 

Thus a lawyer will often advise a company (in this case, 
Mr. Milt Fair) to offer a severance package because 
fighting an unjust dismissal case can be expensive and 
should you lose, you will not only likely end up paying at 
least as much and in some cases more, but also (the) costs. 
 

Now you, sir, know that as a lawyer. And to come here and play 
political games on this issue is not fair. You know it. And I 
think you should apologize, because you know better. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — You’ve started coming unravelled. The lawyer 
you’re talking about relying on, said termination; you said 
resignation. So which is it? 
 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve never accused the NDP of being stupid. They 
knew when they paid the severance to Messer they were 
creating a major political problem for themselves. They knew 
they were planting a bomb in their own backyard. 
 
My question for the Premier, is why? Is this a smokescreen to 
divert attention from other issues? We know the people in 
charge of SaskPower are NDP hacks, but the names that keep 
coming up for Direct Energy Marketing, they seem to be all the 
old Tory names. What actually is going on here? Where did the 
money end up? Who benefited? And why did you deliberately 
give the opposition this big deal of the severance to Messer — 
was it to divert attention from the real issues? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well I say again, the member 
opposite has to wonder, as he is out loud, why this severance 
payment would be made, given the politics that surround it. 
Obviously if you were just doing what was politically good for 
anyone the severance package probably wouldn’t be paid. The 
fact of the matter is the severance package is in order, as you 
know, because you’re a lawyer. Many of your partners over 
there don’t understand this, but because it’s a legal issue, not a 
political one. I say that again to you. To give us credit for some 
sort of a smokescreen to avoid some other political issue, I wish 
we were that wise but that just ain’t the facts. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave of the 
Assembly to make an extended ministerial statement respecting 
the fiscal policy of the Government of Saskatchewan for the 
fiscal year 1998-99. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

Fiscal Policy of the Government of Saskatchewan 
for 1998-99 

(Budget Speech) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Firstly it is my 
pleasure to table a message from His Honour the Lieutenant 
Governor, the estimates and supplementary estimates. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and through you, members of the Legislative 
Assembly, ladies and gentlemen, and friends, I am very glad to 
see so many people here today and I’d like to welcome 
everyone. If I may be permitted, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
acknowledge just a few who are very special to me and I would 
ask each of them to stand. 
 
Firstly, my wife, Pauline Melis, who is an administrative 
assistant at the University of Saskatchewan. And beside her are 
lifelong friends and neighbours, Bill Magill and Jean Magill 
from Saskatoon. And I’d like to say . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — . . . thank you for being here. 
 



206 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 1998 

Mr. Speaker, it has been my privilege these last several months 
to consult with Saskatchewan people and to work with my 
colleagues to put a budget together. This has been a first such 
task for me and I want to say how much better that task is 
because of the good work of my two predecessors, namely the 
member from Regina Dewdney and the member for Saskatoon 
Idylwyld, and I want to acknowledge that and to thank them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, the motto of our great 
province is “from many peoples, strength.” We are stronger 
together. 
 
Pulling together, we balanced the budget, paid down debt, 
protected our quality of life, and most important, restored hope 
and confidence to our province. 
 
Today I am presenting another budget that invests in people: in 
jobs and the economy; education and training; health; 
highways; families and communities — a budget that builds 
opportunity, security, and strength. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is Saskatchewan’s fifth consecutive balanced 
budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — It includes plans for three more balanced 
budgets, and we are seeing the benefits. Our economy is 
growing and diversifying. Incomes are going up. Taxes are 
coming down. Once again, the future is ours to decide. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the past several months as I travelled our 
province talking with Saskatchewan people, I found a great deal 
of common ground. People agree that the number one priority is 
jobs. We are working on jobs and economic growth with the 
same determination that went into balancing the budget. 
 
We’re working with business, labour, farmers, cooperatives, 
and communities to strengthen agriculture, to promote trade and 
tourism, to develop our resources, to expand manufacturing and 
processing, and to create opportunities for new businesses in 
our province. 
 
And I believe, Mr. Speaker, our approach is paying off. The 
simple fact is there are more people working in Saskatchewan 
than ever before, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — There are more full-time jobs, more jobs 
for women, and more jobs for young people. 
 
The economy is strong. Last year, oil drilling set a new record. 
Retail sales were up 9 per cent. Manufacturing shipments rose 
15 per cent. And wholesale trade soared 26 per cent, the highest 
in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And last year 13,000 new jobs were 
created across our province. And, Mr. Speaker, we’re well on 

our way to meeting the job target we set for the turn of the 
century. 
 
This year, as a result of this budget, we will replace or upgrade 
10 health facilities, upgrade over 100 elementary and high 
schools, improve universities, regional colleges, and SIAST 
(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology) 
facilities around the province, and invest in highways, roads, 
provincial parks, and dozens of other capital projects. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — This budget will focus on four elements 
vital to jobs and growth — community economic development, 
targeted tax incentives, a strong transportation system, and 
education and training. 
 
Let me begin with community economic development. Through 
regional economic development authorities and other 
organizations, people mobilize local resources to build on local 
strengths. REDAs (regional economic development authority) 
provide everything from business counselling to skills training 
programs. And they are making excellent progress. 
 
And I’m pleased to announce that this budget doubles our 
investment in regional economic development authorities to 
continue to create jobs and opportunities at the community 
level. This includes support for new neighbourhood 
development organizations to revitalize inner-city communities. 
And we’re also increasing support for locally based 
cooperatives. 
 
And we’re working with people in the North, Mr. Speaker, to 
tap into the unique potential of their communities. This budget 
will more than double investment in the northern development 
fund to help diversity our resource-based northern economy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And I’m pleased to report, Mr. Speaker, 
that since 1991, operating contracts between northern mining 
companies and their joint venture partners increased from less 
than $20 million to about $65 million in 1996. And this 
increased funding, Mr. Speaker, will do more to help 
Northerners attract and obtain such contracts. 
 
Last year we made a three-year agreement with logging 
companies to share the cost of protecting our forests. This year 
we will add $1.2 million to expand the spruce budworm 
spraying program, safeguarding the valuable forest resources 
northern communities depend on for jobs and growth. 
 
Today’s budget also helps SARCAN recycling and its member 
organizations create jobs while protecting our environment. To 
help SARCAN fulfil its mission, we are expanding our 
recycling program to include juice boxes and other cardboard 
beverage containers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1430) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — We’re taking other steps too, to create a 



March 19, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 207 

climate for business and industry to invest and grow. A targeted 
tax strategy can encourage more investment in particular 
sectors. We have pursued such a strategy in the oil patch, 
mining, and manufacturing and processing sectors. 
 
For example, Saskatchewan has one of the most competitive 
structures for manufacturing and processing in Canada. These 
industries are exporting Saskatchewan-made products around 
the world. Last year alone, they created 3,200 jobs. And sales of 
machinery, such as farm implements, reached $563 million in 
1997 — a $50 million increase over 1996. 
 
We are hopeful that a targeted tax strategy can work in our farm 
sector as well. Saskatchewan farmers are responding to the 
world’s growing more competitive food markets. 
 
Last year we introduced a sales tax rebate to encourage 
investment in livestock and horticultural facilities. I am pleased 
to announce this year we are lowering the annual deductible 
from $500 to $100 so even more farmers can compete in these 
and other fast-growing global markets. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, our farmers can compete with 
the best. We know that the future of agriculture will be shaped 
by research and development. Modern dry land farming 
methods, new animal vaccines, and agricultural biotechnology 
have put Saskatchewan farmers at the leading edge of 
innovation. 
 
This year in addition to initiatives supported by the agri-food 
equity fund, we will invest $14 million to encourage more 
innovation and move new technologies from the labs to the 
fields. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s mining sector is strong and this 
budget will make it stronger. Effective midnight tonight, 
exploration equipment purchased for use in the mining sector 
will be exempt from the provincial sales tax. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — This new incentive will promote more 
exploration in jobs, especially in the North. 
 
The oil and gas sector too is a driving force in the 
Saskatchewan economy. It has created wealth and jobs in 
communities like Estevan, Weyburn, Swift Current, and 
Lloydminster. I’m pleased to announce a new petroleum 
research tax incentive to encourage innovation in our oil and 
gas industry to create even more jobs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, across the industrial spectrum a broadly based 
research and development tax incentive will help companies 
stay competitive and invest for the future. I’m therefore pleased 
to announce, effective midnight tonight, a 15 per cent income 
tax credit for research and development in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — This tax credit will benefit industries like 
engineering, biotechnology, and information technology to 

name a few. It will also benefit our universities where much of 
this research activity takes place. 
 
Saskatchewan’s film industry is also flourishing. It offers some 
of the skilled, well-paid jobs we want for our youth and our 
future. I’m pleased to announce, effective January 1, 1998, a 
film employment tax credit equal to 35 per cent of the costs of 
employing Saskatchewan people in this dynamic industry. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — This tax credit will be increased by an 
additional 5 per cent of eligible expenditures for productions in 
rural Saskatchewan, bringing more film activity and jobs to 
rural communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, targeted tax incentives work. In addition to these 
incentives we will continue to cut red tape for business. 
Beginning in April, 4,400 small businesses will be able to save 
time and money by filing their sales tax returns quarterly or 
annually rather than monthly. 
 
We’re also launching a one-stop business registration pilot 
project to simplify the process for entrepreneurs. And we’re 
streamlining licensing requirements for business including the 
resource sector while continuing to safeguard the environment. 
 
Community economic development and a climate for business 
investment and growth — that is our approach to creating jobs 
and opportunities for Saskatchewan people in the 21st century. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, a strong transportation system 
is vital to our growing economy, particularly to our rural and 
farming communities. But there are challenges. The federal 
government eliminated the Crow benefit. It deregulated the 
rails. Rail lines have been abandoned, offloading more traffic to 
the roads and increasing the burden on Saskatchewan highways, 
communities, and taxpayers. 
 
Now more than ever we have to draw on our spirit of 
partnership and innovation to meet our transportation 
challenges. That’s why we’re working with local governments, 
businesses, and communities. Together we’re setting priorities. 
We’re investing our limited resources wisely, and we’re 
exploring options like short-line railways and alternative trade 
routes. 
 
We have also committed $2.5 billion over 10 years to upgrade 
and modernize our roads and highways. 
 
Last year we resurfaced, repaired, or graded thousands of 
kilometres of Saskatchewan highways; we worked on twinning 
the Yellowhead Highway; and we pushed construction into the 
fall. This year we will repair or resurface 3,600 kilometres of 
roads and highways, more than the distance from Saskatoon to 
Quebec City. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — People across the province will see 
construction and repair crews working on their roads and 



208 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 1998 

highways in their communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these efforts do not lessen the federal 
government’s responsibility to work with the provinces towards 
a national transportation strategy. This is especially crucial to 
major projects like twinning the Trans-Canada Highway, so we 
will keep the pressure on but we’re also forging ahead. This 
year, work will start on the sections of Highway 1 connecting 
Gull Lake to Tompkins, and Indian Head to Wolseley. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And twinning will be completed on 
Highway 12 between Saskatoon and Martensville. 
 
Mr. Speaker, even in the absence of a federal commitment to 
transportation, this year’s budget provides $219 million — 10 
per cent more than last year — to build a safe, reliable, modern 
highway system for the 21st century. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, our growing economy also 
requires skilled, knowledgeable workers. Last year our Made in 
Saskatchewan training strategy invested in people through a 
wide range of programs including apprenticeship, JobStart, and 
Future Skills. Thousands of graduates of these programs are 
working in good-paying, full-time jobs in Saskatchewan cities 
and towns, in rural areas, and in the North. 
 
This year, working with our partners in SIAST, regional 
colleges, business, and industry, we will support 7,100 people 
in adult basic education — 4 per cent more than last year. We 
will train 2,800 apprentices — 10 per cent more than last year. 
And we will bring 4,600 people into JobStart, Future Skills, 
Quick Skills, and other programs — 8 per cent more than last 
year. 
 
And this year, Mr. Speaker, some 23,000 Saskatchewan people 
will have a chance to participate in training, education, and skill 
development programs. This means more jobs and good lives, 
Mr. Speaker, and I am pleased to announce that this budget 
invests $136 million, 7 per cent more than last year, to prepare 
more Saskatchewan people, especially youth, for opportunities 
now and in the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Another aspect of preparing our youth for 
opportunities tomorrow is a strong, world-class system of 
post-secondary education. Saskatchewan people take pride in 
their universities. We are committed to helping them provide 
high academic standards, up-to-date equipment and facilities, 
and affordable tuition. 
 
Our universities are making solid progress to revitalize and 
modernize for the new century. For example, a fibre-optic link 
allows students at one campus to join classes being taught at the 
other. The universities are sharing supplies, services, and a new 
library link to reduce duplication, and they are directing the 
savings to students in the classroom. 
 
Last year, we provided $3 million for these and other joint 

initiatives. This year we will do so again. Last year we provided 
$14 million for post-secondary institutions to upgrade 
buildings, equipment, and laboratories. This year we are 
increasing capital funding by 66 per cent to $23 million in 
1998-99. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — This capital investment will address 
immediate challenges and begin the process of modernizing and 
upgrading Saskatchewan’s post-secondary institutions. And, 
Mr. Speaker, today I have the pleasure of announcing even 
more positive news for post-secondary students and institutions. 
In 1998-99, we will increase operating grants for universities 
and federated colleges to $181 million — $9 million more than 
last year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — We are doing our part to keep tuition down 
and I am confident this budget will help the universities and 
colleges do their part as well. 
 
We are also improving Saskatchewan’s student assistance 
program, already one of the best in Canada. This year we are 
increasing student aid for 2,200 students with children by 
raising the assistance limits to reflect today’s costs. We are also 
joining with the federal government to provide tax relief for 
interest paid on student loans. Some 29,000 Saskatchewan 
people will benefit from this change. 
 
And beginning August 1 we are refocusing our loan forgiveness 
program to provide upfront debt relief in the form of bursaries. 
Approximately 6,000 students per year will benefit from this 
change and many will begin their careers with significantly less 
debt. For example, single students may qualify for bursaries of 
up to $3,230 each year; those with dependants, up to $6,120. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And we will do so this year, not in the new 
century, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Overall, this budget will improve the 
quality and accessibility of post-secondary education and 
reduce debt for thousands of Saskatchewan students. Mr. 
Speaker, a solid education starts in our elementary and high 
schools. Teachers, school boards, parents, and students are 
working together to ensure the best education possible. 
 
Saskatchewan people know that the best investment we can 
make in our future is in education for our children. Our task is 
to equip them with the knowledge and skills they need to 
succeed and prosper. That is why we will continue to build 
excellence and opportunity into our kindergarten to grade 12 
education system. And that is why I am pleased to announce 
this budget invests $21 million more this year in foundation 
operating grants to schools, bringing our total 1998-99 
investment to $384 million. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



March 19, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 209 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — And, Mr. Speaker, students everywhere 
need a safe and healthy learning environment. Last year, we 
invested $17 million to upgrade, renovate and build schools 
across the province. Today’s budget increases our investment in 
school capital by 43 per cent to $24 million in 1998-99. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — This year we will upgrade or renovate 
more than 100 schools in communities across the province 
including Central Butte, Estevan, Lloydminster, North 
Battleford, Biggar, and Yorkton. This budget makes a major 
investment in our children and our future and we will do even 
more as our financial situation continues to improve. 
 
(1445) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — By investing in our young people, we will 
build the skills and academic excellence they need to fulfil their 
potential for satisfying and prosperous lives here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people depend on this province’s 
solid education and health systems; on compassionate, 
progressive social programs; and safe, vibrant communities. 
These are the cornerstones of our quality of life. Saskatchewan 
people want their local governments and the province to work 
together to provide services that are affordable and dependable. 
 
Last fall we promised to review the issue of paying grants in 
lieu of property taxes. We said we would start to phase in these 
grants as our fiscal situation improved. I am pleased to 
announce today that in 1998-99 we will pay $3.1 million to 
municipalities, school boards, and libraries. This investment 
will increase to $12.5 million a year as we work with our 
partners to fully phase in the grants in lieu over four years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — This budget also adds $3 million to the 
rural revenue sharing program, an increase of 14 per cent to 
help rural communities build and maintain their roads. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many communities asked us to change the way 
RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) policing costs are 
paid. I am pleased to announce that a new cost-sharing formula 
will be introduced January 1, 1999. This new formula will 
reduce policing costs for almost 100 municipalities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — At the same time, we will contribute $1 
million in this fiscal year and $4 million the following year to 
cover the added expense for hundreds of other communities and 
rural municipalities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, volunteer fire-fighters across Saskatchewan work 
hard to keep their villages, towns, and rural areas safe. This 
budget will support their efforts and help all communities 
contain their costs by removing the provincial sales tax from the 
purchase of fire trucks and attached equipment. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Strong, vibrant communities are the 
foundation of a strong province and we will continue to work 
with our partners at the local level to strengthen Saskatchewan 
communities for the 21st century. 
 
We’re also working to make our communities safer. The best 
way to ensure safe communities is to give our children and 
families the best possible health care, education, social services, 
and job opportunities. The evidence is right here in 
Saskatchewan in our ambitious, enthusiastic, and 
community-minded young people. 
 
All of us agree however, that those very few who do not respect 
the law must be held accountable for their actions. That is why 
this budget provides more resources to track and deal with 
repeat young offenders; expand secure custody facilities for 
youth who commit serious crimes; enhance screening and 
reintegration methods for offenders prior to release; and 
improve supervision of those serving their sentences in the 
community. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — We’re also making our communities safer 
by bringing 911 emergency telephone service to every home, 
business, and farm in the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — In 1995 we introduced the first legislation 
in Canada focused on meeting the needs of victims of family 
abuse. This unique legislation protects victims by allowing 
them exclusive rights to their homes. This budget provides 
further protection by giving police faster access to information 
in cases of family abuse. 
 
In addition, we’re promoting a safe and healthy workplace with 
more investment in training, inspections, and enforcement of 
workplace safety standards. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our Saskatchewan values dictate that we should do 
all we can to foster safe, healthy communities and families. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — These values of cooperation, compassion 
and common sense guided the creation of medicare, 
Saskatchewan’s gift to Canada. In 1991 we began working with 
Saskatchewan people to build a modern, secure health system to 
carry medicare forward into the next century. 
 
Today we provide a wider range of services to Saskatchewan 
people than ever before, including province-wide screening for 
breast cancer, nutritional supplements, education and 
counselling for expectant mothers, treatment for people with 
eating disorders, new health and safety programs for farm 
families; in-home renal dialysis for over 100 Saskatchewan 
residents; and specialized teams to support and transport 
children needing specialty services to any location in 
Saskatchewan. 
 



210 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 1998 

Our emphasis on wellness and prevention has brought many 
other new services to people, including fitness programs, injury 
prevention clinics, and teen wellness centres. Health districts 
continue to introduce programs to meet local needs. For 
example, services for people with acquired brain injuries are 
offered in 14 communities. 
 
More than ever we are focusing on the needs of seniors. Over 
the past six years we doubled our investment in home care. And 
Saskatchewan continues to provide one of the best home care 
programs in Canada. Services like nursing care and intravenous 
therapy, once available only in hospitals, can now be delivered 
in people’s homes. 
 
Compared with 1991, we’re now doing 80 per cent more 
cataract operations a year. We’re doing 30 per cent more hip 
and knee replacements, and twice as many angioplasty 
procedures. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Dedicated teams of nurses, physicians, and 
other professionals work hard to provide all Saskatchewan 
people with the best health care available. 
 
The federal government is telling these dedicated workers, and 
telling all of us, that it has no more money for medicare. There 
was not one extra dollar for health care in the federal budget. It 
simply does not make the federal government’s priority list. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that is not good enough. Continued neglect 
by the federal government threatens our national health system. 
Saskatchewan, the home of medicare, will continue to advance 
the cause of medicare to ensure its future for all Canadians. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Our commitment to medicare is stronger 
today than ever. And I’m pleased to announce that our budget 
today invests $1.7 billion in our health system — the largest 
investment in health in Saskatchewan’s history. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — That is over one-third of our entire budget 
and $88 million higher than last year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — This significant investment will strengthen 
the health system and bring more services to Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
In rural areas, health districts can recruit and retain more 
physicians. Physicians can provide better emergency coverage. 
People will receive improved emergency services with more 
and better-trained first responders and paramedics, and the 
expansion of renal dialysis sites will continue with two new 
sites this year. 
 
Saskatchewan people will also see upgraded, modern, base 
hospitals in Saskatoon and Regina with a full range of quality 
services for all Saskatchewan residents; increased specialist 

services such as kidney and cancer treatments, and CT 
(computerized axial tomography) scanning and a new MRI 
(magnetic resonance imaging) operating in Regina to improve 
access to this service in southern Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Across the province people will see new or 
upgraded health facilities, expanded immunization programs, 
and advanced clinical nurses bringing more health services to 
more communities. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, new technologies are the wave of the future. 
We’re starting now to lay the groundwork for our new 
Saskatchewan Health Information Network. This new system 
will allow physicians and other health professionals to share 
vital health information instantly. It will give people faster 
access to important information and test results, and reduce 
duplication of medical tests. And it will give health 
professionals advance warning of potential drug interactions to 
ensure the safety of Saskatchewan people. 
 
We’re also using new technologies to provide video links 
between specialists in larger cities and health professionals in 
smaller communities. The telehealth pilot project will bring 
advanced medical skills and services into several northern 
communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people today have access to a 
broader range of fully insured health services than ever before, 
and we will continue to work with health districts and health 
professionals to build a secure, publicly funded, modern health 
system for our children and grandchildren. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, the values that led to 
medicare also underlie our other social programs. Saskatchewan 
people continue to lead the way with new solutions to child and 
family poverty. 
 
Saskatchewan’s action plan for children, launched in 1994, 
showed the world there is a better way of doing things. This 
award-winning plan brought together government and 
community resources to give children the support they need to 
grow and succeed. 
 
School- and community-based programs now serve hot meals 
and snacks to thousands of children to improve health and 
learning, and they provide extra resources for children with 
special needs. 
 
This year even more children will receive extra help learning to 
read and write. Some 25,000 children will receive needed 
school supplies. More parents will get support in caring for 
disabled children at home. And more families will benefit from 
affordable housing initiatives across the province. 
 
I’m pleased to announce that for 1998-99 we are doubling our 
investment in Saskatchewan’s action plan for children. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



March 19, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 211 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — We will invest over $53 million, and this 
significant new investment heralds a bold, innovative approach 
to meeting the needs of children. 
 
It builds on efforts, led by Saskatchewan, at the national level. 
We urged the federal government to work with the provinces to 
introduce a national plan to combat child poverty. When the 
National Child Benefit is implemented this July, it will be 
Canada’s first new social program in 30 years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — It will bring the federal and provincial 
governments together to focus directly on improving the lives 
of millions of Canadian children. 
 
But in Saskatchewan we are going even further by providing a 
bridge to opportunity and independence for families on welfare. 
Mr. Speaker, existing social assistance plans have too many 
barriers to people who want to work and get ahead. When 
parents on welfare want to get a job, they are faced with a real 
dilemma. When they start to work they encounter day care costs 
and other work-related expenses. They lose health benefits for 
their children and often find their family worse off than before. 
The result is too many families trapped in a cycle of assistance 
and dependence. 
 
This budget invests in three new initiatives to help families get 
off and stay off welfare. First, a new Saskatchewan Child 
Benefit for some 80,000 Saskatchewan children will extend 
support to low income families and encourage future 
independence by removing children from the welfare rolls 
entirely. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1500) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Second, a Saskatchewan employment 
supplement — unique to our province — will provide low 
income, working families with the extra support they need to 
stay in the workplace. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — It will make sure families are better off 
working than they would be on welfare. 
 
And third, family health benefits for children in low income, 
working families will ensure the health needs of Saskatchewan 
children can be met. 
 
These bold new initiatives target assistance to children and low 
income, working families. They begin to break the cycle of 
dependence and build bridges to jobs and independence. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, this budget puts people first, 
with significant investment in jobs, education and training, 
highways, health, families and communities. These major 
investments reflect our growing financial freedom. They are 
possible because of responsible, sound financial management. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Recent events in Asia, uncertain resource 
prices and changing weather patterns, underscore the 
importance of continued careful management. We are 
committed to this course. That includes containing 
administrative costs so we can invest in more services for 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
We are also committed to maintaining a balanced approach 
towards enhancing services, reducing taxes, and paying down 
debt. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people know that the “buy now pay 
later” philosophy does not work. We are determined to keep 
paying down the mortgage on our children’s future. 
 
When we took office in 1991, we inherited a provincial debt of 
over $14 billion — an amount equal to nearly 70 per cent of 
Saskatchewan’s gross domestic product or GDP. 
 
Today the debt is down to 45 per cent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — By the year 2002, the provincial debt as a 
percentage of GDP will be reduced to less than 35 per cent — 
half of what it was in 1991 — giving us greater security and 
confidence as we head into a new century. 
 
In 1997-98, we paid over $700 million toward reducing the 
debt. In 1998-99, this upcoming year, we will reduce the debt 
by almost $500 million more. Mr. Speaker, that’s $1.2 billion 
gone from the debt in just two years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And the net proceeds from the recent sale 
of our interest in the Bi-Provincial upgrader will be used 
exclusively to pay down debt and reduce interest costs for 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just five years ago, nearly 19 cents out of every 
dollar collected in revenue went to pay interest on the public 
debt. This year we will pay 14 cents on the dollar. By the year 
2002, we’ll pay about 12 cents. That means more money to 
invest in people for jobs, education, health, highways, and 
lower taxes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And most important, it provides financial 
freedom our children will need to prosper in the new century. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on the road to turning the province’s finances 
around, we promised to reduce taxes for Saskatchewan families 
on an affordable, sustainable basis. We balanced the budget in 
1994-95 and we have reduced taxes in every budget since. That 
includes a $55 million-a-year income tax reduction introduced 
in 1995. It was fully implemented in 1996, taking 6,000 lower 
income people off the tax rolls and . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



212 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 1998 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — And benefiting all Saskatchewan 
taxpayers. 
 
Last year we cut the provincial sales tax from 9 per cent to 7 per 
cent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, these tax cuts are here to stay. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — We should also remember that our sales tax 
base is the narrowest of any sales tax base in Canada. 
Saskatchewan families pay no sales tax on electricity, home 
heating fuel, children’s clothes, books, restaurant meals, 
prescription drugs, and many other goods and services. We 
have no provincial payroll taxes and we pay no health 
premiums. 
 
This budget continues to lower taxes for Saskatchewan families. 
It introduces another responsible, sustainable tax cut. I am 
pleased to announce that effective July 1, 1998, Saskatchewan’s 
personal income tax rate will be reduced from 50 per cent to 48 
per cent of basic federal tax. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — In 1998-99 this will put over $28 million 
back into the household accounts of families across the 
province. In 1999-2000, this tax cut will return $45 million a 
year to Saskatchewan people. 
 
In addition, provincial income taxes will be reduced by nearly 
$13 million a year as part of our contribution to recent federal 
tax changes. 
 
In total, income taxes for Saskatchewan families will be 
reduced by $58 million a year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Combined with the tax cuts introduced 
since 1995, this means families earning $50,000 a year will be 
better off by about $600 a year. Families earning $20,000 a year 
and receiving the Saskatchewan Child Benefit and the 
Saskatchewan employment supplement will be better off by 
over $1,500 a year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, we promised Saskatchewan 
people lower taxes and fairer taxes. We promised credible, 
responsible tax cuts that would not lead us back to deficits and 
debt. We promised tax reductions that would be here to stay. 
That is what we said we would do; that is what we have done; 
and that is what we will continue to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people can feel 
very proud of their accomplishments in the 1990s. Together we 
turned the province’s misfortunes around with sound financial 

management and a commitment to economic growth and jobs. 
Together we secured the important services that enhance our 
quality of life. These efforts establish the momentum towards 
the future of prosperity and promise. 
 
Today’s budget builds on that momentum with significant 
investments in the priorities of Saskatchewan people — in jobs 
and the economy; in training and education; in highways, 
health, communities, and families. It keeps us on the path to 
financial freedom by paying down debt and lowering taxes for 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
The history and tradition of our province is one of people 
pulling together in difficult circumstances and turning obstacles 
into opportunities. At the beginning of this century people 
joined together and created a province whose motto became: 
“from many peoples, strength.” 
 
The same spirit of hope and determination which prevailed then 
allows us to approach the new century with confidence. That is 
what this budget is about; that is what Saskatchewan is about; 
that is what our future is about. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
respond to the minister’s statement on behalf of the official 
opposition. I’ll keep my remarks fairly brief today as I’ll have 
more to say when we get into the actual budget debate a few 
days or weeks from now. I just want to touch on a few key 
issues that I know are of importance to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, topping the agenda of the people of this province 
is a meaningful tax cut — a tax cut that will allow them to keep 
more of their own money and increase their spending power. 
We didn’t see a meaningful tax cut in 1997, Mr. Speaker. Yes, 
the provincial government reduced the provincial sales tax back 
to the level it was when the NDP came to power, and that was 
positive. 
 
In fact soon the government will take in almost as much in sales 
tax revenue as it did before the tax cut. It’s proof that tax cuts 
work, Mr. Speaker. But unfortunately last year’s modest tax 
reduction was quickly undone by equal increases in SGI 
(Saskatchewan Government Insurance) rates, SaskEnergy rates, 
SaskTel rates — it’s in one pocket and out of the other with this 
government. 
 
And so now we see the government . . . the Saskatchewan basic 
income tax reduced by two points over the next two years, from 
50 per cent of the federal tax to 48 per cent. And the Finance 
minister acts as if he’s doing us all a huge favour. Let’s look at 
the reality of the situation. Unless you’re Jack Messer and 
you’ve just walked away with a $300,000 cheque courtesy of 
the government, this tax cut will do nothing, or next to nothing, 
for Saskatchewan families. 
 
A couple of weeks ago the federal Finance minister gave us tax 
relief that amounted to about the price of a half a cup of coffee a 
day. Today the provincial Finance minister gave us the other 
half of the cup, because that’s about all we’ll be able to afford 
today with this tax reduction. At 50 cents a day from what the 



March 19, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 213 

provincial government is giving us back today, Mr. Speaker. 
And we’re supposed to be grateful? I don’t think so. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while we welcome this very minor reduction, the 
fact of the matter is that our income tax rates for Saskatchewan 
are still wildly uncompetitive. When you calculate the 2 per 
cent flat tax and the debt reduction surcharge and the high 
income surcharge, the Saskatchewan tax rate really isn’t 48 per 
cent of the federal rate; it isn’t even 50 per cent. No, Mr. 
Speaker. When you calculate all of these other surcharges and 
taxes on income, we’re really closer to 60 per cent of the federal 
rate. 
 
Simply put, yesterday we were highly uncompetitive with our 
neighbouring provinces, and very little has changed today. And 
because of this, the fundamental underlying problem in 
Saskatchewan’s economic future remains the same. We are 
doing absolutely nothing to attract or keep skilled, well-paid 
workers in this province. We are doing little or nothing to 
attract entrepreneurs to Saskatchewan. In fact, just the opposite 
seems to be happening. This year corporate income tax is 
forecast to drop by nearly $50 million despite the fact that the 
tax rates will remain the same. 
 
What’s this tell us? It shows us businesses are just not coming 
to Saskatchewan; they are leaving and taking their money with 
them. Where’s the growth, Mr. Speaker? It’s in Alberta; it’s in 
Manitoba. But based on these figures, it certainly isn’t in 
Saskatchewan. It seems that the NDP has one of two things in 
mind here — either drive business out of Saskatchewan or 
simply shut them down. 
 
This is going to cause Saskatchewan huge problems in the years 
to come. As our population continues to age and its young 
people begin their careers, they continue to bypass 
Saskatchewan. Today our bills will continue to climb while our 
ability to pay them will not. 
 
(1515) 
 
This is the demographic deficit, Mr. Speaker, and the NDP 
government is absolutely unwilling to address it. I’m not even 
sure they recognize it as a problem. The only way to address 
this demographic deficit, the only way to attract and keep 
highly skilled young people in our province and improve the tax 
base is to reduce the tax burden, and reduce it significantly. And 
the government has failed to do that today. 
 
In fact, not only have they inadequately addressed tax reduction 
today, the budget actually contains hidden taxes for many 
people in our province, but especially in Regina and Saskatoon. 
A year ago we heard the big announcement from the 
government that it would begin paying grants in lieu on 
provincial government property. Today with this budget, we’ve 
been told that the province has reneged on this province for the 
most part. 
 
Last year we heard a figure of 12 million going back to 
municipalities, mainly Regina and Saskatoon, through these 
grants. But the figure contained in today’s budget is about $3 
million for the coming year. The message to Regina residents is 
clear — pull out your cheque book because you’re going to 
have to pay through the nose once again. 

For the residents who have seen their property tax bills 
sky-rocket over the last year, this is simply unacceptable. But 
again it’s the oldest trick in the book for the government — put 
the money in one pocket and take it out of the other; download 
on anybody and everybody for the sake of their own books. It’s 
unacceptable, Mr. Speaker, and ultimately it’s highly damaging 
to our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have seen some increases in the budgets of 
individual departments this year, and I want to take a few 
moments to look at a couple of the major areas of government. 
 
First of all, health care. We see the budget increasing the overall 
health budget by about $88 million over last year’s estimate. 
While that will serve the government well politically I suppose, 
it does nothing to address the real problems that are apparent in 
the current health care system. These problems are systemic and 
cannot be fixed by additional cash because if the money for 
health care isn’t going where it’s needed most, it doesn’t do any 
good; it just disappears down a black hole. 
 
If we are going to get to the bottom of the crisis in health care in 
Saskatchewan we have to review the entire health care system. 
We have to review what’s happening to the system since this 
government embarked on health care reform in 1993. We’re 
now five years into the health care reform plan and it’s time to 
look at where it’s going and where it isn’t. Only then can we fix 
it where it needs fixing. Throwing a few million more to a 
health care system that is fundamentally flawed may put out 
some political fires temporarily but it doesn’t address the 
underlying problems. And I urge the government to seriously 
consider our call that such a review begin immediately. 
 
And prior to that review, stop the closure of the Plains Health 
Centre slated to go ahead this fall. The people of Saskatchewan 
are saying they don’t want this hospital closed but because of 
this government’s actions, it will close. The Saskatchewan 
Party is asking that this closure be halted until such time as a 
complete review of the health care system is complete. We feel 
the people of southern Saskatchewan who built this hospital 
deserve that much at least. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I also want to address the 
situation with regard to highways and roads in Saskatchewan. 
I’m very pleased that the government has made a commitment 
to twin further sections of the Trans-Canada Highway. It’s 
certainly a worthwhile project. I’m only sorry it has taken 
tragedy to move the government in the proper direction. My 
hope is that the Liberals in Ottawa will get on board at some 
point and contribute to their own portion of this national 
highway. 
 
Because beyond this single highway however, we see the 
provincial government failing to meet its goal of $250 million a 
year over 10 years. Last year we didn’t meet that goal and this 
year we’re $31 million further below it. This will only mean 
that highways in Saskatchewan will continue to crumble and 
become more dangerous in the coming year. 
 
The news for rural roads is even worse. Last year we saw $29 
million cut from the municipalities. This year the government is 



214 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 1998 

restoring $3 million of that funding. That’s about one-tenth of 
what they cut last year and the Finance minister has the 
audacity to say that RMs (rural municipality) will be able to use 
this money to make much needed repairs to the rural road 
system. I don’t think so, Mr. Speaker. This is a token 
commitment, nothing more. And the state of our roads need real 
action and we’re not seeing it in this budget today. 
 
On the agriculture front we see the Agriculture budget reduced 
once again from last year’s estimate. And we didn’t see a word 
from the minister today about any plans of this government to 
address the problems faced by young farmers in Saskatchewan 
who are facing lower commodity prices and higher input costs. 
Not one word, Mr. Speaker, about the most important industry 
in our province — disappointing but not surprising. 
 
On the education front we see an increase in funding which 
comes as welcome relief to the school boards in this province. 
But let’s make it clear. Nearly every penny of this increase has 
already been eaten up with the teachers’ contract negotiated by 
this government without any meaningful input from the people 
who pay the majority of the bills — the school trustees 
themselves. They were shut out of the process when the 
province unilaterally revoked a protocol agreement in the 
typically heavy-handed way we’ve come to expect from this 
government. 
 
Also regarding education, Mr. Speaker, there’s not a single 
word about removing some of the education burden from local 
taxpayers. At one time the provincial government picked up 60 
per cent of the cost of education; today it’s barely 40 per cent. 
We need a plan to address this inequity and we haven’t heard a 
word about it today. 
 
And finally on education, we are still waiting word from this 
government how it plans to reform the student loan system for 
post-secondary education students. We’ve heard about some 
minor changes today, but for the vast majority there’s nothing 
here fundamentally reforming the student loan program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s much to say about this government’s 
commitment to each and every government department, and my 
colleagues will gladly address each of their portfolios in greater 
detail when the time comes for them to speak on the budget. 
 
There’s still some areas I want to address, Mr. Speaker. The 
first is regarding what I see as very questionable economic 
projections. In this budget the minister has forecast an average 
price for oil of 17.25 per barrel. This is wildly optimistic. 
 
Just days ago the Toronto Dominion Bank forecast average oil 
prices for 1998 at $15 a barrel. In other words, all the 
assumptions of this budget are built on a house of cards. I guess 
we really shouldn’t be too surprised at this, given this 
government’s track record when it comes to speculating on 
commodity prices. They blew it on natural gas with the Channel 
Lake fiasco and I’m afraid they’re well off the mark with oil as 
well. 
 
Another issue I want to address here, Mr. Speaker, is debt 
reduction. I want to point out to the people here today, and to 
those watching around the province, that the only meaningful 
debt reduction contained in this budget, just as in previous 

budgets, comes directly from privatization of government 
property. Just as the case with the Cameco shares, we see the 
privatization of the upgrader in Lloydminster as the only 
meaningful source of debt reduction. 
 
What’s that to tell us? More importantly, what’s it to tell the 
members opposite. Is it enough for them to remove their 
ideological blinders for one minute to consider the possible 
benefits of privatization? Is it enough for them to shake off their 
50-year-old economic theories and get on with the job of doing 
what’s right in Saskatchewan? 
 
We must study each and every Crown corporation, every 
government department thoroughly and with an honesty based 
on facts, not political ideology. We must decide if we should 
keep these entities and which we should run as private 
enterprise. We’re not calling for a fire sale of government assets 
here, Mr. Speaker. We’re simply asking the government to do 
what’s right for the people of Saskatchewan instead of what’s 
right for their socialist sentiment. 
 
It’s a vital debate that must commence immediately because 
some of these Crowns are going to lose value in the wake of 
deregulation and competition, in the wake of government 
mismanagement like we’ve seen with the Channel Lake fiasco 
and the Guyana débâcle. 
 
These two embarrassments alone tell us that these Crowns are 
in a bad need of professional management. There is no more 
room for political bagmen to run these billion-dollar 
corporations, especially when one considers these Crowns 
account for 40 per cent of all government activity. They must 
be run professionally, and in some cases only private sector 
expertise can take these companies where they have to go. The 
Jack Messers of the world just will not do any longer. 
 
While we’re on the subject of privatization of the upgrader, I 
think it’s important for me to point out that the only reason the 
budget is balanced at all is because of cash from the upgrader 
coupled with an increased take from the Crown utilities through 
rate hikes; and let’s not forget a major draw-down from the 
liquor and gaming fund. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, on top of all of this, the government 
balanced its budget because of a 900 per cent increase in 
equalization payments from Ottawa, from $30 million to $310 
million. 
 
I should take a moment here to congratulate the current 
Minister of Economic Development for achieving her goal. A 
couple of years ago she said Saskatchewan should remain a 
have-not province so we can get more in equalization from 
Ottawa. In other words, we should stay on welfare. Well she’s 
got her way. After the best year economically in many years in 
Saskatchewan, we’re still depending on welfare from Ottawa. 
And once again we are a have-not province. 
 
Now that’s astute management, Mr. Speaker. The Economic 
Development minister and Finance minister must be proud 
today. We’ve balanced the budget through liquor, through 
gambling, and through welfare from Ottawa. That’s the 
Saskatchewan the NDP knows and loves. 
 



March 19, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 215 

To close, Mr. Speaker, for the past few days in this House we 
have learned much of the priorities of this government. And 
today we see these priorities coming to fruition. This budget 
contains very little good news for Saskatchewan families. It’s 
$300,000 for Jack Messer and a half-cup of coffee for the rest 
of us. It’s just not good enough for the people of Saskatchewan. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I will try not to trespass on the 
patience of hon. members and our distinguished guests this 
afternoon. I do wish though — just preliminary — to 
congratulate members opposite on their carnations. I think they 
look quite classy. Unfortunately, I think the orange colour is a 
poor choice, because of course orange so often comes across 
looking like nothing more than a pale, faded, second-rate 
imitation of the genuine, vibrant red article. 
 
I would also like, I’d also like to say just very briefly in 
preamble that I am sorry that the budget address couldn’t be 
introduced in the normal manner. And I am sorry to think that 
there are some hon. members who believe that the way to get to 
the bottom of the Channel Lake fiasco is to stop the work of this 
House. And I wish to say that I think that my colleagues and I 
are as committed as anyone to getting to the bottom of this, but 
I don’t think shutting down this House will advance that 
agenda. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — I may say in that regard, Mr. Speaker, that I 
raised questions on Channel Lake in November — I got no 
answers. I asked questions in December — I got jokes and 
laughs. I tried juggling a phone-in radio program and an 
interview on Channel Lake in January and I was ridiculed by 
some members over there. I asked question . . . I asked the 
Public Accounts to add it to its agenda in February and the NDP 
and Tories voted no. 
 
We must do this, but we do not have to prevent the work of this 
House and of the Government of Saskatchewan from 
proceeding in order to do what needs to be done. 
 
Now on the budget, Mr. Speaker, very briefly. It’s very clear, 
when we look at the numbers, that this budget was written on 
the backs of utility users of this province. While our utilities 
operate in the only unregulated market on the continent, and our 
utilities continue to demand higher and higher rate increases 
and larger and larger profits, that in effect this has become a 
convenient method of back-door taxation. 
 
As well as use of the Crowns as back-door taxation, we are 
concerned that some of the projections of revenue may be 
overly optimistic. I will give just one example, Mr. Speaker. 
The federal government told us in its budget that Saskatchewan 
was expected to receive equalization in the amount of a hundred 
and sixty million this year. The Hon. Minister of Finance has 
said we will receive 310 million, double the federal figure and 
11 times the 1998 figure. 
 
(1530) 
 

Mr. Speaker, this budget does nothing to keep the Plains 
hospital open. It will not shorten waiting-lists or stop bed 
closures. It will not even bail out those health districts which 
are operating in the red. And even as we meet this afternoon 
these health districts, including my own, are projecting 
cut-backs and seeing how they are going to deal with the 
problems created by the Health minister. 
 
One of the few bright spots in health is the new MRI for 
Regina. The Health minister took credit for it. I don’t know 
why. We all know, everyone knows, that’s been paid for by 
private funding. More and more it’s private resources that are 
funding this health care, and they’re trying to take the credit for 
what the citizens of this province have done, not them. 
 
I am pleased however that some small . . . (inaudible) . . . bit of 
the thanks we have to express, the work of some of my 
colleagues here — and Joan Kortje — in bringing the issue of 
the need to twin the Trans-Canada . . . has been brought to the 
fore. We see 27 kilometres of the Trans-Canada; nothing for the 
Yellowhead. It’s a small start. It took 30,000 petitioners to put 
this on the agenda, but they have accomplished something and I 
congratulate Joan Kortje for that. 
 
I would also like to say that in the opposition, well we 
oftentimes feel that it’s very hard to move the agenda along. 
I’m pleased personally that last year we made an issue out of 
the fact that an environmental handling charge was being 
charged against juice boxes, and this was fraud because there 
was no environmental handling, there was no recycling. That’s 
been added to the province this year and I’m pleased to see that 
we were able to accomplish that. It’s small. I’m also pleased to 
see we were able to cancel that crazy art tax that you tried to 
slip through. 
 
Well the NDP tells us that they want to invest in people. And I 
think those are fine sentiments. I hope that the only people 
they’re interested in investing in aren’t just Jack Messer. Most 
of us haven’t felt the same level of investment that he has 
received. 
 
I’m concerned especially in education, that we don’t see the 
funding commitment that will have a true impact on educating 
our young people. I was appalled last week when the Premier 
was critical of the federal government for placing such a high 
priority on the education of our young people. 
 
The NDP tells us that the education and training of our 
aboriginal young people especially, is a top priority. We all 
know, Mr. Speaker, from the demographic projections facing 
this province, that there will be an extremely large number of 
native young people entering the workforce and the work age in 
the next 15 years. We all know, Mr. Speaker, that these young 
people must be equipped to become full participants in our 
economy or this province has no future. 
 
Yet, Mr. Speaker, the province has refused to come up with any 
money whatsoever for the Saskatchewan Indian Federated 
College. They will not even come up with half the money that 
Ottawa has come up with. Fine words about training for our 
aboriginal youth — no follow-through. 
 
As well as utility hikes, there’s another form of back-door 



216 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 1998 

taxation and that is the continuing cuts to our municipalities. 
We know that cuts to grants to municipalities end up directly on 
our backs as more property taxes. We are one of only two 
provinces that doesn’t in effect pay municipal property taxes by 
the provincial government. Well the 12 million the Deputy 
Premier promised for municipal property taxes has now 
dwindled to 3 million. What effect will this, reneging on this 
promise, have on property taxpayers in Regina? 
 
We in Saskatchewan are the most heavily taxed of all 
Canadians. Our tax freedom day is the last in Canada. There is 
some tax relief in this budget, but any tax relief we get is more 
than eaten up with utility rate hikes and downloading on the 
municipalities likely to be reflected in municipal property taxes. 
 
At the same time is, there is $150 million increased money 
coming in from the Crowns; the Crowns are assuming 200 
million in new debt. Specifically, SaskTel alone is assuming an 
additional 100 million in debt. We don’t know what this is for. 
This underlines the need for what the Provincial Auditor has 
been telling us for several years. We need one, comprehensive 
document which lays out the entire of the public sector of 
Saskatchewan so we get a whole, complete overview of the 
financial position of the province, not piecemeal, not divided 
into general revenue and Crowns. This is the only way we will 
get the full picture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in conclusion, we know that the basic 
infrastructure of this province has been allowed to deteriorate 
for many years. We need to get back to basics. We need a 
government which cares about roads and health and education. 
We need a government where our ministers are more likely to 
turn up in Esterhazy than El Salvador. We need leaders who 
would rather visit the Battlefords than the Philippines. We need 
a government which is more interested in Gravelbourg than 
Guyana. We need the Plains hospital, not new planes for the 
cabinet. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I move that the House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Can I ask our guests . . . 
there’s protocol of the House that hon. members remain seated 
until the mace has been removed and I’ll ask the guests to 
honour the same protocol. Thank you. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 3:36 p.m. 
 



   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................197 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................197 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................197 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................197 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................197 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................197 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................197 
  Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................197 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................197 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................198 
  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................198 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................198 
  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................198 
  McPherson.................................................................................................................................................................................198 
  Goohsen .....................................................................................................................................................................................198 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ..........................................................................................................................................................................................198 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................198 
  Lingenfelter ...............................................................................................................................................................................199 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................199 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................199 
  Goohsen .....................................................................................................................................................................................199 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 House Proceedings 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................199 
 Prince Albert Credit Union Expansion 
  Kowalsky ...................................................................................................................................................................................199 
 Channel Lake Pollution 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................200 
 SaskEnergy’s Commitment to Science Education 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................200 
 Billabuster 
  Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................200 
 New Era in Grain Storage 
  Renaud .......................................................................................................................................................................................200 
 Tory Studies 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................200 
 Funding for Medical Research 
  Lorje...........................................................................................................................................................................................201 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Premier’s Alleged Remark in the House 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................201 
  Romanow ...................................................................................................................................................................................201 
 Tax Relief 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................202 
  Romanow ...................................................................................................................................................................................202 
 Plains Health Centre Closure 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................203 
  Romanow ...................................................................................................................................................................................203 
 Health Care Funding 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................203 
  Romanow ...................................................................................................................................................................................203 
 SaskPower President’s Severance Package 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................204 
  Lingenfelter ...............................................................................................................................................................................204 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Fiscal Policy of the Government of Saskatchewan for 1998-99 (Budget Speech) 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................205 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................212 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................215 


