





























































Hansard: June 02, 1998


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1517 
 June 2, 1998 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My petition 
reads, the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions come from the Gull Lake area, Mr. Speaker, 
from Midale and south-eastern Saskatchewan, from Govan, 
from many places in Saskatchewan. I so present. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As well to present 
petitions to the Assembly, and reading the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action to ensure that the required level of 
service in radiology is maintained in the North Central 
Health District and the priorities of its board be adjusted 
accordingly. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 
 

And this petition is signed by individuals from the Kinistino 
Melfort areas of the province. I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. 
The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to put 
an immediate halt to all investments in foreign countries by 
all Saskatchewan Crown corporations and instead invest 
Crown corporation profits in Saskatchewan. 
 
As is in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

The communities involved, Mr. Speaker, are the community of 
Lemberg and Neudorf. I so present. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
citizens concerned about adequate funding to support a regional 
radiology service in Melfort. Signatures on this petition, Mr. 
Speaker, come from the community of Melfort, of course, but 
also from St. Brieux and Pathlow. I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition to present today: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 

immediate action to ensure the required level of service in 
radiology is maintained in the North Central Health 
District, and the priorities of its board be adjusted 
accordingly. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

The people that have signed this petition are from Star City, 
Beatty, and Melfort. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition to 
present to the Assembly as well this afternoon, amazingly still 
dealing with the severance payments to Jack Messer issue and 
the call to recover . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Now the hon. member 
will want to avoid wandering into debate as he presents the 
petition and I’ll invite him to present the petition in the normal 
manner. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I didn’t realize I was 
wandering anywhere but anyway the petitioners come from the 
Carnduff, Carievale areas of the province and I’m pleased to 
present on their behalf. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise 
once again on behalf of concerned citizens of Saskatchewan 
with respect to our health care crisis. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the signatures are from the good citizens of Yorkton and 
Ituna. I so present. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I rise this afternoon to present 
petitions concerning the dangerous and confusing entrance to 
the city of North Battleford, and pointing out that there have 
been two fatalities at that intersection in the last two years. 
 
Your petitioners this afternoon requesting the removal of 
Highway 40 from the entrance to North Battleford come from 
the communities of Gallivan, Battleford, and North Battleford. I 
so present. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I bring forward a 
petition on behalf of people in their efforts to stop the closure of 
the Plains hospital: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 

 



1518 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 1998 

Mr. Speaker, the people who have signed the petition are all 
from Moose Jaw. I so present. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also stand to 
present a petition. And the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to address the issue of reducing 
the high costs of power rates in the North. 
 

And the people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, on 
this particular petition are from Patuanak and other petitions 
from all throughout the land. And I also present . . . Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud to rise 
again today on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan with a 
petition. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the petitioners’ signatures on this petition are from 
the community from Bethune in that nice constituency of Arm 
River. I so present. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
again on behalf of citizens who are unrelentingly wanting 
justice for men and women who have lost spouses in 
work-related accidents, and I’ll read the prayer as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to have The Workers’ 
Compensation Board Act amended for the disenfranchised 
widows and widowers of Saskatchewan, whereby their 
pensions are reinstated and the revoked pensions 
reimbursed to them retroactively and with interest, as 
requested by the statement of entitlement presented to the 
Workers’ Compensation Board on October 27, 1997. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

All the signatures today are from Regina. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise today 
to present petitions on behalf of people in northern 
Saskatchewan who would like to be full partners in all of the 
services available to all Saskatchewan residents. And the prayer 
reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to take immediate action to 
allow the North to join the rest of Saskatchewan. 
 

I so present. Oh, these petitions are from Uranium City, Mr. 
Speaker. I so present. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
people of Saskatchewan, I rise to present the following prayer: 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reach necessary agreements with other levels of 
government to fund the twinning of the Trans-Canada 
Highway in Saskatchewan so that work can begin in 1998, 
and to set out a time frame for the ultimate completion of 
the project with or without federal assistance. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

These folks today come Waldeck, Eastend, Robsart, Consul, 
and Regina, Mr. Speaker, and I’m happy to present it on their 
behalf. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly on the 
following matters: the twinning of the Trans-Canada 
Highway; the saving of the Plains Health Centre; putting a 
moratorium on the closure of the Plains Health Centre; 
having the Workers’ Compensation Board reinstate 
pensions for disenfranchised widows; the relocation of 
Highway No. 40 to alleviate congestion at the entrance to 
North Battleford; action to allow Steven and Kimberley 
Walchuk to remain in the custody of their grandparents; 
and to taking the action in health, education, jobs, etc., to 
allow the North to join the rest of Saskatchewan. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 65 ask the government the 
following question, again: 
 

As of March 31, 1997, the reported accumulated deficit in 
the summary financial statements was $9.3 billion. What is 
the forecasted accumulated deficit of the government as a 
whole, not just the General Revenue Fund, as of March 31, 
1998; and what is the forecasted accumulated deficit of the 
government as a whole for March 31, 1999? 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to introduce to you today and through you to the 
members of the Assembly a group of students who are seated in 
your gallery. The group is 20 grade 9 students, and they are 
from Balfour Collegiate in the constituency of Regina Victoria. 
They are here today for a tour of the Legislative Building, to 
take in question period, and I look forward to having my own 
question period with this group. 
 
They are accompanied today by their teacher, Pat Maze, and I 
would ask all members to make them feel very welcome here 
today. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am very 



June 2, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1519 

pleased to introduce to you and through you to the Assembly 26 
grade 8 and 9 students from Lake Lenore School. 
Accompanying them is their teacher Wade Weseen and their 
chaperons Glen Berscheid, Gene Brockman, and Kelly Poppl. 
 
The students are in Regina today to observe question period and 
the proceedings of the legislature. They are also going to be 
visiting the IMAX centre this afternoon. I had the opportunity 
to meet with them this morning and to hear some of their 
questions and their concerns and also some of their thoughts 
and I very much enjoyed that. So I do wish you a very fine day 
and I ask the Assembly to extend a warm welcome to this group 
from Lake Lenore. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to 
introduce to you and all members of the Assembly today, seated 
in your gallery, two members of the Amyotrophic Lateral 
Sclerosis Society of Saskatchewan, better known as Lou 
Gehrig’s disease, who are here with us today in the spirit of 
raising awareness of this disease. I’d like to introduce you to 
Gloria Miller who’s the president of the ALS (Amyotrophic 
Lateral Sclerosis) Society, and Marianne LaCoste who is the 
secretary. 
 
I’d ask them to stand please and have all the members of the 
Assembly join with me in welcoming them to the Assembly this 
afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I can 
recall as a youngster that when I was working at a place I would 
always appreciate my family coming to see the place I worked 
in. And today I’m very, very pleased and I have the honour of 
introducing to you, Mr. Speaker, and to my colleagues here in 
the Assembly, Mrs. Eleanor Renkas, who is the mother of Cara, 
one of our hard-working pages. And she wanted to come here to 
see just how hard the pages did work in this Assembly and I’m 
sure you’ve seen that they do work very, very hard. Mrs. 
Renkas please stand up. Also with Mrs. Renkas is Auntie Pearl 
Kreway. 
 
Mrs. Renkas works at the health care centre as a lab and x-ray 
technician in Ituna and I just want to tell you a little about the 
family of the page that works with us here, Mr. Speaker. Her 
dad Casey is the manager of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool in 
Ituna and her brother David is in his second year of an 
agricultural studies. The family has been residents of the great 
and beautiful community of Ituna for 28 years and I ask you all 
to please welcome them here to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
I’m pleased to introduce to all members of the Legislative 
Assembly two constituents of mine who’ve travelled from 
Saskatoon to visit the legislature. They are both keen observers 
of the legislative proceedings but this is the first time they’ve 
had the opportunity to actually be in the chambers. 
 
I’d ask members to welcome Mr. & Mrs. Coleman who are 

sitting in the west gallery. Mr. Coleman is a veteran of the 
Second World War having served in the Royal Canadian Air 
Force and he retired a few years ago from Canada Post. Mrs. 
Coleman is also a veteran having served in the British Air Force 
as a young woman during the Second World War. Mrs. 
Coleman is one of those who we affectionately refer to as a war 
bride, having joined Mick to start a new life in Canada 
following the Second World War. 
 
They’re joined today by their daughter, Judy Rice, who is a 
resident of the city of P.A. (Prince Albert). So I’d ask everyone 
to join me in welcoming our three guests. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
my pleasure to introduce to you and to my colleagues in the 
legislature, Mr. Norbert Lepage seated in the gallery opposite. 
Mr. Lepage is the secretary-treasurer of la Fondation de la 
Radio Saskatchewan. And he is here this afternoon for 
Committee of the Whole for a private members’ Bill and is very 
interested in the proceedings. And I’d just like to welcome . . . 
have you welcome him here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis Awareness Month 
 

Ms. Murray: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As the minister has 
already said, June has been declared Amyotrophic Lateral 
Sclerosis Awareness Month. ALS or Lou Gehrig’s disease is a 
progressive, terminal neuromuscular disease that attacks motor 
neurons that convey messages from the brain to voluntary 
muscles. Although victims of this disease retain their 
intellectual capacities, they become prisoners of their own 
bodies. Most people who are diagnosed with ALS die within 
two to five years. 
 
People today wear cornflowers to raise awareness of this 
disease that afflicts 7,000 people across Canada. Each year 
about 2,000 of these people die while another 2,000 are newly 
diagnosed. Currently 65 people in Saskatchewan suffer from 
ALS. As mobility and even communication becomes 
impossible, victims of ALS require constant care. 
 
Care is very costly for ALS patients and while the ALS Society 
has many dedicated volunteers, more are always welcome. The 
society is a non-profit organization that works to ensure patient 
access to all new drug therapies and to encourage increased 
funding for ALS medical treatments. There are currently many 
promising drug treatments for ALS and some of these drugs are 
available in Saskatchewan under the early release program. 
 
Through you, Mr. Speaker, I ask all my colleagues in the 
Assembly to help the ALS Society in its work to educate people 
about this debilitating disease. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as well, I 
would like to make a few comments regarding Amyotrophic 



1520 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 1998 

Lateral Sclerosis Month and the recognition of the problems 
that are caused by the disease that most people would recognize 
as Lou Gehrig’s disease. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all members wear the blue cornflower as a symbol 
of hope for all those who suffer from Lou Gehrig’s disease. 
And hope, Mr. Speaker, is one of the most important things we 
can give to these people. Lou Gehrig’s disease is a very 
devastating illness that slowly robs its victims of muscle 
function, their ability to speak, and eventually for many their 
ability to breathe. 
 
Mr. Speaker, sadly those who suffer are given a short life 
expectancy that makes medical research for a cure extremely 
important. I would like to commend the work of the ALS 
Society for their efforts in making their search for a cure 
possible. I would also like to extend my thoughts and prayers to 
all those who suffer from this disease and the loved ones who 
stand by their side and hold their hand through the tough times. 
 
I am told, Mr. Speaker, that many that suffer from Lou Gehrig’s 
disease lose the ability to communicate with their loved ones in 
the final stages of this disease. But expressions of love and 
support for them are invaluable to their spiritual and physical 
well-being. And that is why, Mr. Speaker, we wear the 
cornflower today, to say to all that suffer, the fight for a cure 
continues and we are behind you 100 per cent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Regina Habitat for Humanity Program 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday 
I had the pleasure of participating in the Habitat for Humanity’s 
ground-breaking ceremony with Mayor Doug Archer and 
Reverend Bob Gay. They will be building six new homes for 
Regina families on Pasqua Street. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Habitat for Humanity was formed by former 
president Jimmy Carter. It was his idea to provide homes for 
low-income families by using sweat equity or participating in 
the building of your own home. It’s an integral part of Habitat 
for Humanity’s success. 
 
Along with the mayor and many others, we kicked off the 5th 
annual Ed Schreyer work project known as a “blitz build”. The 
six houses that will be built in Regina will be built during a 
five-day period from July 19 to July 24. This blitz requires a 
tremendous commitment on the part of sponsors, volunteers, 
and dozens — perhaps hundreds — of people from Regina and 
area who will help in this worthwhile project. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if I could, I’d like to acknowledge some of the 
sponsors and volunteers. First of all, Cairns Homes, Brentwood 
Construction, Fiorante Bros. Construction, Sthamann Homes, 
Sunwest Construction, Home Depot, Dow Chemicals, Royal 
Building Systems, Farm Credit Corporation, the Royal Bank, 
Petro-Canada, Harvard Developments, Hotel Saskatchewan, 
John Deere Foundation, Kelsey’s, the RCMP (Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police), our Power corporation, SaskTel, as well as 
SaskEnergy, the credit union system, Toronto Dominion Bank, 
Weyerhauser, Workers’ Compensation Board, Casino Regina, 
and the Association of Regina Realtors, as well as Nu-Fab. 

Mr. Speaker, I join with you in welcoming this project to 
Regina. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Level of Health Care in Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. McLane: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday we said that we have 
received a number of letters from people pleading for help for 
one man who is battling life-threatening cancer. Alick Paterson 
was diagnosed with metastatic melanoma on May 15. He was 
told he would have to wait four days for an appointment with an 
oncologist, but was later told that he would have to wait until 
June 11. 
 
The life expectancy for someone with this form of cancer is 
about seven months and Alick Paterson was told to wait weeks 
before he could see a specialist or begin anti-cancer treatment. 
Mr. Speaker, Alick Paterson is now receiving care at Royal 
University Hospital in Saskatoon, but only because his pain has 
become so severe he had to be admitted through emergency. 
 
What has happened to our health care system when a cancer 
victim has to endure agonizing pain before he receives medical 
attention? Why has this government allowed its bean counters 
to determine what is an appropriate level of health care? What 
has happened to the care and compassion that our health care 
system was founded on? 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are no longer cracks in our system; there are 
gaping holes in the system. At what point, Mr. Speaker, is this 
government going to open its eyes, acknowledge the fact that 
they have crossed the line, and begin working to repair the 
system? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Wilfred Hunt School — A Green School 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Tuesday I had 
the opportunity to be part of a celebration at Wilfred Hunt 
School. Students of the school participated in the “Learners in 
Action” Green School Program and they became involved in 
the green program by completing 250 projects for green status 
and they have now achieved emerald status by completing an 
additional 500 environmental projects. This is a tremendous 
achievement as just 200 schools in all of Canada have achieved 
the emerald green status. 
 
The young people involved understand that the environment is 
not someone else’s responsibility. It is the responsibility of 
everyone who breathes the air, drinks the water, and eats the 
food of this planet. They have identified a need in our society to 
be more environmentally active and responsible. 
 
The students of Wilfred Hunt School in my constituency have 
made a difference. They have made a difference to our 
environment. They have raised public awareness of the issues 
surrounding the environment and they have set a spectacular 
example of how to be environmentally responsible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I applaud the efforts of the staff and students of 
Wilfred Hunt School and am confident they will achieve the 



June 2, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1521 

next level of earth status where 1,000 environmental projects 
are required. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Expression of Sympathy 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
today with a feeling of sadness but also with a sense of deep 
gratitude for the life of a wonderful young Humboldt area 
woman who met her death in a tragic car accident east of 
Muenster last Friday, May 29. 
 
Andrea Sylvester’s magnetic personality and her genuine 
concern for the well-being of young people found expression 
through her work at Teen-Aid teacher for the Carlton Trail 
region. 
 
Teen-Aid is a chastity-based program centring on self-respect 
and respect for others. And it provides students with an 
awareness of the importance of building positive relationships 
and self-knowledge. 
 
Students from Humboldt, St. Brieux, Bellevue, Bruno, Watrous, 
Kelvington, Cudworth, Archerwill, Muenster, and many other 
communities benefited greatly from Andrea’s attitude of 
encouragement. 
 
My sincere sympathy goes out to Andrea’s husband Dan and 
her family. Andrea’s vibrant life will be fondly remembered by 
those whose lives she touched. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Annual Royal Canadian Air Cadet Ceremony 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On May 30 you and I 
were privileged to attend the annual ceremonial review of the 
No. 40 Snowbird Squadron Royal Canadian Air Cadets. 
 
They demonstrated excellent drill team and parade techniques 
and were a vivid example of the value of cadets. Through 
partnerships with the military, local businesses, and parents, 
young people learn the skills of self-discipline and teamwork. 
 
Their commanding officer, Second Lieutenant Scott Myers, is 
the youngest in Canada. He is only 22, yet he is successfully 
and competently filling the shoes of the much older man he 
replaced. At the banquet the cadets gave him a standing 
ovation. 
 
Colonel Hunter, commander of Moose Jaw Air Base, told me 
that in 30 years of military service he has only seen such a 
spontaneous display of admiration and respect once before. 
Scott Myers may be young, but he obviously has leadership 
skills. 
 
What is particularly remarkable is that he was raised in a 
single-parent family. His mother Susan has severe multiple 
sclerosis, and during Scott’s teen years she probably spent as 
much time in hospital as Scott spent in cadet training, but she is 

strong and determined and Scott has those same qualities. He is 
now passing them along to the cadets under his command. He is 
a young Canadian well worth bragging about. By the way, Mr. 
Speaker, did I mention that Scott is my nephew? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Girl Guides of Canada, Canada Cord Ceremony 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
night I had the honour of attending the Canada Cord ceremony 
in Melfort. This is the highest honour that a Pathfinder Girl 
Guide can achieved. It requires over a hundred challenges to be 
completed in the areas of home, community, camping, and the 
world. 
 
There were five young ladies from the north-east of the 
province receiving this award. They are Lindsay Markland, 
Melissa Pederson, and Lindsay Yaremy, all of Melfort; Sarah 
Hunter of Nipawin; and Jaylene Mortenson of Naicam. 
 
Lindsay Yaremy has also been selected as one of only 12 
Canadian girls that will travel to England to participate in an 
International Girl Guide Camp this summer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the hours of commitment and effort necessary to 
meet the requirements of this award are obvious. I want to 
commend the girls for their determination and I also want to 
recognize their leaders and parents for their involvement and 
motivation. Would the Assembly please join me in 
congratulating these five young ladies. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Adequacy of Health Care Resources 
 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Health. Mr. Speaker, Laurel 
Radbourne is an 18-year-old University of Saskatchewan 
student from Gerald. She was working at her summer job when 
she had her fingers severely injured in a meat grinder. She was 
taken to the Langenburg hospital; they couldn’t help her there 
so they sent her to the Yorkton hospital. They couldn’t help her 
at the Yorkton hospital so they decided to send her to Regina, 
but they had to wait an hour for the ambulance to arrive. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it then took four hours to reach Regina because of 
road construction delays. When she finally got to Regina, she 
was taken to the Plains. After they did some work on her at the 
Plains, they decided to send her to the General. At the General 
there was more confusion and they talked about sending her 
back to the Plains. 
 
Mr. Minister, the accident occurred before 10 in the morning. 
They finally operated at 8 in the evening — Mr. Minister, 10 
hours later. How can you say your health system is working 
when these kinds of breakdowns continue to take place? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 



1522 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 1998 

member opposite, first and foremost I appreciate you raising 
this issue with me and wish you would have brought this to my 
office so that we could have had this discussion. 
 
But I say to you . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Privately, Mr. 
Member, so that we could in fact then dealt with it in a fashion 
that I think would be more compassionate to the individual. 
 
But I say to the member opposite, you and I both know that in 
the regional centre of Yorkton they have a number of 
physicians, they have some of the best, best surgical people in 
the province, and they have access to some of the best 
equipment in the region. And so I say to the member opposite 
that if for some reason this individual needed to be transferred 
to Regina that was a decision that was made at the regional 
hospital in Yorkton. 
 
Now to say to me that en route to Regina, en route to Regina, 
that the ambulance driver had three or four notations as he’s 
making his way to Regina as to which hospital he would be 
going to, hardly in my opinion — hardly in my opinion — 
reflects the fact that the health care needs are not available. It 
reflects to me that there needs to be a better coordination of the 
services so that as the ambulance driver approaches Regina, 
they know which facility to go to rather than going to each of 
the three facilities. 
 
So I say to you this is more of a management problem than it is 
a health care problem. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Minister, according to the 
Radbournes . . . Laurel’s dad this morning said you have 
knowledge of this situation. You know what happened here, so 
you can’t accuse me of saying you haven’t been contacted. 
 
Mr. Minister, this story does not have a happy ending. Two of 
Laurel’s four fingers were finally reattached. But after all the 
delays there is little hope of her regaining use of her fingers. 
 
In cases like this, time is of the essence. Laurel Radbourne was 
forced to wait 10 hours to have this serious injury dealt with — 
10 hours, Mr. Minister. Because they couldn’t help her in 
Yorkton, because she had to wait an hour for an ambulance, 
another four on the road to get to here, because she was shuffled 
around between hospitals in Regina, she waited 10 hours 
because your heath care system is a disaster. And because of 
that she will spend the rest of her life without the use of her 
fingers on one hand. 
 
Mr. Minister, Laurel Radbourne’s family believes that her 
fingers could have been saved if not for the confusion and the 
delays in your . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. The hon. member has 
been extremely lengthy in his preamble and I’ll ask him now to 
go directly to his question. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I guess, Mr. 
Minister, what we’re saying is, what are you going to do to 
address this problem so it doesn’t happen to someone else out in 
rural Saskatchewan? 

Hon. Mr. Serby: — I want to say to the member opposite that 
it is very, very unfortunate that this individual in fact has lost 
the use of some of her limb, an unfortunate situation. 
 
But I say to the member opposite, to stand in your place and 
condemn the services of the East Central Health District or the 
province of Saskatchewan’s health system is in my opinion, 
totally ludicrous for you to do. 
 
Because this past weekend I attended a function which I believe 
you were invited to attend. A young woman by the name of 
Donna Roberts, whose heartbeat and pulse disappeared — in 
your constituency just outside of your town — the EMR team 
were there on call. The emergency ambulance brought this 
person to the Yorkton Regional Hospital and after seven hours 
revived this person from what they would say was her death. 
 
And today you stand up in this Assembly and you condemn the 
services of the East Central Health District, the emergency 
service people who work there, the ambulance team, and the 
physicians. And I say to you, you need to talk about the positive 
things that are happening in the health care system and don’t be 
hypocritical in what you state. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Minister, I’m not condemning the East 
Central Health District. I’m condemning you and your 
government for your health care system, for what you’re doing 
to my people out in my constituency in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, I spoke with Laurel Radbourne’s father, Glen, this 
morning. He realizes that nothing you can say now will help his 
daughter. She will almost certainly lose the use of her fingers 
and will have to deal with this for the rest of her life. 
 
However, Glen Radbourne said that something has to be done 
so this never happens again. No one should get run around for 
10 hours before having a serious injury treated. There is 
something seriously wrong here and Glen Radbourne says it’s 
time you fix it, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you take the first step today in addressing the 
health care crisis by admitting your health care system is failing 
us? What specific steps are you taking to address this problem 
so no one ever has to wait 10 hours again to get a problem 
addressed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said to the member 
opposite it’s unfortunate that from time to time the health care 
system doesn’t address the immediate needs that we serve. 
Occasionally that happens, Mr. Speaker, and it’s unfortunate 
that that happens. 
 
But I say to the member opposite that if you look at the number 
of people who are served on a daily basis in this province, 
35,000 people are served every day by the health care system — 
every day. On an annual basis in this province, last year 72,000 
trips, Mr. Speaker, 72,000 trips by road ambulance, and more 
than 800 trips by air ambulance in this province. 
 



June 2, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1523 

And the member asks what are we doing? More money for 
health care in the history of this province — 88 million brand 
new dollars this year, 1.72 billion — the largest expenditure, the 
largest expenditure in road ambulance and emergency services 
in the history of this province, Mr. Speaker, more additional 
funding for doctors in this province than we’ve ever seen and 
more money for front-line workers. 
 
And putting all of this in on our own when you and the 
government that you now . . . The party you now support ran 
this province into a debt of $15 billion and you have the 
audacity to stand up here as a member of that party asking 
where the money is. You’re one of the people who were 
responsible for why we can’t support the health care system . . . 
(inaudible) . . . we do. 
 

Crop Insurance for Re-seeding 
 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
questions are for the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Mr. Minister, farmers all over Saskatchewan are telling us your 
crop insurance program is failing them. Premiums are too high; 
coverage levels are too low. Right now thousands of farmers are 
being forced to re-seed because of poor germination, insect 
damage, and in recent days, severe frost in some areas of the 
province. The problem is crop insurance only pays $17 an acre 
for re-seeding. That’s nowhere near high enough, given the 
input costs of today. 
 
Mr. Minister, what are you doing to help the farmers, the 
thousands of farmers across this province who have to re-seed 
their crops, and do you think $17 is adequate to pay for those 
re-seeding costs? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 
the member, the Government of Saskatchewan has reduced crop 
insurance premiums to farmers over the last two years by 33 per 
cent. That’s a $35 million saving for the province’s farmers. 
 
The $17 re-seeding benefit that is put there is not intended, Mr. 
Speaker, to cover all the input costs. Because as a farmer, you 
put your input costs in your fertilizer and then your chemical 
and later on probably more chemical as a farm practice. The 
$17 is to cover the expense of re-seeding, and I think that it is 
enough to cover that cost, yes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, 3,000 less farmers are 
carrying crop insurance than just a few years ago. I think that 
speaks volumes as to what they think of the changes you have 
made. 
 
Your own Department of Agriculture officials say $17 an acre 
is too low to re-seed. This morning I spoke with the soils and 
crop specialists in both Saskatoon and Regina. They told me 
that most of the crops being re-seeded will be canola and flax. 
They estimate the cost of re-seeding a canola or flax crop to be 
anywhere between 24 and $30 an acre. And probably a lot more 
was spent on the original crop when it went into the ground. 

Twenty-four to $30 an acre, Mr. Minister — that’s the estimate 
from your own department. And it’s a lot more than the $17 an 
acre coverage you’re offering. 
 
Mr. Minister, why is the re-seeding benefit for farmers so low 
in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, like I say the costs, 
input costs are there if a farmer has to re-seed . . . if you’re 
looking at canola, for example, at $2 a pound. So most people 
sow 5 or 6 pounds to the acre. That’s 10 or $12 an acre. Then 
there’s the fuel and machinery maintenance on top of that. 
 
When the crop insurance program pays out at the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Well I thought that member, being a 
farmer . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Now the Chair is having 
some difficulty . . . Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Well I assumed the member over there, 
being a farmer, would understand that you only have to fertilize 
once. It’s just the seeding process; it’s just the seeding process 
that you have to put in. 
 
And while he’s listening to the answer, he says, he quoted me 
the number of reduced number of farmers participating in Crop 
Insurance. Well overall there are fewer farmers participating in 
agriculture. But if you look at the acres, Mr. Speaker, that are 
enrolled in Crop Insurance, they’re actually up. So that time of 
misleading information — he should reconsider putting that 
forward. 
 
And when Crop Insurance pays at the end of the day, you pay 
up to 70 per cent with spot-loss hail or 80 per cent without 
spot-loss hail. You don’t pay 100 per cent of the coverage. So I 
believe, we believe that that dollar figure is quite reasonable for 
the process that we have to go through. 
 
We don’t like to see farmers having to re-seed. It’s part of 
mother nature’s way of letting us know who’s the boss. And 
we’re going to be continuing our program and maintaining a 
good Crop Insurance program as we have in the past. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Acute Care Beds in Regina 
 
Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the Liberal opposition 
provided evidence that the bed crisis in Regina has claimed at 
least one life. We provided documentation which underlines 
how a patient waited days for a critical care bed to become 
available in Regina, but passed away before a bed became 
available. 
 
Dr. Joseph Javier of Yorkton says: 
 

In the end the patient suffered an extension of a heart 



1524 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 1998 

attack. That’s an emergency situation. I don’t know how 
much clearer it could be. 
 

Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Health, how much clearer could 
it be? What has your government, sir, learned from this 
tragedy? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the member 
opposite that when I reviewed the letter from Dr. Javier, it said 
this: 
 

On Saturday, October 4, the admitting department of the 
Plains Health Centre phoned my residence to tell me that 
they now had a bed for me. On being informed by my wife 
that this gentleman had expired on October 1, the 
individual calling me stated that there was no indication 
note saying this transfer was an emergency. 
 

This is Dr. Javier’s letter. Today I get a note in follow-up, as I 
said I would, from the East Central Health District and it says 
this: 
 

Further to our telephone conversation, this is to inform that 
urgent cases from the ICU department do not wait longer 
than four days for transfer. On average, transfers take place 
two or three days. To reiterate, to the best of our 
knowledge, no patient has ever waited longer than four 
days for a transfer. But please note that emergency cases 
are always (always) given immediate transfer to the tertiary 
care centre. 
 

This is what the Yorkton East Central Health District writes and 
this letter is in relationship to an emergency referral. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, the doctor himself says, I don’t 
know how much clearer it could be that it was an emergency. 
Mr. Speaker, this victim was waiting for a critical care bed. His 
doctor says this was an emergency situation and suggests it 
couldn’t be any clearer. Perhaps the Minister of Health should 
be prescribed a dose of reality. 
 
Mr. Minister, you acknowledged you went too far by cutting 
front-line staff and 200 more nurses are being added to the 
system. But the fact remains; you went too far by slashing 
almost 400 acute care beds in Regina. I think everyone in this 
House would agree that one victim is one victim too many. The 
only thing worse is if this government does not take steps to 
ensure that this kind of tragedy does not ever happen again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister, are you going to take appropriate 
steps to ensure there isn’t a repeat of this tragedy? Are you 
going to add more beds to the Regina system? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday — to the member 
opposite and to this House — I indicated that I would take a 
review of what’s happened on this particular case. Already I 
informed the member on my first piece of information that the 
East Central Health District says to me that they did not make 
an emergency referral because it was not recognized as an 

emergency. But I’m not going to stop there, Mr. Member. 
We’re going to continue to examine the relationship between 
the two health districts to see what happened with this particular 
individual. 
 
And we’re going to continue to examine that further with likely 
a referral to the college of physicians and surgeons to have the 
college review that in some detail. Because when you, Mr. 
Member, say to me — of which the doctor says here to some 
degree — that in fact his practical or professional liability is at 
stake here, it concerns me dearly. And so it will be our opinion 
to refer this matter to the college of physicians and surgeons. 
The Department of Health has now spoken with them, and that 
process will be undertaken to ensure that in the future these 
kinds of issues do not occur. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the members on this side of 
the House are accused of saying that there’s a fault with the 
medical practitioners. Now it seems that the tables are reversed 
and it’s coming from the other side of the House. 
 
Only a few weeks ago the Minister of Health maintained that 
675 beds were enough for the Regina system because on an 
average day 620 people occupy beds in the Regina system. A 
recent letter to a constituent by the minister indicated 608 beds 
are occupied on a daily basis. And now he is circulating 
information stating that on an average day, 589 of the beds in 
Regina district are occupied by patients. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister, if he continues to go unchecked, 
we’ll be hearing that only 400 beds are needed in the system by 
the end of this session. 
 
Instead of manipulating the figures, why don’t you simply 
admit that there is a bed crisis? Admit you went too far. And 
will you make a commitment to this House today that more 
beds will be added — more desperately needed beds — will be 
added to our health system here in Regina? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I’m a bit surprised that the 
member from Melville would now be circulating information 
that doesn’t have the kind of accuracy that the member from 
Wood River has been circulating on a regular basis. I’m 
surprised it’s coming from you. 
 
Because the information that I provided to this House, and you 
have at your disposal, where the district health board in Regina 
said that 625 beds are the number of beds . . . or 608 beds are 
the number of beds that they have on an average daily census. 
And that’s the information that I’ve been providing you. And 
when asked, this is what I say in terms of their average daily 
census for 1997-98, or 1996 . . . 1997-98 . . . sorry, 1996-97. 
 
Just recently now the district health board has provided an 
update of the information and they’re saying that the average 
daily census for the Regina Health District today is 585 beds. 
Now that isn’t my information; that’s their information. So 
when you say, Mr. Member, that I’m circulating the 
information, I’m only giving it on the advice of the district 



June 2, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1525 

health board, and that’s the basis on which you give it as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Metis War Veterans 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When Canada went 
to war, people from across this country and of every origin 
fought for this country. Most war veterans have been 
acknowledged for their contributions but one group that 
continues to go unnoticed are Metis war veterans. 
 
Last November the Minister of Northern Affairs promised that 
he would do something to address the fact that this group has no 
funds with which to hold a provincial meeting to discuss their 
concerns. 
 
Mr. Minister, why have you not lived up to your promise? Why 
do you choose to forget and ignore the Metis veterans? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, the Metis have been trying 
to deal with the issue for many, many years in regards to not 
being dealt with by the federal government. For many, many 
years they’ve been trying to petition the federal government to 
deal with the Metis issue. 
 
In many cases when land was transferred to people in the South, 
you know, after the war, many of the Metis did not get the land 
that was due to them after the war. And in many cases in the far 
North many of the Metis were left out. As we looked at that, the 
Metis . . . (inaudible) . . . regards to the feds, and in many cases 
the federal government, where the issue of the veterans is dealt 
with . . . was not dealt with by the federal government. 
 
The member from Athabasca should be petitioning the federal 
government and dealing with the federal government in dealing 
fairly with the Metis people in regards to having given their 
lives for this country and who came back and are now working 
in regards to development. And in that sense that’s where he 
should be looking at, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Next question. 
 

Contamination of Drinking Water 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, according 
to a recent study done by the National Hydrological Research 
Centre in Saskatoon, there are herbicides present in every water 
supply in western Canada. Some dugouts used as a source of 
drinking water by 15,000 Saskatchewan families contain levels 
of pesticides as much as 1,000 times more detectable than 
European water supplies. 
 
According to Mr. Allan Cessna, he has yet to analyse water 
from a dugout that didn’t contain pesticide residue. And he’s 
finding residue in ground water as well. This contamination of 
drinking water poses serious, long-term health hazards for 
Saskatchewan people, in particular rural people. 
 

My question is for the Minister of the Environment. Is your 
department aware of this very serious problem and what are 
your plans to address it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I appreciate 
the question from the hon. member. This is a very important 
issue and we certainly are aware of the drinking water problems 
found in some rural areas, particularly as it applies to water 
taken from shallow wells or dugouts. 
 
We are very pleased though to note that in our estimation and 
knowledge, all of the tests still do not exceed the Saskatchewan 
and Canadian drinking water standards but we are concerned 
about that. Really any amount of contaminant is too much but 
we are monitoring this and we will continue to work with 
people who are concerned about their drinking water. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Dr. Jim 
Dosman of the University of Saskatchewan Centre for 
Agricultural Medicine says, and I quote: 
 

Scientists know little about the effects of pesticides on 
rural residents. Funding to do research is tight. We’d love 
to do the investigation. These are important questions for 
rural people. 
 

Mr. Kristian Liber of the toxicology research centre at the 
University of Saskatchewan says, and I quote: 
 

The reason there is so little known about the effects of 
pesticides on the rural population is because nobody has 
screamed loud enough at the government to get their 
attention. It is a matter of dollars and cents, and research 
money for these issues is in short supply. 
 

To the Ministers of the Environment, Agriculture, and Health: 
Saskatchewan residents are facing a serious health and 
environmental hazard that cannot be ignored any longer. Will 
you and your government pledge to immediately provide the 
necessary research funding to deal with this problem before it is 
too late? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Certainly we are 
obviously doing some research on this issue in order to discover 
that there are problems in some of the drinking water areas. We 
are working with the Saskatchewan Research Council. We are 
also working with the federal government, which is responsible 
for the licensing of all herbicides and pesticides. And we do 
take this very seriously and we will continue to work with 
authorities, scientists, and all levels of government as well as 
people who are concerned about possible contaminants in their 
water. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
spraying season used to be a month or maybe two. It lasts seven 
months now and farmers are forced to use higher and higher 
rates to control weeds that are developing tolerance to 
herbicides. So more product is being used. Aerial spraying has 
been identified as a major culprit in the failure to control spray 



1526 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 1998 

drift. 
 
Mr. Minister, what safeguards or regulations are there in place 
to minimize the toxic spray drift from all herbicide/pesticide 
applications, but in particular from aerial spraying? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Again there is very rigorous testing 
administered by the federal government before any 
pesticide/herbicide is licensed for aerial application. We’re 
working very closely with the aerial application people who are 
actually doing the spraying and flying of the planes in 
developing tighter and better guidelines and controls. 
 
This obviously is a concern and there certainly have been 
occasions when areas have been sprayed where they shouldn’t 
have been; we want to avoid those. And again we are working 
with the industry and all levels of government — Research 
Council, Department of Agriculture and others — to get the 
best value for the dollar with the spreading of the applicants and 
also to ensure that environmental concerns are met. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 743  The Crown Corporations Amendment Act, 
1998 (Capital Market Activities Restrictions) 

 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to move first 
reading of Bill No. 743, The Crown Corporations Amendment 
Act, 1998 (Capital Market Activities Restrictions). 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the interest of 
open and accountable government I am now tabling the answer 
to question no. 70. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The response to question 70 is tabled. 
 

PRIVATE BILLS 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 301 — The Conference of Mennonites 
of Saskatchewan Act 

 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure for me to speak briefly to this Bill as its sponsor in the 
House this afternoon. I speak on behalf of the Conference of 
Mennonites in Saskatchewan and I would like to thank them for 
their work first of all in our province in and through the 
Mennonite Church. They really do wonderful work not only 
here in Saskatchewan, but across the world through the work of 

the Mennonite Central Committee, which many members of the 
House and many members of the public will know full well. 
 
Now speaking to the particulars of this Bill, I would just like to 
provide some brief background information. The Conference of 
Mennonites of Saskatchewan was originally formed pursuant to 
The Societies Act in September of 1960. When The Non-profit 
Corporations Act of Saskatchewan came into effect, the 
Conference of Mennonites of Saskatchewan was continued as a 
non-profit corporation. 
 
For many years the Conference of Mennonites of Saskatchewan 
has had a parliamentary form of governance. That is delegates 
are sent to meetings of the Conference of Mennonites of 
Saskatchewan from their constituent churches. And each 
delegate who attends such a meeting is entitled to a single vote, 
to introduce resolutions, and to participate in debate, as we 
would expect in the parliamentary system of governance. 
 
Each constituent church is entitled to name one delegate from 
each 25 members of the church. In addition there is provision 
for the naming or providing of youth delegates. And the affairs 
of the Conference of Mennonites of Saskatchewan have been 
governed in this fashion, between meetings of the Conference 
by an executive committee. Some of the individuals to that 
executive committee are elected to the Conference; other 
individuals have been nominated by virtue of their positions 
with affiliated organizations. 
 
The occasion for this particular Bill before us now is that the 
Conference of Mennonites of Saskatchewan has recently 
become aware that there is a conflict between the provisions of 
The Non-profit Corporations Act and the bylaws that have been 
in effect for many years. The Non-profit Corporations Act does 
not envision governance by a parliamentary system of 
governance. Therefore the organization has had to amend its 
bylaws to carry out its activities differently than it has done for 
the past 38 years. 
 
(1430) 
 
This does not fit with the traditions and the history of the 
Conference of Mennonites of Saskatchewan. And accordingly, 
at a meeting recently held within the past year in Osler, the 
Conference unanimously determined that it should petition the 
legislature of Saskatchewan for continuance pursuant to a 
private members’ Bill, which we have before us today. 
 
The Conference of Mennonites of Saskatchewan can only 
govern itself in accordance with its history and traditions if this 
private members’ Bill is passed. There will be no change to the 
nature of the activities the Conference undertakes by virtue of 
this continuance. 
 
So in conclusion I would like to pay tribute to the work of the 
Conference of Mennonites in our province. And I want to pay 
particular tribute to Mr. Henry Harder, who is chairman of the 
Conference of Mennonites of Saskatchewan. Mr. Harder is 
from Hanley. And also to Florence Driedger of Regina, who is 
on the national conference board of the Conference of 
Mennonites. And also Otto Driedger from Regina, who is the 
past Chair of the Conference of Mennonites of Saskatchewan, 
who attended the Standing Committee on Private Members’ 



June 2, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1527 

Bills meeting which was held on May 20 to consider this 
legislation. 
 
I’d also like to acknowledge the work of Dr. Ernie Bergen of 
Saskatoon who has worked with me in presenting this Bill to 
the Assembly. And also finally, like to thank the Clerk’s office 
for their assistance and also thank the Legislative Law Clerk for 
their assistance in preparing this legislation. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 15 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Preamble agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 302 — The Fondation Fransaskoise Act, 1998/ 
Loi de 1998 sur la Fondation Fransaskoise 

 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, 
it’s my pleasure to rise this afternoon and to take a couple of 
minutes of the committee’s time to go over a little bit of the 
history of this Bill No. 302. And, Mr. Chairman, with the 
indulgence of fellow members, I would like to do in French for 
the most part. 
 
And with that, M. le président, je voudrais prendre quelques 
minutes de raconter l’histoire de ce projet loi numéro 302. 
 
M. le président, le projet de loi prévoit, au début, deux 
partenaires fondateurs. De plus on prévoit la possibilité de 
fusionner d’autres “fonds” dont les objects ne sont pas en 
conflit avec ceux de la Fondation fransaskoise. Telles fusions 
seront sujet à des conventions de fusion spécifiquement 
formulés entre les parties et ne doivent pas nuire a la Fondation 
fransaskoise. 
 
La Fondation de la Radio Francaise en Saskatchewan fut 
inçorporée par le projet de loi 04l’année 1975-76 de 
l’assemblée législative de la Saskatchewan. Elle détient un 
fonds (couramment à peu près 630,000$) qui découle de la 
vente de deux stations de radiodiffusion française à la société 
radio Canada. A partir de ce fonds de la Fondation de la radio 
française en Saskatchewan attribut annuellement des bourses et 
des octrois à des groupes et à des individus pour des études ou 
des projets susceptibles à bénéficier la communauté 
fransaskoise. 
 
Le Comité permanent du fonds fransaskois de l’Association 
Culturelle Franco-Canadienne de la Saskatchewan n’est pas un 
organisme a statut légal couramment. Comme leur nom le 
suggère il est un comité de l’ACFC en Saskatchewan. Ce 
comité fut créé il y a à peu près cinq ans par ladite de l’ACFC 
pour prélever des fonds, les revenues desquels seraient utilisés 
pour supporter les programmes et les projets d’envergure 
provinciale ou locale qui promouvoient l’expansion et le 

développement de la langue provinciale et de la cutlure 
francaise en Saskatchewan. Couramment, M. le président, son 
captial se chiffre à environ 185,000$. 
 
L’impact des coupures budgétaires de la part de Patrimoine 
Canada il y a quatres annés constitut la force majeur qui poussa 
l’ACFC et d’autres organismes fransaskois à entamer cette 
démarche pour assurer sa propre survie au service de 
communauté fransaskoise. Ces coupures au niveau du 
gouvernement fédéral constituent un phénomène qui n’est pas 
uniquement particulier à la communauté fransaskoise. 
 
Afin de maximiser l’utilisation de ressources précieuses il fut 
juger bon d’étudier comment et par quels moyens ces deus 
groupes pourraient collaborer. 
 
M. le président lors de sa prise de décision de participer à cette 
étude la Fondation de la radio française en Saskatchewan 
imposa deux conditions. 
 
Premièrement, qu’il y ait aucun coût à absorber par ladite 
Fondation de la Radio; et deuxièmement, que l’ACFC entame 
les démarches nécessaire pour se dépouiller de son contrôle sur 
le Fonds fransaskois. 
 
Ces deux conditions furent acceptés, acceptés et Patrimoine 
Canada s’est engager à établir un fonds spécifiquement pour 
défrayer les côuts de l’étude et las mis en marche des 
démarches découlant de l’étude. 
 
M. le président, la convention de fusion et le projet de loi 302 
contiennent les mesures protectrices qui suivent: 
 

Premièrement DANS LE PROJECT DE LOI: Section 4 
“Buts et objets”. Préserve, virtuellement verbatim les 
objets de la Fondation de la radio francaise en 
Saskatchewan qui se trouvent dans le projet de loi 
(original, loi) 4 de 1975-77s. 
 

Section 5(2), le capital de la Fondation fransaskoise ne peut 
jamais être réduit moins de 800,000$. Couramment à peu près 
815,000. en total. 
 
Section 7 stipule que le premier Conseil d’administration sera 
composer de dix membres nommés à partir de la Fondation de 
la radio francaise en Saskatchewan et de cinq membres à partir 
de fonds fransaskoise. De plus 7(3) stipule que, “La majorité du 
conseil doit toujours être élue par les membre à la main . Le 
“membership” est défini dans les règlements. Cette définition 
est, effectivement la même que celle de membre de la 
Fondation de la radio francaise en Saskatchewan. 
 
M. le président, DANS LA CONVENTION DE FUSION, 
article 8(3) préserve les objets des organismes fondateurs. 
 
Annexe “A” contient les noms des premiers administrateur 
conformément au projet de loi 302. 
 
Annexe “B”, section 4, stipule qui peut devenir membre (Il n’y 
a jamais eu de cas de refus d’une demande d’adhésion dans 
l’histoire de la Fondation de la radio). L’annexe “B” continue et 
stipule les conditions d’expulsion ou de suspension et de 
réintégration. 



1528 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 1998 

Article 5 stipule la composition de Conseil d’aministration 
(Notez que c’est presque identique à la structure de Conseil 
d’administration de la Fondation de la radio française en 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Annexe “D” M. le président, contient plusieurs, autres mesures 
protectrices pour assurer que non seulement les objets de la 
Fondation de la radio soient préservés dans la nouvelle structure 
main que sa contribution financière demeurera reconnue, par un 
poste comptable au passif des états financiers du nouvel 
organismes et que tout bourse ou octroi consentis à partir de ces 
fonds seront aussi identifiés comme tel. De plus tout don fait au 
nouvelle organisme et destiné a faire partie des fonds de la 
Fondation de la radio après la fusion sera ajouter à ce poste 
comptable. 
 
En conclusion, M. le président, it est donc claire 
qu’effectivement la Fondation fransaskoie est simplement la 
continuité de la Fondation de la Radio Francaise en 
Saskatchewan. Cette loi 302 leur permet d’y intégrer le Fonds 
fransaskois. 
 
 (Translation: There are, initially, two partners involved in the 
proposed merger. There are also provisions for possible future 
mergers with other "Funds" having objectives which are not 
dissimilar. (Currently at least three such funds exist in 
Saskatchewan). Future mergers will be governed by a separate 
agreement containing conditions agreed to by both parties but 
could not be detrimental to the current founders and, therefor 
need not be of concern here. 
 
1. La Fondation de la Radio Française en Saskatchewan 
(F.R.F.S.) incorporated by Bill 04 of 1975-76 of the 
Saskatchewan Legislature. It controls funds (Currently about 
$630,000.00) received from the sale of two french language 
radio stations to S.R.C. (C.B.C.) from which it grants bursaries 
and scholarships for study and research projects which are 
deemed beneficial to our community. 
 
2. Le Comité permanent du fonds fransaskois de l'Association 
Culturelle Franco-Canadienne, is not incorporated and, as the 
name implies it is a committee of the A.C.F.C. (F.F.). The 
committee was formed about five years ago by the 
aforementioned A.C.F.C. to essentially raise capital funds the 
revenue from which would be used to fund the various 
programmes and projects undertaken provincially and locally 
which benefit the expansion and growth of the French language 
and culture in this province. (Currently capital about 
$185,000.00). The initiating force was the gradual shrinkage of 
funds available from Heritage Canada (and its predecessor), a 
phenomenon which is not unique to the francophone 
community. 
 
In an effort to maximize the use of resources it was deemed 
beneficial to study how and by what means these two 
organizations could work together. 
 
The F.R.F.S. when considering the study agreed with two major 
conditions: 
 
1. That there be no cost for this study born by F.R.F.S. 
2. That A.C.F.C. undertake measures to divest itself of any 
vestige of control over F.F. 

Both of these conditions were agreed to and a special fund was 
established and funded by Heritage Canada strictly for the 
purpose of carrying out this study and implementing any 
resulting recommendations. 
 
The documentation provided you, including Bill 302 and a 
working translation of the merger agreement contain the 
following protective provisions: 
 

IN THE BILL: Section 4 Purposes and Objects of the 
Corporation. Preserves, virtually verbatim the Objects of 
F.R.F.S. contained in Bill 04 1975-76. 
 
Section 5(2) That the Capital of the corporation cannot be 
reduced below $800,000.00 (Currently about $815,000.00 
combined). 
 
Section 7 stipulates that the first board shall be made of 
TEN appointees from F.R.F.S. and FIVE from F.F. It goes 
on to state that, at all times a majority of the board shall be 
elected by and from the membership (emphasis added). 
The membership is defined in the bylaws (Appendix D of 
the Merger Agreement). 

 
IN THE MERGER AGREEMENT: Article VIII (8.3) 
undertakes to preserve the objects of the founders. 
 
Appendix "A" stipulates the names of the first Board of 
Directors in accordance with Bill 302. 
 
Appendix "B" 4 Stipulates who can be a member 
(Throughout the history of F.R.F.S. There has never been a 
refusal of an application for membership). It goes on to 
detail how a member can be expelled, suspended and 
reinstated and the reasons therefor (These are the same 
reasons for which an initial application might be denied). 
 
Article 5 stipulates the constitution of the Board of 
Directors (Note that it mirrors very closely the structure of 
F.R.F.S.) 
 
Appendix "D" contains much additional "boiler plate" to 
ensure that not only the objects and powers of F.R.F.S are 
preserved in the new structure but that its financial 
contribution will continue to be recognized, by a specific 
line item in the Financial statement of the new organisation 
as will any bursary or grant emanating from that 
contribution. In addition any donation made specifically to 
F.R.F.S. after the merger will be added to and form part of 
that line item. 

 
Respectfully submitted for 
LA FONDATION DE LA RADIO FRANÇAISE EN 
SASKATCHEWAN 
Norbert Lepage, Secretary-Treasurer.) 
 
Mr. Chairman, on behalf I would like to just say a couple of 
words in conclusion. I would like to thank members of the 
ACFC, the president of ACFC, Mme. Lorraine Archambault 
and Mr. Norbert Lepage from the Fondation de la Radio 
Française of Saskatchewan, who I introduced a little earlier, for 
approaching me on this. It’s been my pleasure to work with 
them in guiding this Bill through, and I think there’s some 



June 2, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1529 

congratulations are in order to the association for the work they 
have put into this. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 16 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Preamble agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
(1445) 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 301 — The Conference of Mennonites 
of Saskatchewan Act 

 
Mr. Koenker: — I move that Bill No. 301, The Conference of 
Mennonites of Saskatchewan Act be now read a third time and 
passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 302 — The Fondation Fransaskoise Act, 1998/ 
Loi de 1998 sur la Fondation Fransaskoise 

 
Mr. Kasperski: — I move that Bill No. 302, The Fondation 
Fransaskoise Act, 1998/Loi de 1998 sur la Fondation 
Fransaskoise be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the 
Assembly I move that the House do now move to government 
orders. 
 
Leave not granted. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 7 — Provincial Economy 
 

Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to say 
at the end of my remarks that I would move the following 
motion: 
 

That this Assembly recognize the efforts of all stakeholders 
of the provincial government and the stakeholders in the 
provincial economy for creating an environment in which 
Saskatchewan has become a consistent leader in job 
growths, business investment, and debt repayment. 
 

Mr. Speaker, to begin this debate I would like to take a walk 
down memory lane for many reasons. Number one, I think that 
the history of Regina and their leadership in developing a 
Regina Economic Development Authority was something that 
occurred when I was on city council. And I think that it became 
a model or a prototype for REDAs (regional economic 
development authority) that developed later on, Mr. Speaker. 

One of the reasons why, when we were on city council, we 
wanted to develop a Regina Economic Development Authority 
was to broaden the base of support within the community, to 
bring all sectors together to understand what were the best 
sectors of the economy, that we could strategically identify, that 
everyone put their emphasis and effort toward; and that perhaps 
we would convince the provincial government — at that time, 
the Tory government — that this is what we needed to do to 
further economic growth and that the initiatives should occur 
based on what communities saw for themselves as an area for 
economic growth. 
 
I’ll quickly conclude, Mr. Speaker, by saying . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — . . . that we all know what the results of that 
was — that we have REDAs developing throughout the 
province and that we’re leading in so many ways in this 
economy. And with that in mind, I would like to now move the 
following motion: 
 

That this Assembly recognize the efforts of all stakeholders 
in the provincial economy for creating an environment 
which has allowed Saskatchewan to consistently lead the 
nation, or be close to the top in growth, in business 
investment and in debt repayment; a successful cooperative 
effort has allowed us to improve and advance our 
innovative social programs for which Saskatchewan is 
known throughout Canada. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Moved by myself and seconded by the 
member from Regina South, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I listened with 
interest to the motion that was put forward and I think those of 
us that are working in this province and trying to run a business, 
we recognize that one of the biggest problems we have is the 
taxes, the very high level of taxation along with the high utility 
rates and all the other problems that are facing the people in this 
province. 
 
We have a million people — the same number we had in the 
1930s. One of the things that would probably solve the problem 
is another million people. And that’ll only happen when we get 
a tax break. 
 
So the economy, though it is in a near state of crisis at this 
moment, I can tell you that there is a health care crisis in this 
province, and therefore I am going to move this following 
motion, seconded by the member from Moosomin: 
 

That this Assembly now do proceed to item no. 4 under 
private members’ public Bills and orders, adjourned 
debates in orders of the day. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The division bells rang from 2:55 p.m. until 3:05 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 



1530 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 1998 

Yeas — 11 
 

Bjornerud Toth D’Autremont 
Boyd Draude Gantefoer 
Osika Hillson McPherson 
McLane Goohsen  
 

Nays — 22 
 

Flavel Van Mulligen MacKinnon 
Mitchell Tchorzewski Johnson 
Whitmore Upshall Calvert 
Koenker Trew Renaud 
Lorje Sonntag Hamilton 
Jess Kasperski Ward 
Murray Langford Murrell 
Thomson   
 
The Speaker: — The question now before the Assembly is the 
main motion moved by the member for Wascana Plains, 
seconded by the hon. member for Regina South. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the debate 
on this motion be now adjourned. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the 
Assembly, I move that the House do now move to government 
orders. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Renaud: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to all 
members of the Assembly, I would like everyone to please help 
me welcome, in your gallery, nine classmates and one teacher 
from the Pasqua Hills Christian School at Carrot River, 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now you know where Carrot River is, Mr. Speaker. It’s in 
northern Saskatchewan. It’s one of the most beautiful areas in 
the whole province, and it’s certainly known for its alfalfa 
production and its leafcutter bees, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And right now just down the road in Arborfield, of course, 
they’re fighting for their CN (Canadian National) Rail and 
we’re working hard for those. 
 
There’s a fair amount of rain in that district, Mr. Speaker, but 
frost has certainly affected the agricultural sector in Carrot 
River area, and hopefully we won’t have to re-seed too much. 
 
But I want everyone to welcome the students and the teachers, 
Roger Loewen, and the chaperons, Mr. and Mrs. Calvin James 
and Mr. and Mrs. Earl Reimer, to Regina. And have a good visit 
and a safe trip home. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 49 — The Saskatchewan Assistance 
Amendment Act, 1998 

 
The Chair: — I would ask the minister to introduce his 
officials, please, before we start. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Today we’ll be 
assisted in our discussions by Ms. Bonnie Durnford, who is the 
assistant deputy minister of the Department of Social Services, 
and Mr. Phil Walsh, who is the executive director of the income 
security division. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And welcome to the 
minister and his officials who have joined us this afternoon to 
discuss The Saskatchewan Assistance Act. 
 
Mr. Minister, as I understand it, this legislation is coming 
before us today and before this Assembly this spring as a result 
of a number of changes that you’ve announced to assistance in 
the province of Saskatchewan. Changes that, as you’ve been 
suggesting, are . . . it’s a visionary approach to helping people 
move from the area of welfare into employment opportunities 
and still recognizing the fact that some of those employment 
opportunities may not give the individuals even the same 
amount of coverage or employment income that they would 
have under social assistance. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, as I understand the assistance that you’re 
talking of and the changes, it’s an area . . . in some cases an area 
that I’ve talked about and addressed for a number of years in 
this Assembly, about recognizing the fact that there are many 
people across this province who today happen to be on social 
assistance who have also found minimal opportunities. 
 
And I think we will recognize that throughout the province 
there are not the full-time, fairly high level of paying jobs in 
each community. In some cases, there are just minimal jobs 
available; sometimes very low-houred — maybe 20 hours a 
week at a minimum wage — which for a person if they were to 
do that and to live on it completely or wholly, be wholly 
dependent on that employment would find themselves in a very 
unenviable economic position to the point that it becomes very 
difficult. 
 
Then they sit back and say, well, why am I doing this? I can go 
to social assistance; at least social assistance covers my power 
and it covers my fuel/heat bills, and I’ve got something to cover 
the rent and provides food and clothing for my family. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, just maybe for the sake of the Assembly, just 
clarifying a bit as where you hope to go through the piece of 
legislation and the changes in the assistance programs that 
you’ve recently announced. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Chair, not to go on at length 
but to confirm some of the observations that the member has 
made this afternoon. We’re intending, through these changes to 
the Act, to put the legislative framework in place that will allow 
us to move forward with the new programs as we’ve described 



June 2, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1531 

them. 
 
They are essentially . . . the major programing are essentially 
three. 
 
One, to partner with the federal government in the National 
Child Benefit by adding to that benefit a Saskatchewan Child 
Benefit so that we ensure that all children in our province have 
their basic needs met. Not just among children who are now 
children of families on welfare, but for children of low income 
parents across our province. 
 
Second is, which the member just referred to, is what we’re 
describing as the Saskatchewan employment supplement which 
will provide to low income working families supplement to 
their earned income, or supplement to maintenance income that 
may be due to, in most cases, a single mother with children. 
 
The member is correct in saying that under the current system, 
particularly if you’re on welfare and you are able to access 
some employment income or maintenance income, the current 
practice is that a small amount of that income is kept by the 
client of social assistance. 
 
But once it reaches a relatively low level, then we begin to 
deduct from the welfare payment dollar for dollar. With every 
due dollar earned in income through employment, we then will 
deduct from the social assistance cheque. And so an individual 
can find themselves working more and at the end of the month 
have no more resources to provide to the family. 
 
In fact, if a person is able to secure enough income to leave the 
welfare system, you’re right. You might in fact find yourself in 
a minimum wage that pays less than what you would be 
receiving on welfare. And add to that the double burden, 
particularly if you have children, if you leave the welfare 
system, you then also will lose all of your family health 
benefits, the health benefits for your children. And so there is an 
incentive therefore built into the system to remain on assistance. 
 
With the employment supplement and with the addition of 
family health benefits to low income families across our 
province, we’re trying to turn that on its head. So that if you are 
able to secure some income, some earned income or some 
maintenance income, our employment program — our 
employment supplement program — will build on that income 
as income to your family therefore providing an incentive and a 
step up out of the welfare dependency cycle. 
 
I just want to report, Mr. Chair, that as of yesterday, June 1, our 
call centre now established at the Department of Social Services 
to accept applications for the employment supplement program 
which begins in July, over the month of July, the application 
process was made available yesterday at the Department of 
Social Services in the call centre because all applications will be 
made by telephone. And I want to report, Mr. Chair, to the 
House today, it can only be described as a resounding success. 
The phone line opened at 7 p.m. yesterday morning. At 7:02 we 
had our first application. By the end of the day, I’m told, they 
had received 900, Mr. Chair, 900 calls with 575 applications 
made; the others for further information. 
 
I simply want to take this opportunity to congratulate all the 

people down in the department who have worked so hard for 
many, many weeks and were working with much enthusiasm 
yesterday as we received these hundreds of calls coming into 
the department to make application for the employment 
supplement. This tells me, Mr. Speaker, there are families 
across our province who want to improve the lot for their 
family, who want to do it without becoming dependent, and 
who are moving forward as a result of this new program. 
 
And so just to respond and . . . (inaudible) . . . to the member, 
the changes that we’re making to the Act in these changes are 
those legislative changes necessary to make these programs 
legal. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Minister, just this afternoon actually our office received a call 
from an individual who happens to come from, I believe, the 
Redberry Lake area and she’s concerned that the low-income 
supplement may leave a number of people out. I’m not sure if 
your department is aware of this. I guess the area that comes 
into focus is for small businesses and the agricultural 
community, and there seems to be some discrepancies there. 
 
I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, if you can . . . if you’re aware of 
this and if you can give us an explanation of what your 
department is doing to address this concern. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, if the member has an 
individual who has a particular concern or a specific situation, 
I’d welcome his passing over the name and we could follow up 
further. 
 
But I do want to emphasize to the member and members of the 
legislature that we were very cognizant of the fact that there 
will be farm families and small-business people with families in 
our province who should benefit from these programs, that they 
should not be simply available to those who will be earning a 
defined wage or receiving maintenance income. 
 
Now we wrestled long and hard with how to find the 
appropriate cut-offs and parameters for describing farm and 
small-business income. Where we have resolved it to is, that in 
terms of a test for income — and here of course the programs 
are available and we want them only to be available for 
low-income family circumstances — we will be basing farm 
and small-business income on 40 per cent of gross, 40 per cent 
of gross. But we have decided not to use an asset test, so that an 
asset test will not be applied. 
 
In other programing that governments over the years have 
provided to farm and small-business people, assets were 
considered part of a family’s resources. We know that in a farm 
circumstance one may be very asset rich, but cash poor and 
income poor for the family. And so we are not using an asset 
test; we are using 40 per cent of gross as the cut-off line for 
income. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, I’m not exactly sure 
where you got the 40 per cent number. I think there are some 
cases where agriculture producers may even find their return at 
the end of the day is a lot less than 40 per cent with the high 



1532 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 1998 

input costs and the fluctuations in . . . certainly whether it’s 
livestock or grain, whatever you happen to be producing, those 
costs can certainly fluctuate a great deal. And there are periods 
of time where individual producers or even business . . . 
individuals in business find that their bottom line decreases 
significantly. And so I think that 40 per cent may be a little 
high; I’m not sure, I’d have to do some checking on that. 
Maybe you need to talk to the Finance officials. 
 
And I guess the question I should ask is how does the federal 
government arrive at this. I believe on these income supplement 
programs . . . the federal government they take your income tax 
statement and arrive at a figure and determine whether or not 
you would qualify. Is that indeed what the federal government 
does? Is that something that your department could have 
considered? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I want to be clear with the 
member that the child benefit — the Saskatchewan and 
National Child Benefit — will operate on the federal rules. 
That’s the Revenue Canada rules. So income is described by 
Revenue Canada. At a certain level you’re eligible for the 
income. 
 
The employment supplement, being totally a provincial 
program, we’ve had to design some of our own parameters. 
Now with the employment supplement . . . something unique 
about this approach . . . that it is in many ways a test with a 
unique approach. In fact in the parameters of up until when you 
would not be eligible for the supplement because of reaching an 
income ceiling — in fact the higher your income the more the 
supplement — to encourage people to advance their own efforts 
in creating wealth for themselves in employment or through 
small business or so on. 
 
And so it is a curve so that your benefits will start here but as 
your income rises, so will the benefits, providing greater 
incentive to independence until we feel that the benefits earned 
plus the benefits through the supplement will be enough to 
provide a living and adequate . . . or at least a living income for 
the family. 
 
And so we have set this parameter — no asset test for farm or 
small business, and 40 per cent — recognizing that if we use 
Revenue Canada’s figures, in fact income might be zero. It 
might be zero. Then with the employment supplement there 
would be no supplement. If you’re not creating some income 
for yourself, of course there’s no supplement. And so we want 
to be sure that . . . we’re trying to be as fair and as reasonable as 
we can, not to make the program available to those who in fact 
have sufficient income. 
 
We don’t want to create a circumstance where people who are 
not deserving or who do not require or need the assistance — 
that they’re getting it. But on the other hand we do not want to 
cut out some farms and small businesses, which if you just use 
Revenue Canada’s description of income would say zero, 
therefore no benefit. 
 
So what we’ve done is to take the farm income — by taking the 
gross farm income reported to Revenue Canada on your tax 
return — and then minusing 60 per cent for farm expenses, 
allowing them that 40 per cent to be seen as your income from 

the farming enterprise. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess one 
thing . . . The question I would have, Mr. Minister; it almost 
sounds a little backward if I understand you correctly. You’re 
talking of if you have a higher level of income; your 
supplement is higher. I thought the idea of the supplement was 
to be if you happened to be lower, that the supplement would 
kick in. The higher level of income you’re able to finally bring 
into the home, this supplement would decrease. But the 
supplement was there as a means whereby you’re meeting a 
need in the home rather than, the greater the amount of income, 
the income supplement then increasing as well. 
 
It would seem to me that there would be an imbalance there, 
Mr. Minister. I’m not sure if I totally understand how you’re 
arriving at that decision. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, we’ll provide for the member 
these figures because it’s clearest when you can actually look at 
the actual benefits that people will be paid. But here’s the 
principle. It’s a curve, as I say. As the program begins . . . well 
let me just give an example. 
 
Here’s a parent. This will be a single parent or a family unit 
with one child. It doesn’t matter, single or married parents. 
Their income is zero from employment or farming or business, 
the supplement is zero. If their income in a month or they are 
able to earn through their own efforts $250, the subsidy then, 
the supplement, is another $31. If they’re able to earn 500, the 
supplement grows to $94. If they’re able to earn 750, the 
supplement grows to 156. If they're able to earn 825, the 
supplement will go to 175, and that’s where it peaks. 
 
And so the incentive is, we hope, to provide to people, the more 
that you’re able to secure for yourself, the more the supplement 
will be until you reach that ceiling, and then it begins to curve 
off. And it will fall to zero as soon as that family has income of 
something over $1,500 a month. Then the supplement 
disappears. 
 
And so it’s a curve. It begins, it grows, and then it disappears. 
Our hope is with that curve we’re encouraging people to access 
more work opportunities as much as they possibly can, or 
through small business or their own effort. 
 
I’ll have a copy of this made and we’ll send it to the member. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
from the numbers you’re giving me it almost sounds like the 
income supplement program you’re talking of, basically you 
may find yourselves with more people still looking at social 
assistance versus going to work. At $26 . . . I forget the number 
now. It was less than 500 if that was your employment income 
and around $26 in a supplement. I think most clients would 
receive more than that on social assistance. Is that not true? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — That will not be true, Mr. Chair. In fact 
this is one part of the benefit package. The other that we’ve 
spoken of is of course the Child Benefit. 
 
And so that family with one child or that single parent with one 
child would receive the Child Benefit, would today be receiving 



June 2, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1533 

that Child Benefit as a welfare payment for their child, and then 
receiving the rest of the social assistance payment to provide for 
themself, the rent, and so on. 
 
Now in this mix, if that’s what you’re getting today, your 
welfare payment that covers the child and your own needs, in 
that mix may come some outside income. Now as that outside 
income comes in with this program, you would gain this 
supplement. You would also have access to the Child Benefit, 
but you would not necessarily lose all your welfare benefits. 
 
You may lose a portion of them to keep the income level up 
above that cut-off line, because we don’t want to repeat the 
circumstance we’ve had for the last 30 years where you can find 
yourself better off on the welfare than in employment. And so 
this is but one of a combination of programs. 
 
Now we hope eventually to see that same family would be 
accessing enough income in the workplace that, combined with 
the Child Benefit combined with the National Child Benefit and 
then with the supplement, they’re essentially independent of 
Social Services with the help of that supplement. And hopefully 
that too can grow to a circumstance where even the supplement 
would disappear. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, as well, if a family 
qualifies for family income supplement — you mentioned that 
there’s a child supplement that’s available — what about 
housing and power and those other costs that are carried by 
social assistance recipients? Is there some assistance in that 
area? Is that taken into consideration when you look at the 
overall dollars that may be going into that household? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Now this does not dismantle the current 
social assistance program, which is a program based on need. 
And so if a family has need, we define what we believe are the 
basic needs — lots of debate whether that’s high enough or low 
enough or where it should be but we define basic needs for the 
household — and then through social assistance we will 
continue to meet those needs. 
 
These programs then are being made available in addition to 
Social Services. The one component that will significantly 
change is that all of the child’s benefits will not be provided by 
welfare but will come through the Child Benefit, national and 
Saskatchewan. But children’s needs will be met through that 
other program, not through social assistance. But the family’s 
needs, overall, will continue to be supported by Social Services 
— power, housing, and food. 
 
In that mix then, is the opportunity then to get out and perhaps 
earn some of your own income or supplement it through a 
maintenance income and so on. It’s that income that we’ll begin 
to supplement with the employment supplement program and 
hopefully grow that family right out of social assistance. 
 
(1530) 
 
But I want to re-emphasize that this program and the Child 
Benefit programs are not just available to those on welfare. In 
fact we predict that the majority of families, in fact the 
significant majority of families who will benefit, are today not 
receiving welfare. 

And so these supplement programs and the Child Benefit 
programs and the family health benefits will be available to lots 
of families who are able to meet their basic needs now but 
would be in what we might commonly call the working poor. 
They’re working hard but they’re just not in a situation where 
it’s providing income enough to lift them anywhere near the 
poverty line. 
 
And so these programs will reach a significant number of 
people who are not getting welfare, adding new resources to 
them and to their children. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, currently how many 
people in Saskatchewan are collecting social assistance and of 
that number, do you see a significant drop-off to some form of 
income as well as continuing to rely on some amount . . . how 
many people do you see at the end of the day. Will the full 
assistance under social assistance be reduced somewhat as a 
result of changes to the program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, our case-load — these are the 
most recent figures that we have are April 1998. And the 
case-load at the end of April 1998 was 35,960 — 35,960 cases. 
That means family units or individuals. That will represent 
71,891 people — adults and children — 35,960 cases. That, Mr. 
Chair, while it’s a high number, it’s a significant, significant 
decline from where we were just a few years ago. 
 
I can recall standing in this House reporting case-loads of over 
40,000. And so we’ve fallen to thirty-five, nine. It’s actually 
down from thirty-nine, three four in April of ’97. So we’re 
seeing a trend down. It’s related I believe to the growing 
economy. 
 
With the introduction of the new programs we expect that we 
will see an immediate, an immediate, drop of a thousand cases. 
A thousand households will move from welfare because the 
income will be better through the other programs. So a thousand 
cases. 
 
Now what we’re hoping is that over a longer term that the 
mentality around the social assistance program will change and 
people will begin, as we hope they will, to see independence as 
the preferred route. If we can provide the tools to have folks do 
that, we see a steady — we hope a steady — decline in the 
case-load numbers which, in combination with education 
programs, with the economy, and so on, we hope we’ll see. 
 
Now I’m of the view that we will continue to require in our 
province for the conceivable future a form of social assistance 
to meet the short-term needs on a short-term basis for families 
or individuals who will find themselves in difficulty. I believe 
that to be the case. There will always be a certain welfare 
case-load. 
 
Now in this mix too are those people whom we’re providing the 
basic needs for who are disabled, whose disability may prevent 
them in fact in many ways from accessing employment. These 
too are represented in this case-load of 35,000, and we’ll want 
to be . . . I think working with the disabled community and 
looking at programs that might better meet their needs through 
some other alternative than just social welfare. Very specific to 
your question, we expect an immediate drop of a thousand cases 



1534 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 1998 

and then an ongoing decline. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, under the current system, what is 
the cost associated with administering the current social 
assistance program in regards to the number of individuals 
being on the program and what amounts of funds will now be 
required to administer the new income supplement program 
you’re talking about? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chairman, I’m going to beg the 
indulgence of the member. We anticipate moving to the 
Committee of Finance and our folks that have all of the 
financial figures are right out here in the hallway. If we could 
hold that question until the Committee of Finance when the 
officials are here we’ll be glad to give them the exact numbers. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, in regards to 
the fact that yes we’re going to be dealing with Social Services 
in committee, we can certainly address some of the more 
in-depth questions in regards to the changes that are taking 
place at that time and I appreciate the minister’s comments. 
 
A couple of further questions — you talk about a Youth Futures 
program working along, in conjunction, with the new 
Saskatchewan assistance program. If I understand it correctly 
you’re talking about educational skills training programs you’re 
going to become involved in. How do you anticipate those 
programs working and the delivery of that educational 
component that you’re looking at? And I believe what we’re 
seeing is the need to upgrade or help people upgrade their 
educational skills to actually enter the workplace to find full 
employment. Is that true? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Yes, that and more, Mr. Chair. The 
Youth Futures program seeks to meet the needs of a specific 
group of individuals in our province, 18- to about 21-year-olds. 
 
When I was provided the privilege of serving as Minister of 
Social Services, one of the most alarming statistics that I found 
was the growth of 18- to 21-year-olds coming into the welfare 
system. While our total case-load was beginning to decline, the 
growth of 18- to 21-year-olds coming out of the system was 
growing like this. 
 
Now that is a prescription for a lifelong and long-term 
dependency, in my view. So we ask ourselves, why are these 
young people coming onto social assistance? In many cases it’s 
because they are unable to access employment opportunities. 
 
We ask the question then, why are they unable to work, find 
work, and so on, when we know that work is available in many 
of our communities. And it is as the member points out, it’s 
very often a lack of educational skills or tools or experience. It 
may be other lifestyle, life-skill issues. It may be simply they 
haven’t had a chance to gain any experience. It may be because 
of dysfunctional family background. There are many reasons 
why we found those people on social assistance. 
 
And so what we have done is created in the community of 
Prince Albert, as a pilot project from which we’re learning a 
great deal, what we describe as Youth Futures. Now the 
program is being handled by Post-Secondary Education because 
it is primarily an educational opportunity to equip people for 

work. 
 
But it provides for those young people their basic needs, not 
through welfare. They are no longer eligible to apply or to 
receive welfare except in very special circumstance. They 
receive their basic needs through the Youth Futures program. 
They are counselled on an individual basis, utilizing a 
community, a broad community base of resources who have 
come together to support this project. And almost on an 
individual basis, these young people are getting case-managed 
plans for themselves. 
 
Now for some of them it will mean back to doing some 
traditional education. For others it may mean non-traditional 
education. For others it may mean community service or it 
might mean job experience. All of which is to tool these young 
people, to give them the experience and life skills to enter that 
growing economy that’s all around us. 
 
To date Youth Futures is proving to be a very successful 
program. I judge its success in that we have a significant 
waiting-list of young people who want to become part of it. If 
the pilot proves, as we see it happening, to be a good program 
then we’re looking forward to expansion of that program to 
other communities. 
 
But just by the way, Mr. Chair, the Youth Futures program, 
there is nothing in the Act, the amendments, that affect Youth 
Futures or that Youth Futures affects the Act. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, and Mr. Minister, in regards to the 
income supplement, and we talk about other benefits such as 
health benefits and what have you, is any of that addressed in 
this Act? Are those extended to people who would qualify for 
the income supplement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — The family health benefits program will 
be available to all of those families who have children where 
their income and family income and number of children qualify 
them for the national and provincial Child Benefit. 
 
If by Revenue Canada’s description in your income tax form, 
your income shows your eligibility for the Child Benefit, then 
we will, with signed permission of course of the family, enrol 
the children in the family health benefits program. 
 
And so all of the same health benefits that are provided today to 
children on welfare will be provided to children . . . all of those 
children who are not on welfare but all the children who will 
qualify for the benefit, and that will be a significant number of 
children across our province. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, the legislation calls for 
the Government of Canada to administer the payment of 
program benefits. Now I guess the question I have, are we 
talking of all the elements of the change in social assistance? 
We’ve got the income supplement; we’ve got the child benefit. 
I forget what the others were right offhand. But are we talking 
of every level of additional care? 
 
You mentioned about the fact that the federal government, 
some of the programs were run in conjunction. I believe you 
mentioned, if I’m not mistaken, the income supplement actually 



June 2, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1535 

is a provincial plan. What do you mean when . . . what 
programs are you talking of here when you’re talking of the 
federal government administering programs on behalf of the 
minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, it will just be the 
Saskatchewan Child Benefit that will be administered by the 
federal government. We’ve done that because of our work at the 
federal-provincial table in establishing a National Child Benefit 
that’s being provided to Canadian children. For administrative 
savings and for ease of administration for families, it seems to 
us only sensible that there be essentially one cheque provided to 
the family. That cheque will be cut by the federal government. 
It will show both involvement of the province and the federal 
government and it will be based on Revenue Canada. So it’s the 
Child Benefit that’s being administered by the federal 
government. 
 
The family health benefit is administered by the province; 
Youth Futures by the province; the employment supplement by 
the province. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, as well I note that you 
give the federal government the ability as well to recover 
overpayments. So I would take that that’s in the Child Benefit. 
What about in the area of the income supplement and the health 
benefits. What provisions does the department, the provincial 
department have should there be an overpayment down the road 
in regard to any one of these programs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Essentially, Mr. Chair, the same as we 
do now with the traditional social assistance. If there is an 
overpayment then we would collect. 
 
It would be . . . in terms of the health benefit, that’s a little more 
difficult. If a prescription medicine has been paid for for the 
child, that would be a little different. But in terms of any 
income going to that household, and if it was an overpayment, 
someone had failed to report income or something that would 
cause an overpayment, it would be recollected the same way we 
do now. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, in your opening comments this 
afternoon, you mentioned that — I believe it was this morning 
— that you’ve actually opened up the phone lines and gave 
individuals the opportunity to begin calling to seek some 
information. And also I believe you have applications now that 
people can request, as I understand it. 
 
When this Act is passed in this Assembly, is it intended to come 
into force immediately, or retroactively to a certain date or 
down the road to come into force? When do you intend to have 
the Act officially come into force? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, the Act and the programs will 
come into force on July 1. What we’re doing now is simply 
taking the applications. And just while I have the opportunity, if 
anyone is interested in information or making application, the 
toll-free number is 1 888 488 6385 — 1 888 488 6385. 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I 

have read this Act with a great deal of enthusiasm because I’m 
very hopeful that it will succeed at what you are attempting to 
accomplish. 
 
I’m wondering though if you’ve done a little research in order 
to supplement this in the future in case this doesn’t all work. 
And my thoughts today go to two areas that need to be resolved 
if we are to achieve the goals that you’ve set out for yourself. 
We have to provide jobs for people, and of course we want to 
provide higher incomes for people. Those two combinations of 
course, put together, take people off welfare probably quicker 
than anything else. 
 
I see some problems in this Act, but obviously it’s going to be 
the law so we may as well learn that we’re going to accept it as 
being the new law and the system we’re going to try. 
 
So my question, Minister, is related to British Columbia and 
Alberta. In British Columbia of course they’ve gone the 
direction of using a higher minimum wage in order to increase 
people’s net income or income potentials in the lower income 
groups, of course. 
 
And in Alberta of course they have lower minimum wage but 
they have a lot more jobs. An example, of course, of that is the 
fact that there will be something like 500 people employed at 
the gas plant constructions over at Burstall in the next couple of 
years. So why that’s happened is immaterial. 
 
What I need to know is what studies have you done to find out 
whether or not going the direction of British Columbia and 
Alberta would supplement your plan which seems to be to try to 
bribe people with a carrot at the end of a stick rather than to 
force them to work? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, the experience in other 
provinces we’ve carefully considered. 
 
In terms of opportunities for Saskatchewan people, the member 
will know that we now enjoy the first or second lowest rate of 
unemployment anywhere in Canada. And then when it comes to 
youth employment, the youth employment, a number of studies, 
particularly one that was recently done by an Alberta firm, tells 
you that if you’re a young person looking for work, the best 
place in all of Canada to be is in Saskatchewan. 
 
So there are opportunities in our economy and many of our 
people are taking advantage of those opportunities. And we see 
that reflected in our declining welfare case-loads, which the 
decline has been significant. 
 
We recognize that the programs we’re putting into place with 
this legislation are but one piece of a puzzle, and that this 
puzzle of providing employment and decent living income for 
families is not going to be accomplished through any particular 
programs alone. We don’t pretend that these programs alone 
can provide a decent living income for families; that they must 
be in combination. 
 
They must be in combination with an economy that’s active and 
buoyant and providing employment opportunities. They’ve got 
to be in a market-place that provides a decent return for labour. 
And so we have minimum wages in Saskatchewan. 



1536 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 1998 

We have a Minimum Wage Board who works diligently both 
on the business side of the equation and on the worker side of 
the equation to try and find accommodation. We’ve seen 
moderate increases in the minimum wage here; not dramatic, 
but we believe increases that are appropriate to the 
Saskatchewan economy. 
 
That’s a piece of it. Because many people, when they do get 
into that economy, their first job is a minimum wage position. 
And as I say, I think we’ve gone some real distance in creating 
employment opportunities in this province for people. So it’s a 
combination. 
 
What these programs are trying to do is change that traditional 
welfare system so that it is advantageous for families to access 
that economy, to access the employment opportunities, to 
access the education opportunities, to get out there and secure 
some of those minimum wage positions even as a start to 
independence. 
 
We’ve had a system where I believe the system itself has almost 
forced dependence or kept people behind what we sometimes 
call the welfare wall. And so what we’re tying to do here is 
really to change the notion from simply a hand-out to a hand up, 
a hand up to dependence for families and individuals. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, Minister, I 
certainly support the idea of giving people a hand up rather than 
a hand-out because those people that receive hand-outs rarely 
are given an incentive to ever do anything for themselves. And 
that seems to be one of our problems in Saskatchewan. While 
you have the second lowest unemployment or thereabouts of the 
country, as you’ve just alluded to, you still have 78,000 people 
on welfare. 
 
A few years ago we had 51,000, and of course your government 
made the argument that you added 10,000 of that because 
aboriginals were dropped from the federal lists onto the 
provincial, so that’s still 61,000 as compared to 78,000. So 
you’re still a long ways off the mark at 17,000 more people on 
welfare than you used to have. And while you have achieved 
some measure of success in Saskatchewan for employing 
people — and that’s good and I compliment people for that — 
but the credit really has to go to the private sector because they 
are the people who have employed folks. 
 
And the reality is that the solutions you’ve had for welfare 
haven’t worked for welfare recipients because you haven’t 
tackled some of the very basic fundamental issues in welfare. 
And in Saskatchewan one of those fundamental issues that we 
have clearly had identified for us is the lack of a work ethic that 
is coupled with third- and fourth-generation homes and families 
who are on the welfare system. 
 
And when you have people that have had their grandmother, 
their great-grandmother, their mother, and everybody in the 
family has for generations been on welfare, you have to have 
some program that teaches these children what a work ethic 
even is because they don’t understand what work is all about. 
They don’t understand the need to go to work. They don’t even 
understand the concept of arriving any place on time once of 
course they are through the school system, and that’s the only 
place where they ever have any requirement thrown at them that 

they should be some place on time in life. And we need to work 
on that. 
 
And I fail to see, Minister, where the efforts that you’re making 
here, although I’ve conceded to you that they’re a start, and the 
reality being though that you have to if you’re going to get that 
78,000 number down, you’re going to have to start to address 
those fundamental reasons why people stay on welfare even 
when you have provided them with a job opportunity as you say 
we have. We are the second lowest in unemployment so 
obviously we are supplying people with the opportunities for 
jobs, yet they’re not taking those opportunities. 
 
So we have got some more work to do. And I think my question 
is very simply this. In view of the fact that you have not been 
successful at bringing welfare numbers down very quickly, not 
nearly as quickly as places like Alberta, the reality of course is 
then that we have to do something else. And what studies have 
you done that will complement and supplement this approach 
that you’re taking now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I believe I’m going to find 
myself somewhat in disagreement with the member’s 
assessment. He, I think, generalizes too much. 
 
I will first of all be in disagreement with his figures. I want him 
to be absolutely accurate in terms of the numbers of people 
today receiving social assistance in Saskatchewan has fallen to 
71,000, not 78 — 71,000 which is a 10,000 almost, 9,000 drop, 
9,000-person drop from only April 1997. And so we are seeing 
a significant decline. 
 
I want to remind the member again that of those 71,000 people 
on social assistance, a goodly number of them, a goodly number 
of them — in fact the number being accurately 30,791 — 
30,791 of that number are children. So I’m sure the member’s 
not suggesting that those children should all be getting up in the 
morning and going to work. 
 
Of that number, Mr. Chair, again a significant number of people 
will be those who are afflicted by some significant disability 
that will in many cases prevent them from going to work. So I 
want you to not suggest that the 78,000 people who are 
receiving social assistance in our province today are all folks 
who don’t have a work ethic. 
 
Now of those who have the ability to work and who are on 
welfare, in my experience, Mr. Chair, the vast majority of them 
wish they were not on welfare. They wish they were not on 
welfare. They wish they did have employment. 
 
I will concede, as the member will concede on certain points, 
that there are those in our communities who do lack a work 
ethic. But I would suggest to the member and all members that 
that by far is the minority in our province. And in fact I think 
our province is known nationwide as having one of the best 
work ethics anywhere in North America. I’m sure folks in 
private industry and private enterprise will tell you that. We 
have some who lack a work ethic, I admit that. And we need to 
assist them as best we can and provide them the options. 
 
I admit as well that we have a number of families who have 
fallen into the welfare dependency cycle where it has become 



June 2, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1537 

intergenerational, hence the kind of changes that we’re making, 
to tear down the walls that in fact keep people in this system to 
give them the opportunity, the hand up. 
 
Just imagine this, Mr. Speaker, if you’re a single parent 
receiving social assistance right now, and there are many. We 
have many single mothers receiving social assistance, 
responsible for their children; they take that responsibility 
seriously. If they’re able to get a minimum wage job now, even 
a job that provides them enough to meet the basic needs of their 
own — their adult needs and their child needs — and they leave 
welfare, they’re going to lose all their health benefits. 
 
Now many single parents say, I don’t want to risk that for my 
child, and so I’ll stay on social assistance. It doesn’t mean they 
don’t have a work ethic. They’re trying to do what’s best for 
their child. 
 
So what we want is a circumstance where that single mom, in 
doing the best for herself and her child, can leave welfare, 
confident that she’s not going to lose all the health protection 
for her child until they are well-established in work and in their 
own income. 
 
That’s the kind of change we want to make to encourage people 
and build on what I think is a deeply held work ethic in our 
province. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, Minister, 
we can throw figures back and forth and you can get technical 
about wanting to use exact figures, and that’s all right. But the 
reality is that you’ve got 30,791 children on welfare and they 
should be in school. And most certainly they should be learning 
in school not only that you have to show up at 9 o’clock in the 
morning, but that you have to spend the whole day there, and 
that you should learn in that process, and the only opportunity 
available to them the work ethic that we’re talking about. 
 
And you need of course then to follow up with apprenticeship 
programs so that these people can in fact have a goal in life that 
is presented to them. Because oftentimes people who are the 
victims of growing up in welfare homes, in welfare 
atmospheres, don’t have any goals that they can see for 
themselves because they never have the opportunity to see 
anything except the poorer lifestyle that they are caught up in. 
 
And so they need to have someone guide them and direct them 
through apprenticeship programs that actually shows them that 
there is a job and here’s how you can work to get to it. And I 
would suggest to you that that is part of the solution that you 
should be examining, and I of course would ask if you are 
taking further steps in that direction. As well of course you 
allude to the fact that you’re doing pretty well because you’ve 
reduced the number of people on welfare by 9,000. 
 
Well that’s the same philosophy your government has used 
when they fired 500 nurses and then hired back 200 and said, 
you should all be happy. And it’s a little bit convoluted when 
you think about it. Because again here’s what you’re saying, is 
that we had 51,000 people on welfare in 1991, but the fact that 
it went up to 70 or 80,000 and we’ve cut off a third of those, 
now you should be happy. 
 

It’s the same philosophy that you used in the nurses’ argument. 
Now that you’ve got back a third of the nurses that you had 
fired, you should all be happy. And now that you’ve got a third 
of the people off welfare that you have determined through your 
numbers, then we should all be happy about that. I don’t think 
that goal, Minister, is good enough. I know that it’s a start, and I 
will concede to you that I’m glad that you are getting the 
numbers to come down, but let’s not try to conclude that we’ve 
solved the problem with the numbers that you’re using. 
 
We’ve got a long ways to go here is what I’m saying, and I 
think I should let you respond to that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well I certainly agree, Mr. Chair, we 
have a distance to go. That’s for sure. None of us can be content 
when we have this number of families and children, children 
particularly, living in low income or poverty circumstances in 
our province. Well that is intolerable. We see it as intolerable, 
and hence we’re making what I think is taking some Canadian 
leadership on trying to change social assistance programing. 
 
I want to assure the member that the children who receive 
welfare benefits today in Saskatchewan are in school, if they’re 
old enough to be in school. 
 
And while it’s not particular to this department or this piece of 
legislation under debate, there are a host of new training 
programs available to Saskatchewan young people and 
Saskatchewan families which build on some of the very ideas I 
think the member’s talked about. Apprenticeship, mentorship, 
just a broad base now of Job Start, Future Skills programs that 
endeavour to do just that — equip people with the tools they’ll 
need to take advantage of this growing economy. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, Mr. 
Minister, I think you’re going to be surprised to hear that I wish 
you well. I hope your program works. I truly do. 
 
But I do think you’re going to have to do some more work. I 
hope you will put your officials to work thinking about 
follow-up programs so that we can in fact succeed. 
 
There is nothing more tragic than to see young people in our 
society without hope, without direction, and without any plan 
for a future. We need to teach them in our province that there 
are goals they can set, that realistically can be reached by 
themselves, so that they can hold up their heads and have the 
dignity to go on in life. 
 
And while I sympathize with older people as well, I am 
particularly concerned about the young people that are caught 
up in this kind of a lifestyle. Because they do get pushed back, 
they do find themselves treated badly by their peers in schools 
and through the system, and I think your program has a chance 
to start to relieve that. 
 
So I wish you well and I compliment you for giving it your best 
effort. 
 
(1600) 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 



1538 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 1998 

Clauses 2 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. To the minister, I 
would like to say thank you and I appreciate the responses to 
the questions. And also thank you to your officials who have 
joined you this afternoon to address the questions in regards to 
significant changes to the social assistance program. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Just before our officials depart, I too 
would want to join with the member from Moosomin in 
thanking the officials for the work in advising us this afternoon, 
but for particularly the work they’ve done over the many, many 
months in building these programs. And I want to thank the 
members for their appropriate good questions. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 49 — The Saskatchewan Assistance 
Amendment Act, 1998 

 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I move this Bill now be 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Social Services 

Vote 36 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I’ll remind committee members that this 
department was last here on April 29. I invite the minister to 
reintroduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. With us this 
afternoon, Glenda Yeates at my side, who is deputy minister of 
the Department of Social Services. Just behind Glenda, Bonnie 
Durnford, assistant deputy minister. To Glenda’s right, Phil 
Walsh, executive director of income support. Just behind Phil, 
Richard Hazel, executive director, family and youth services. 
And just behind myself is Bob Wihlidal, who is our executive 
director of financial management. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Thank you, Minister. 
 
Subvote (SS01) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 
welcome to you and to your officials to the discussion around 
Social Services. 
 
Mr. Minister, while we were discussing it a bit earlier, I think 
I’ll go directly into those questions. In regards to the social 
assistance Act that we just moved through Assembly earlier this 
afternoon, a couple of questions that I had asked at that time 
and in regards to the cost. 
 
Number one, the cost currently associated with administering 
the program for the number of individuals. I believe you 

mentioned somewhere in the neighbourhood of 71, almost 
72,000 people on social assistance right now, roughly close to 
36,000 cases. What is that cost to the department? 
 
And secondly, Mr. Minister, what will the cost be associated to 
the new income supplement program in administering and 
implementing the low income program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I want to say to the member, 
when we discuss administrative costs in the Department of 
Social Services, it’s not a simple breakdown. We deliver our 
programs on a regional basis — I’m talking now about the 
current structure and system of programs — and so our 
programs are delivered through regional offices and for the 
most part they are delivered by social workers with clerical 
assistants. 
 
And so there will be those monetary benefits that are paid 
through the welfare system to people, but they also are 
encountering the work of social workers. So we can provide for 
the member . . . it’s difficult for us therefore to break down. If 
we talk about all of our workers and clericals as part of 
administration, while it is administration, but it’s also service 
delivery. We can provide for the member sort of the breakdown 
of monies that are provided as cash transfer payments to 
individuals through welfare and then show on a regional basis, 
the cost of the workers, the social workers. 
 
But that one worker may be delivering child family services to a 
family, another worker may be delivering social welfare 
interviews and programs. The person that’s the clerical or the 
receptionist will be not billed to any one division of the 
department but serves to answer them all. 
 
So in our case it’s difficult to sort of separate out what’s 
administration and what is service provided. With our new 
programs, the actual ongoing cost of administering the 
programs, as we’ve been able to sort them out, will be about 
two and a half million dollars for administration. Now that 
represents 2.5 per cent of the program dollars. 
 
Now this will provide for the total, also the ongoing totally new 
systems development. So that, as I described earlier, we have 
now the call centre here at the Department of Social Services 
and the people from all over the province can access the 
employment supplement not by having to go down to an office, 
not by having to in some cases have the indignity of having to 
work through a worker, but you can do very privately from your 
own home. All of this is included in that administrative cost. 
 
We believe this is an entirely reasonable cost, given that these 
programs are going to extend to a broad, broad range of 
Saskatchewan people whom we do not now serve in any 
programing way. 
 
The employment supplement, the family health benefits are 
going to go out to a broad range of families and we believe this 
is an appropriate investment to serve that many people. In terms 
of our Child Benefit as we discussed earlier, we’re trying to get 
the administrative costs down by working with Revenue 
Canada in Ottawa. 
 
So we can provide for the member the breakdown of . . . well 



June 2, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1539 

some of it’s displayed in the book, in the Estimates book. So 
you’ll see the cost for regional services, you’ll see the cost for 
salaries in the book, and so on. But again, as I say, this is our 
department’s administration, is at the same time the service that 
we’re providing to people. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Deputy Chair, to 
the minister. Mr. Minister, we in our discussion earlier as well 
in regarding the social assistance and income supplement 
program, question at that time was how many people on 
assistance and how many people did you envision moving from 
direct assistance that would qualify or possibly take advantage 
of the income supplement program. I believe at that time you 
indicated you’re anticipating at least right initially, roughly a 
thousand people, or cases. 
 
Mr. Minister, as well, the fact that this is now open to the 
general public and it may give a lot of very low income families 
who have struggled to survive at minimum wage, how many 
cases do you anticipate may be added to, or become a part, or 
take advantage of — I shouldn’t use the word take advantage of 
— but look to the income supplement program as a means of 
meeting their financial needs? 
 
(1615) 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — We are anticipating, Mr. Chair, that 
19,000 — 19,000 Saskatchewan households, families, will 
benefit from the Saskatchewan employment supplement 
program, from the employment supplement program. Of that 
19,000 families, we anticipate 4 to 5,000 of those families today 
are receiving welfare benefits under social assistance. So it will 
represent another 15,000 or thereabout, families who will be 
receiving benefits under the Saskatchewan employment 
supplement. 
 
Under the Child Benefit and family health benefit, we expect up 
to 40,000 families, up to 80,000 people, will be getting benefits 
under those programs. But the employment supplement itself 
we expect will involve about 19,000 families, about 15,000 of 
whom are not on welfare. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. Minister, have you an idea 
of what you anticipate may be an average cost per household 
under the income supplement plan, and what do you anticipate 
may be the total. When I’m talking costs, I’m talking the actual 
dollars that may go into the hands of individuals to help meet 
the needs that they’re facing as a result of the program being 
available to them. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, we anticipate on an annual 
basis — now this year we’re starting later in the year so it won’t 
represent this figures — but annualized we expect the 
employment supplement program to be in the neighbourhood of 
$24 million. Our more exact projection right now is 23.7 — but 
in the neighbourhood of $24 million. If we anticipate 19,000, 
that will give us the average. 
 
Now it’s hard to work averages here because it’s based on 
earned income or maintenance income by the families. So some 
families will receive more because of their number of children 
and the income they’re able to earn. So it would be probably 
difficult to say there’d be an average per household. But to 

create an average one could say $24 million on an annual basis, 
hopefully reaching 19,000 families. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. Minister, so I take it from 
that response then that under income support programs here in 
the Estimates for the year ’97-98, we see for Saskatchewan 
employment supplement, zero, but anticipated 13.5. That 13.5, I 
believe you’re basing that on the fact we’re starting the program 
July 1. 
 
I also note a Saskatchewan Child Benefit program of forty-nine 
million seven, roughly the same. I would take it that’s based on 
the same thing. And maybe you could just indicate what 
specifically the Child Benefit program is going to do when 
we’re looking at almost $50 million going into that program. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — What it will do, Mr. Chair, is to provide 
in combination with the National Child Benefit . . . The federal 
government has created a National Child Benefit that will 
provide resources to families. With the investment that the 
federal government’s now put into the National Child Benefit, 
that’s not enough at this time to provide for the basic needs of a 
child in our province. 
 
And so what our provincial Child Benefit will do will ensure 
that in combination with the National Child Benefit, we provide 
enough to meet the basic needs of children of low income 
families in our province. That means that all the children now 
receiving welfare will get their support through the Child 
Benefit combination, Saskatchewan and federal. 
 
Other provinces are not doing this. We’re taking all of our 
children off welfare to provide for all those children who today 
are on welfare, their needs through the Child Benefit. But then 
we’re expanding that, you see, taking that same benefit package 
and providing it to children in other low income circumstances, 
and hence the very significant investment of dollars. 
 
This is a large investment of dollars that it is to provide for the 
basic benefit, the basic needs of children in low income 
circumstances, all the kids on welfare, and then children that are 
in families not on welfare today. And that’s why the large 
investment of dollars. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Deputy Chair, and Mr. Minister, as we’ll 
note and I thank you for those comments and just trying, 
clarifying a little more what the Child Benefit Program will be 
doing, and those costs, as those costs are now entered in that 
weren’t there previous to. 
 
I noticed under the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan we’ve got 
roughly a $45 million reduction. Is that reduction for this year 
versus last year of 292 million down to 248 coming as a result 
of the transfer of some of the programs to these other areas of 
support versus the current system of social assistance? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — It’s a combination, Mr. Chair. It will 
represent what we believe is the declining case-load. That’s 
factored in. We’ve seen the case-load fall, as we talked about 
earlier, significantly. And then it’s the redirected money. 
 
And so the money is now being provided to children through 
the Child Benefit. Part of that money is redirected monies from 



1540 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 1998 

social assistance because we’re not covering the children under 
welfare in future. And with the employment supplement 
program, we’ve collapsed the Family Income Plan, the old 
Family Income Plan, into that. And so that also comes out of 
that figure. 
 
And so it’s two things. It’s redirected monies; it’s case-load 
drop. The redirected monies is then being supplemented with 
new money to create the new programs. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Deputy Chair, and Mr. Minister, you 
mentioned about combining the Family Income Plan. I noticed 
that there’s a reduction in the Family Income Plan of about $6 
million. There’s still 2.6 million involved in the plan. 
 
I guess the question I would have is why would you need to 
continue to run the Family Income Plan if we have these new 
changes to the plan, changes to assistance and these new plans 
coming in? Wouldn’t the new plans basically pick up all the 
service or the services that were available under the Family 
Income Plan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — They will, Mr. Chair. It again relates to 
the July and month of July start. So we kept the Family Income 
Plan going for the first quarter of the year and then when it 
phases out . . . so it’s shown in this year’s for the month it’s 
continued. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Deputy Chair, to 
the minister, under the seniors’ income plan, senior citizens 
benefits, I notice a reduction of almost $3 million. Can you 
explain why the reduction . . . is that fewer cases you’re dealing 
with or cutting back in the level of services that are available to 
seniors? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — It represents no change in the benefit 
levels but a drop in the demand, a drop in the case-load. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Deputy Chair, to the minister. Mr. Minister, I 
raised an issue last year. I just sent you a letter most recently, 
and I believe you’re quite familiar with the case we’re talking 
about. I want to raise a couple of questions here in regards to 
Mr. Lance Connell who was an employee of the department. 
 
And I raise it, Mr. Minister, I raised a couple of questions last 
year. The concern I had was, number one, the way your 
department handled the case when allegations were raised 
against Mr. Connell and the fact that under our judicial system I 
believe most people perceive that we live in a judicial system 
that says you’re innocent until proven guilty. But I think we’re 
beginning to see more people beginning to wonder whether or 
not that’s the case and whether we’re not facing a situation that 
if you face an accusation, that it’s then your responsibility to 
prove your innocence. 
 
And the concern that the way your department handled the case 
at the time, and the fact that it was almost appearing that your 
department was basically laying guilt by laying . . . basically 
releasing Mr. Connell from his obligations, and I think I 
suggested then, asked at that time, wouldn’t it have been 
possible to find other employment that would not have put Mr. 
Connell in an area of conflict where he could have maintained 
employment without creating such a problem for his family. 

The question I have this year, Mr. Minister, is in regards to the 
fact that just most recently the courts have actually withdrawn 
all charges against Mr. Connell. And that was the reason I had 
written a letter bringing up the fact that after a good, long 
period of time of discomfort and struggle and turmoil in the 
Connell family, they’ve gone through the court process; they’ve 
had to deal with that in the court to withdraw all the charges. 
 
However your department finds itself in a position of saying, 
we’re going to continue an investigation. It would seem to me 
that it would have been a fairly intensive investigation prior to 
any charges, and the fact that they were withdrawn is a strong 
indication that the department or the prosecutor’s office 
obviously felt that they really didn’t have information to go to 
court to even . . . and probably would have found themselves 
with a not guilty of all the charges that were laid against him. 
 
The question I have, Mr. Minister, is twofold. Mr. Minister, I 
believe in your letter you indicated or . . . no, in a letter that was 
sent by the department to Mr. Connell it says that his status has 
been changed to suspended with pay. I guess the question I 
have, has Mr. Connell’s pay been . . . is Mr. Connell now on 
pay while he’s still on suspension . . . brought up received 
payment. Has he received payment back to the day he was 
released and his employment was ceased? 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I guess the other question is why would the 
department feel it now has to continue its own investigation 
when we’ve had more than a period, almost more than a period 
of a year where the Department of Justice would have been 
looking into the accusations that were laid at the time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, for the information of the 
member, as of March 18 of this year, March 18, 1998, Mr. 
Connell was provided a letter from the department advising him 
that his employment status with the department has been 
changed to being suspended with pay, and that he should be 
receiving those benefits now. And as the member indicates, 
there is an employer’s investigation following, which is I think 
near conclusion, will be concluded by the end of this month. 
 
When the member asks why an employer’s investigation, part 
of that investigation actually is to look at the question of 
retroactive pay. And part of it is, while the courts have one 
view, I think the employers may have some other issues they 
want to work through. They want to be as fair as they possibly 
can to Mr. Connell. We want this investigation to be as timely 
as possible and for its results to be known at the latest, at the 
end of this month. 
 
But I’m informed by my officials that in fact his employment 
status has been changed to suspended with pay, and that should 
be happening now. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, so as I understand it . . . 
and certainly I do have a copy; Mr. Connell has passed that 
copy on. What you’re saying though is, the current status would 
be that Mr. Connell should be receiving the pay that he would 
have had when he was suspended, but anything retroactive that 
is still under discussion, there will not be a decision made on 
that until the report is brought to the department and a decision 
is made upon further employment with the department. Is that 
correct? 



June 2, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1541 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — That is correct, Mr. Chair. 
 
(1630) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, I guess the one further 
question — and I haven’t unfortunately had the opportunity just 
to double check immediately, but the last I checked Mr. Connell 
was still waiting for a cheque. And I’m not exactly sure if that’s 
. . . if your department’s aware whether or not indeed salary is 
now being extended to Mr. Connell, as to the letter that he’s 
been sent in regards to the review. I don’t know if you can 
confirm that. 
 
And secondly, as the one letter indicated, I believe the letter you 
had sent back to me as well, you talked about a report being 
filed with the deputy minister by the end of May and a 
commitment to Mr. Connell to having his employment status 
conference . . . or at least a call to him to let him know where he 
stands. 
 
Mr. Minister, is that June 15 deadline . . . Are you aware or is 
your department aware — are you going to be able to achieve 
that? 
 
Because I think, Mr. Minister, as you can appreciate, the 
Connell family have certainly gone through a lot. It’s created a 
lot of turmoil even within their own family members, it seems. 
Situations like this I don’t think are easy for any family, Mr. 
Minister, and I think you can appreciate that. So I think it’s very 
important that this be looked at, be addressed quickly and, as 
you say, carefully. But certainly that we indeed recognize what 
the Connells have gone through. 
 
And I know other members of the department I think it doesn’t 
matter what . . . when you’re dealing with individuals, I’m sure 
all members or all workers working for social assistance at 
some point or other maybe ask themselves are they in the right 
place. Because under our current system you never know what 
you may find thrown against you, and I think most people 
would expect the union and their employer to look fairly 
appreciably about how they’ve conducted their work over the 
years. It’s a difficult situation. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, can you confirm that indeed salary has been 
indeed . . . that it’s now going to the Connells and that indeed 
this will be finalized by the date you’ve indicated in your letter? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, we will immediately check in 
terms of whether the benefits have been paid to Mr. Connell 
from the March date; we’ll check that right away. And my 
officials advise me that we expect to meet the June 15 
opportunity, thereabouts. But it is the expectation of the 
department that we’ll meet that mid-June target. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, another question. Mr. 
Minister, when it comes to — and this question actually rises a 
bit from a human resources and development fund for 
educational courses. Now I believe that’s a federal program, but 
I guess the question to your office . . . and we talked about that 
a moment ago when we talked about futures programming. 
What does your office do in assisting or trying to help clients 
find, or not necessarily maybe always find employment, but 
help them obtain the skills that are needed to find real and true 

employment? 
 
Is there an avenue in your department whereby you are always 
looking at ways in which you can help clients upgrade their 
skills if necessary, and also build up a rapport or help them to 
really be able to go through an employment opportunity by 
applying for and presenting themselves to receive employment? 
What does your department do to address that and what amount 
of finances do you put into this level of programming? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, if we’re here speaking of 
folks who are receiving welfare, social assistance, each and 
every person who receives social assistance is provided a case 
plan. We try and work with each individual in a case plan. If 
that individual indicates or it’s demonstrated that they could use 
some training opportunities, then the worker will point them in 
those directions. 
 
Now we’ve tended over the last number of years to move 
responsibility for the delivery of the programs out of social 
assistance to Post-Secondary Education, when we’re talking 
about adults, with I think some thought behind that move. 
Again it’s my sort of thought that if we can move people from 
sort of being on welfare as their source of sustenance and 
income into other opportunities, the better. And so some folks 
now have moved from receiving their basic needs through 
welfare to receiving their basic needs through a training 
program being delivered by Post-Secondary. 
 
So we’re moving away from some of the actual program 
delivery in terms of training. But each and everyone of our 
workers working with each and every client on social assistance 
tries to build a case plan for them and push or encourage or pull 
folks into those training programs. We’ve let the delivery now 
move more to Post-Secondary. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. 
Minister, I think it’s important that the department certainly be 
available and work with . . . because for a lot of the clients I’m 
sure it’s . . . many of them may not be in a position on their own 
to really be able to achieve or to find the avenues or to look 
through the avenues that may be available for . . . whether it’s 
education or upgrading and specific skills. 
 
And when we look at people on social assistance, we look at the 
numbers of people going to the food bank, it’s obvious, Mr. 
Minister, that we need to utilize all our resources. We just can’t 
depend on the Departments of Education or Post-Secondary 
Education because some of these individuals may not even 
qualify for that Post-Secondary without some upgrading. 
 
So I would encourage your department to continue to do 
whatever it can to assist people in finding meaningful 
employment. 
 
Mr. Minister, the other day I believe — a couple of questions 
here — I think if I’m not mistaken I did ask you for the global 
questions, whether your department had received them, whether 
you pretty well have them wrapped up or together, whether you 
can even give them to us today. I wonder if those are here. And 
. . . Well maybe I’ll wait for a response to that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I’d hoped we have them or 



1542 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 1998 

they would be delivered by today. They will be I’m sure very 
soon. The work is near completion. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well we look forward to receiving those, Mr. 
Minister. It’s unfortunate that, yes, we don’t have them. There 
may be some questions that arise, and I could stand here and 
say, well maybe that’s why we don’t have them yet because 
we’re . . . as we wind down but we look forward to receiving 
the questions. Certainly, Mr. Minister, if there are any questions 
that arise, we will be in contact with your office and your 
department to raise some of those concerns. 
 
The other day as well, I submitted a written question regarding 
the new Child Benefit and employment system computer 
program and I asked what the total cost to the government for 
planning, developing, and implementing this computer program 
was. You answered $4,957,437. 
 
My second question was whether the program . . . work on this 
program was tendered. Your answer was yes. My question 
today, Mr. Minister, is whether this work was openly tendered. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, the information I have is this. 
There were tenders issued for the program planning work. 
There were two tenders. The first of those failed to attract any 
available or suitable resources. Three local companies were 
awarded the second tender. Social Services then asked IBM to 
propose additional expertise and project management service, 
and IBM was then selected. 
 
We have worked with IBM in past, and it’s on this basis that 
IBM was really selected — familiarity with the department’s 
business and processes through previous work — and they 
provided to us immediate access to some hard-to-find resources. 
And given the time lines, knowing that we needed these 
programs in place and running by June 1 to accept applications 
and be running in July 1, it was concluded by the department 
that IBM’s proposal provided the good value for money. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, as I 
understand what you’ve said, you did have a tender go out 
initially. There were no responses to it, so then you followed up 
with a second tender where you approached some of the firms 
that you felt might have the ability. Is that correct? And out of 
those — I believe you mentioned three — out of the three you 
found a firm that would be able to meet some of the time lines. 
Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I want to be clear, Mr. Chair, that this in 
some ways was two-phased and the early parts were tendered as 
I described. And then when we moved into the actual bigger 
phase, it was not. It was awarded to IBM. It’s IBM that’s doing 
the work. Yes, it was awarded to IBM. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. Minister, it was awarded 
to IBM because after the first phase, it appeared it had the . . . it 
was the firm or the company that was best able to and provided 
the job skills and the programing that would meet the 
requirements that your department was looking for. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — That’s absolutely correct, Mr. Chair — 
and because they’ve worked with the department in the past, 
I’m told, and because they had the skills and ability to put this 

in place in a relatively short period of time. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. Minister, a question here 
regarding foster-parenting. And maybe I can discuss this a little 
bit and some of the issues surrounding the level in procedures 
for confidentiality when it relates to placing youth in foster 
care. 
 
I’d just like to give an example. Let’s say it was 3 o’clock in the 
morning and a foster-parent gets a phone call and is asked to 
take a child into their home. And please remember these people 
likely have children of their own or other foster-children in their 
home already to protect. So they’re asked to take a child in who 
has run away or been forced out of their previous foster-home. 
And let’s assume the reason for leaving the previous home was 
because he or she had pulled a knife on their foster-parent. 
Would the foster-parent receiving the phone call at 3 in the 
morning be told why the violent child was forced out of the last 
home? 
 
And I would like to ask the minister in a very general way a 
question, because I don’t want to certainly get into the Helen 
Montgomery case, but the general question is in regards to what 
is the level of disclosure to individuals who run open care 
custody facilities in their homes for young offenders? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, the member describes two 
quite different scenarios. One is a foster placement, an 
emergency foster placement. In that circumstance, because it is 
an emergency, the worker involved would provide or should 
provide to the receiving foster parent as much information as 
that worker knows, given at that moment. 
 
Now they may not have a complete or a full picture because it’s 
an emergency situation. Any other information that comes 
along would then be provided from the worker to the new foster 
parents. 
 
In the other circumstance of the community home represented 
by Mrs. Montgomery’s home in North Battleford, there’s never 
such a thing as an emergency placement there. These are much 
more considered and studied, and the community home 
operators, they’re provided a full dossier on the individual 
young offender and they’re given the option, after having 
reviewed all the information, to say, no, I don’t want that 
particular young offender in my home, or yes I do. 
 
So it’s quite different. There wouldn’t be a situation where 
you’d have an emergency placement in a community home. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, how 
many foster homes or families do we have in the province of 
Saskatchewan today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — As of March this year, Mr. Chair, the 
total number was 829 and we’re involved in another 315 foster 
home studies that are under way. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. Minister, another issue 
that I’d like some clarification on is regarding emergency 
shelters for women. About a month ago my colleague, the 
member from Kelvington, raised the issue of emergency homes 
for women. And she raised the issue of the Prince Albert 



June 2, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1543 

Emergency Shelter for Women and the announcement made by 
the Community Service Centre board that they would not 
continue governing this shelter because they simply could not 
continue operating the shelter given the current funding 
commitment. 
 
When she raised the issue, Mr. Minister, you stood up in this 
Assembly and said that indeed the shelter would not be closing 
and that you’d gone to Prince Albert and taken care of the 
situation. 
 
Mr. Minister, some of the information we’ve just received — 
and I wanted to share a moment — information from the shelter 
and from the Community Service Centre board, and I share this 
information with you because although the shelter has not 
closed, it is in real danger of closing in the future because 
you’ve not fixed the real problem, that is the funding source. 
 
The annual budget for the shelter I believe is around 313,000. 
The only increase their budget has received in the last five years 
is a 2 per cent increase. Mr. Minister, I think you would say you 
would acknowledge that, 2 per cent in five years is very 
insignificant. According to the shelter they need an additional 
24,000 to simply meet the current levels of service. 
 
Last year, Mr. Minister, as I understand it there were 149 
women and 221 children using the services of the shelter and 
for every person the shelter took in, they turned two away. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’m wondering if you could inform this Assembly 
as to what the current status of the shelter is, whether funding 
levels will be increased to handle the heavier case-load that the 
shelter is facing, or whether or not the shelter will be forced to 
close its doors in the near future? 
 
(1645) 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I want to repeat, we are 
committed to ensuring that the shelter in Prince Albert 
continues; that the shelter will not close its doors. And I am 
very cognizant of the fact of some of the very special needs of 
the Prince Albert situation. 
 
But I want to assure the member that in fact base funding over 
the past four years has increased 31 per cent to the P.A. shelter. 
I believe it is the — it is the most generously funded shelter in 
the province when compared to other shelters. 
 
However that does . . . and I admit it needs to be in the context 
of its location and the geographic draw that it serves, this 
shelter tends to serve the North. And there are few other 
opportunities in the North, and we may have more opportunities 
in the south. That’s a special consideration. 
 
My understanding is that an interim board has been formed. 
That the interim board is looking at every option and all the 
options and working closely with our department in Prince 
Albert to ensure absolutely that the Prince Albert shelter will 
continue. And as part of that ongoing assessment, we’re simply 
going to have to review the funding levels. 
 
But new resources, significant new resources actually over the 
last number of years, have been provided to the shelter. There 

still are some problems but we want that shelter to continue. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. Minister, since the date 
when we raised these questions, Mr. Minister, what have you 
done? Have you personally contacted or have been contacted by 
anyone in the shelter to address some of the concerns that have 
been brought forward? 
 
I think you’d indicated at that time that you would be contacting 
the shelter, and I’m wondering exactly what have you done 
personally to address some of the questions and the concerns 
that have arisen as a result of the funding shortfall that the 
shelter is facing. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I have not . . . I’m confused a 
little about the dates. I do not believe I have physically been 
back in Prince Albert since we had that discussion in the House. 
I know that my office has been in conversation, not myself 
personally, but members of my staff have been in conversation 
with individuals from Prince Albert, also with the provincial 
association of transition houses and representatives there. I am 
apprised almost on a weekly basis of discussions that are 
happening in the community between our officials and the 
interim board as we move towards this. And both members of 
the legislature from Prince Albert are continually providing me 
with updates on the situation around the P.A. women’s shelter. 
Together we are resolved to find solutions to the situation in 
Prince Albert. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, I wonder do you have any numbers 
. . . as to the number of women and children who have been 
turned away from shelters in 1997? I’m talking of all shelters, 
not just Prince Albert. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, we do not have that number. 
It’s not something that we request of our transition houses or 
our women’s shelters. I am aware, Mr. Chair, of the 
circumstance in Prince Albert which I believe represents the 
most difficult in the province in terms of the numbers of women 
or family units that are approaching that shelter and having . . . 
not being able to be served immediately. 
 
I think in our other circumstances as I have travelled the 
province and met with service providers in the transition 
houses, there will be pressures on occasion, but it’s more 
dramatic, I think, in the Prince Albert circumstances. Again I 
believe it’s because of the geography — they’re serving a good 
chunk of the North there. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Deputy Chair. Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Minister, I guess a further question. Have we seen a significant 
increase in the demand for the services of emergency shelters in 
the last few years? If we have, what would you attribute the 
increases to? Would there be . . . some of the reasons we’re 
seeing this is people are discouraged and alcoholism being a 
factor or gambling problems being a factor. What are some of 
the factors that cause people to seek the services of emergency 
shelters? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — We’ve not seen any dramatic increase 
but I think we’re all agreed that the existing demand for those 
protections and services is too high. We haven’t seen any 
dramatic increase and the member has pointed out a number of 



1544 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 1998 

the factors I think that are in play here. 
 
We’ve been trying . . . Well in addition to maintaining the more 
traditional women’s shelters and transition houses — and we 
have over the last number of years been able to put in some new 
resources particularly to support workers and benefits and 
wages for workers and so on in those circumstances. We’ve 
also been working at outreach programs; I think some of them 
very successful in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
We’ve been working at trying to build in protections through 
. . . for instance our pioneering legislation, The Victims of 
Domestic Violence Act. So we’re trying to broaden our, 
broaden our approach to meeting these circumstances and these 
needs but we haven’t seen a dramatic increase in demand. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, when it comes to the individuals, 
and I believe most of the cases we have would be in fact . . . I’d 
be surprised if we have any men but I would guess that most if 
not all of the cases are women and children seeking shelter. Has 
your department had, or have any of the shelters had, men 
coming to seek some shelter at any time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — We’re not aware of any requests, Mr. 
Chair, that have come from men but I suspect there are some 
males in our province who are victims of abuse. Now in terms 
of domestic violence and domestic abuse, the vast majority of 
course will be women and children. 
 
Mr. Toth: — And, Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. Minister, I think 
certainly when we talk about abusive situations I think most, 
like you say by and large, most of the situations tend to be 
women and children. However, we have had some calls and 
suggestions that, as a result of the majority, sometimes there are 
situations where the men face that and basically are overlooked 
because they aren’t perceived as being in that type of situation. 
 
Mr. Minister, just a couple of quick questions in regards to 
some of the things that are done in emergency shelters. What do 
you have available as far as addressing some of the counselling 
needs children may face? And are there programs available for 
anger management for women of abuse or who would maybe 
abuse them . . . as be abusive themselves? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, in many of the . . . in many or 
several of the transition houses or women’s shelters that I have 
been able to visit, including that in my own community, there 
are children’s counsellors who are part of the staff who work 
particularly with the children and in many cases will be 
working with anger management issues — will be also working 
with the women. And the shelters and the transition houses and 
so on will access many of the community-based counselling 
resources as well. There is a significant effort put into 
counselling and meeting the needs of the children and the 
women as they come through the programs in the homes. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Minister, as 
we’ve been addressing a number of the questions regarding 
social services, I note, Mr. Minister . . . And while I’ve agreed 
with you in what you’re trying to do under the new 
Saskatchewan assistance program — your income supplement, 
and your child benefits, your health benefits — I think those are 
certainly things that can be a benefit. But an unfortunate reality; 

we still have a number of people in this province looking to 
social assistance. The fact that we have almost on an ongoing 
basis we have individuals going to food banks and cries from 
food banks about shortages of food, and I find that somewhat 
appalling. 
 
I think our economy has been moving along not too badly, 
although certain economic situations that the province is facing 
may create even more of a problem for the province in the near 
future. When we look at agriculture and some of the dramatic 
changes we’ve seen just in the last few days in agriculture. We 
see the price of oil is fluctuating. Right now it’s below the level 
that the Minister of Finance is striving for. I note your budget is 
looking at almost a $30 million increase to try and provide the 
services that you’ve been listing out, Mr. Minister. 
 
I think at the end of the day when it comes right down to it, it 
doesn’t matter how much money we put into programs, what 
we need is to be there to meet and try to meet the needs of 
individuals who through no fault of their own find themselves 
in a desperate situation. I think at the end of the day, Mr. 
Minister, governments of all shapes — and certainly while we 
have had a motion this afternoon by the member from Wascana 
Plains — I believe suggesting that things are looking so rosy in 
this province . . . I run into so many people who find themselves 
saying it’s not as bright out there as it may appear. 
 
And when it comes to job opportunities, if people on assistance 
are going to find real job opportunities, I think, Mr. Minister, 
we have to look very seriously at addressing some of the 
questions that arise — the taxation levels when it comes to 
business and certainly a more positive business environment in 
this province. Because then and only then are we going to be 
able to address in a wholehearted manner some of the major 
problems we have as far as welfare and creating avenues 
whereby people can feel good about themselves. 
 
Because I would suggest, Mr. Minister, if we have healthy 
home environments, if we have a good economic . . . the 
economy is doing well, people have good quality jobs, we 
would have less abusive situations; certainly more healthy 
environments create an opportunity for less abusive situations. 
 
So it’s a situation that we need to all work with but I would 
certainly strongly suggest, Mr. Minister, and ask that your 
government take a closer look at how it approaches business. 
And I believe we need to look at a more positive environment 
. . . for opportunity for businesses to create real job employment 
in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I share, for certain, the premise that the 
member bases his comments on and that is the best social 
program is always a job. And the more that we can have an 
economy in our province that produces good, decent 
employment for people, the better. 
 
We’ll probably have differences of opinion on how we achieve 
those goals. I’d like to believe that we’ve come a significant 
distance in the last number of years in providing employment 
for Saskatchewan people. We will not stop in that regard. We 
see that challenge, as the major challenge for our government. 
 
Subvote (SS01) agreed to. 



June 2, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1545 

Subvotes (SS03), (SS04), (SS05), (SS06), (SS07) agreed to. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Why is the Government House Leader 
on her feet? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — With leave, for a brief recess. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I think I’m merely a servant of the 
committee. I simply will report to the committee, if I have 
agreement, I will not call this subvote for a couple of minutes or 
whatever it takes. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Yes, with leave, Mr. Chairman, to 
revert to subvote (1). 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — It now being 5 o’clock, I move that 
we recess until 7 this evening. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1517 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1517 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1517 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1517 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1517 
  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1517 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1517 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1517 
  McPherson...............................................................................................................................................................................1517 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1518 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1518 
  Haverstock...............................................................................................................................................................................1518 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1518 
  Goohsen ...................................................................................................................................................................................1518 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ........................................................................................................................................................................................1518 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Haverstock...............................................................................................................................................................................1518 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Van Mulligen...........................................................................................................................................................................1518 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1518 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1519 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1519 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1519 
  Kasperski .................................................................................................................................................................................1519 
  Renaud .....................................................................................................................................................................................1530 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis Awareness Month 
  Murray.....................................................................................................................................................................................1519 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1519 
 Regina Habitat for Humanity Program 
  Lingenfelter .............................................................................................................................................................................1520 
 Level of Health Care in Saskatchewan 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1520 
 Wilfred Hunt School — A Green School 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................1520 
 Expression of Sympathy 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1521 
 Annual Royal Canadian Air Cadet Ceremony 
  Lorje.........................................................................................................................................................................................1521 
 Girl Guides of Canada, Canada Cord Ceremony 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1521 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Adequacy of Health Care Resources 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1521 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1521 
 Crop Insurance for Re-seeding 
  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1523 
  Upshall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1523 
 Acute Care Beds in Regina 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1523 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1524 
 Metis War Veterans 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1525 
  Goulet.......................................................................................................................................................................................1525 
 Contamination of Drinking Water 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1525 
  Scott .........................................................................................................................................................................................1525 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 743  The Crown Corporations Amendment Act, 1998 (Capital Market Activities Restrictions) 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1526 



 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................1526 
PRIVATE BILLS 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 Bill No. 301 — The Conference of Mennonites of Saskatchewan Act 
  Koenker ...................................................................................................................................................................................1526 
 Bill No. 302 — The Fondation Fransaskoise Act, 1998/Loi de 1998 sur la Fondation Fransaskoise 
  Kasperski .................................................................................................................................................................................1527 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 301 — The Conference of Mennonites of Saskatchewan Act 
  Koenker ...................................................................................................................................................................................1529 
 Bill No. 302 — The Fondation Fransaskoise Act, 1998/Loi de 1998 sur la Fondation Fransaskoise 
  Kasperski .................................................................................................................................................................................1529 
 Bill No. 49 — The Saskatchewan Assistance Amendment Act, 1998 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1538 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 Motion No. 7 — Provincial Economy 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................1529 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1529 
 Recorded division .......................................................................................................................................................................1530 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 Bill No. 49 — The Saskatchewan Assistance Amendment Act, 1998 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1530 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1530 
  Goohsen ...................................................................................................................................................................................1535 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund 
 Social Services — Vote 36 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1538 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1538 
 
 
 


