





























































Hansard: October 20, 1998


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2029 
 October 20, 1998 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
The Deputy Clerk — I wish to advise the Assembly that Mr. 
Speaker will not be present to open this sitting. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise on behalf 
of concerned citizens of this great province of Saskatchewan to 
present a petition, and the prayer of relief reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are 
from Churchbridge, Langenburg, Melville. I so present. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I present 
petitions this afternoon, the prayer of relief which reads as 
follows: 
 

Your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. Assembly 
may be pleased to relocate Highway 40 at the entrance to 
North Battleford to east of the David Laird campground in 
order to alleviate the congestion at the entrance to the city 
of North Battleford. 

 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I join my 
colleagues in bringing forward petitions today. The prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people who signed the petition are all 
from Regina. I so present. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I too rise to 
present petitions on behalf of citizens concerned about the 
Plains Health Centre closing. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 

by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Those who signed this petition, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are from 
the communities of Saltcoats, Langenburg, Bredenbury, and 
Esterhazy. I so present. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud to rise 
again today to present a petition on behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
regulate SaskPower and SaskEnergy so as to require them 
to provide electricity and natural gas at affordable rates for 
non-profit municipal recreation facilities. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition has been signed by concerned folks 
who are just now firing up the plants in our rinks across 
Saskatchewan. And the people that have signed this petition 
that are concerned about it, Mr. Speaker, are from Imperial, 
Liberty, Stalwart and Penzance. I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk:  According to order two petitions regarding 
the closure of the Plains Health Centre presented on October 19, 
1998 have been reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are 
found to be irregular and therefore cannot be read and received. 
 
According to order the following petitions have been reviewed, 
and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and received. 
 

Of citizens humbly praying that your hon. Assembly may 
be pleased to act to save the Plains Health Centre; 
 
Of citizens humbly praying to cause the government to 
immediately start work on the rebuilding of our secondary 
highway system to provide for safe driving. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is too 
rare that we get a chance to introduce people that we not only 
respect in this legislature, but — and this is the critical part of it 
— we not only respect them, but we can claim them as very 
close relatives. 
 
Today it is my honour to introduce someone that I not only 
respect but who is a relative of mine. And it is my pleasure to 
introduce, in the west gallery, Greg Trew. Greg will be better 
known to many members as working very diligently for SEIU 
(Service Employees International Union). And I ask all 
members to join me in welcoming my friend, my relative, Greg 
Trew. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



2030 Saskatchewan Hansard October 20, 1998 

Mr. Aldridge: — Well thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I too 
would like to rise and welcome Mr. Greg Trew to the Assembly 
here this afternoon and congratulate him on his excellent work 
that he does for SEIU. So if everyone here this afternoon would 
just join once again and welcome him here to the Assembly. 

 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Whitmore: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate it that 
you remembered my seat. 
 
I too would like to introduce Greg Trew today. Unless recently 
he still is a constituent of mine if I do remember, and we have 
had several chats on the phone at different times. So I too would 
like to welcome Greg here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Anniversary of Person’s Case 
 

Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m pleased 
to have this opportunity today to recognize a very special day 
that’s just passed on Sunday. It was on October 18, 1927 that 
the courts ruled that women were indeed persons and therefore 
eligible to sit as senators. The court stated on that historic date 
that the exclusion of women from all public offices was a relic 
of days more barbarous than ours. 
 
This decision may not have been made had it not been for five 
brave and determined women who petitioned the Supreme 
Court of Canada to decide once and for all to determine whether 
women qualified as persons under the law. While it may seem 
ridiculous today that was not even a question seven decades 
ago. And if it weren’t for such brave women as Henrietta Muir 
Edwards, Nellie McClung, Louise McKinney, Irene Parlby, and 
Emily Murphy, it might have taken even longer for women to 
take their rightful place beside, and in many cases ahead of, 
men in our country. 
 
Today there’s still a lot of work left to do as far as women’s 
equality goes but this victory by women in 1927 equipped us 
with the tools we need to rise right to the top in Canada today, 
and we thank them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

90th Anniversary of Person’s Decision 
 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, I have a connection to women’s 
month in the history. And the connection is I’m the grandson, 
the direct descendent of Beatrice Trew, the first CCF 
(Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) MLA (Member of 
the Legislative Assembly) to sit in this esteemed, august 
Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this all started October 18, 1929 when the 
question was put to the Supreme Court: Does the word person 
in section 29 of the British North America Act include female 
persons? On this anniversary I think it’s important that we all 
reflect on the unanimous decision of the British House of Lords 
as stated by Lord Sankey. He said: 

The exclusion of women from all public offices is a relic of 
days more barbarous than ours. And to those who would 
ask why the word person should include females, the 
obvious answer is, why should it not? 

 
We’ve made some progress over the years and if you look at 
our Assembly, Mr. Speaker, today, especially in the cabinet 
benches, although the advancement has not been perfect it has 
been substantial. My grandmother would be very proud of the 
progress that has made. We should all be proud of my 
grandmother, Beatrice Trew, today just as we should be grateful 
and proud of the famous five Alberta women who launched the 
famous person’s case. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Eric Malling 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. On 
September 28, a man who was a friend and acquaintance of 
several people in this Chamber passed away at the age of 52. 
Television and newspaper reporter Eric Malling was born and 
raised in Swift Current, attended the University of 
Saskatchewan, as well as Carleton University School of 
Journalism. 
 
His son, Leif, likes to recall the story of how his dad did poorly 
in only two subjects in high school, one was typing and the 
other was woodworking. And of course then Eric went on to 
use typing and his words to influence tremendous change in his 
lifetime; and of course did woodworking through his great love 
of making furniture, which was his hobby throughout his life. 
 
At his funeral a friend since university years was recalling 
something that meant a great deal to everyone who was there, 
and what she said was this: 
 

It was unbelievable that a man like Eric could have the 
ability to interject, regardless of story, regardless of the 
amount of time that he was allotted, something about the 
prairies in each and every story, and he always made us so 
tremendously, tremendously proud. 

 
He leaves to mourn his wife Pat Werner, his son Leif and his 
daughter Paige, and he will be missed very, very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Village of Livelong Booming 
 

Ms. Stanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Recently there was an article in The Northwest Neighbors in my 
constituency about a little town called Livelong on the prairies, 
which I’m sure that Eric Malling would have enjoyed. 
 
This story is about a town that is surviving in our global 
economy. The headline of the article said, “Livelong booming 
with new residents and new ventures.” The story backed up the 
headline. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the new ventures were not huge 
ventures, but they were enthusiastic and they were optimistic. 
 
Volunteers are setting up a small library next to the post office. 
The post office is relocating into a new building. The local 



October 20, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 2031 

lounge is planning its fall entertainment schedule, and the hair 
shop is opened and doing well. 
 
No closures here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, just ordinary people 
going about their ordinary lives with contentment. Lives by the 
way that include, according to the article, a couple of new 
homes, a wedding or two, and time to enjoy the peaceful and 
lovely fall scenery that I enjoy in our great north-west. 
 
This is the attitude of optimism, of quiet joy, of contentment, 
that makes our province the best place in the country to live. 
 
I value the village of Livelong and, as its name suggests, what it 
represents — live long. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Congratulations to the Community of Outlook 
 

Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last night there was 
good news for a town in my constituency. Unfortunately I was 
not able to attend due to the legislature sitting but I would like 
to offer my congratulations to the community of Outlook. The 
people in Outlook have worked long and hard to improve the 
educational facilities for the young people in their community. 
 
The initiative for this project came from the people themselves 
— the parents, the teachers, the business leaders, the farmers, 
and the trustees. They all had a vision and they stayed focused 
on their goal of rejuvenating education in their community not 
only for themselves but for the future of the students as well. 
But as a result of their dedication and belief in themselves after 
renovations and upgrades have been completed, the school will 
be a source of tremendous community pride for many years to 
come. 
 
Mr. Speaker, only a couple of weeks ago I was in Outlook to 
help them open their new bridge and I would to ask all 
members to join me in recognizing the good people of Outlook 
for their entrepreneurial spirit. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

10th Annual SADD Convention 
 
Ms. Murrell: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. At a meeting 
in Saskatoon this weekend, a young women named Dionne 
Pohler said the following: “It is hard to change people who are 
set in their ways.” I don’t have the slightest idea who she was 
talking about — certainly not me — but seriously the reasons 
behind her statement are well worth all of us listening to. 
 
Dionne was one of 700 youth delegates to the tenth annual 
convention of students against drunk driving or SADD 
(Students Against Drinking and Driving). Although this is a 
group of students, it has already shown itself to be a very 
effective organization for change and change for the better in 
our society. 
 
In 1996, SADD was instrumental in bringing about major 
changes to our legislation dealing with drinking and driving as 
well as with licensing new drivers. Because of SADD and with 
the work of the able legislative committee chaired by our 

Speaker, changes including lowering the legal blood alcohol 
level were brought about. The reason for SADD’s dedication 
and effectiveness is simple and direct. They are tired of their 
friends, their relatives, and their neighbours being killed by 
drunk drivers and they want not a reduction, but an end to this 
senseless loss of our citizens. 
 
I congratulate SADD on their work thus far, and I know we will 
be hearing from them until they successfully lobby themselves 
out of existence. Thank you, Mr. Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

University of Regina Convocation 
 

Mr. Thomson: — Thank you. I was being unusually deferential 
waiting for the member for North Battleford to stand up again. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, on Saturday the University of Regina held 
its fall convocation. And although I was unable to attend, I do 
want to congratulate the 418 students from the nine faculties 
who received degrees. 
 
I especially want to congratulate Vanessa Stockbrugger of 
Regina who is a constituent of mine and was awarded the 
president’s medal as the most distinguished student. 
 
Saturday’s convocation was also important for another reason, 
as Dr. David Barnard was formally installed as the fourth 
president and vice-chancellor of the University of Regina. Dr. 
Barnard is a distinguished scholar in computer science, and of 
all things, also in theology, which is an interesting combination 
if there ever was one. 
 
Those of us who have met with the new president I think would 
all agree that he brings a fresh, inquiring intellect to the 
university during an interesting period in this institution’s 
evolution. 
 
During his convocation address, Dr. Barnard spoke in English, 
French, and Cree as a symbolic recognition on his part of the 
influences that have come together in this university. 
 
I know all members will wish Dr. Barnard well as he begins his 
tenure as president. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

First Woman MLA 
 

Mr. Hillson: — Yes, in Women’s History Month I rise to 
inform the Assembly of the first woman MLA, the first woman 
member of this Assembly. I had occasion to research her life 
last week to be with a women in politics class at the University 
of Regina. 
 
Sarah Ramsland was a school teacher in Minnesota before her 
marriage. She was married to the MLA for Pelly who died 
suddenly during the influenza epidemic of 1918. After his 
death, many friends suggested she return to Minnesota with her 
young children. 



2032 Saskatchewan Hansard October 20, 1998 

She had no money. However, she wanted to stay in Canada and 
she decided to enter politics only one year after women received 
the right to vote. 
 
The by-election campaign was a rambunctious affair. Her 
brother-in-law had to get out his shotgun to chase away 
demonstrators who were hurling eggs and tomatoes on the 
streets on Kamsack. It was probably some of the most 
excitement Kamsack . . . I trust the present member for 
Kamsack has an easier time of visiting there. 
 
She was not always accepted by the old boys’ club. The premier 
of the day came to support her at a meeting and didn’t mention 
her name. However, she did win the by-election and went on to 
win two further elections — our first woman MLA, Sarah 
Ramsland, a Liberal. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Financial Assistance for Farmers 
 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, my question is for the Minister of Agriculture. 
Congratulations, Mr. Minister, you finally woke up. You finally 
recognized there is an emergency in agriculture. 
 
There wasn’t an emergency last Thursday when you spoke to 
the Saskatoon chamber and there wasn’t an emergency 
yesterday when your House Leader tried to shut down this 
House. But today after the Sask Party called an emergency 
debate on agriculture, you finally figured out there’s an 
emergency. I guess better late than never, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, why did it take so long to figure out farm families 
are suffering and why is it taking so long to realize that a 
number of our farmers are going to go under this winter if 
action isn’t taken? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would remind 
the member opposite that credibility goes a long way in politics. 
If you were at the meeting at the chamber of commerce or if 
you were at any other meeting I have been at for the last little 
while, or if you were to read the papers, you would know that I 
have written to and spoke personally to, on more than one 
occasion, the Minister of Agriculture in Ottawa. 
 
I keep reiterating that we have to analyze the problem that’s out 
there in making sure that NISA (Net Income Stabilization 
Account) and Crop Insurance, that are the accounts available to 
producers, are adequate. I’ve said that on many occasions. 
 
The fact that the House is open today was an opportunity for all 
of us to join together, because I think you believe the same 
thing. I’m not going to make cheap politics on who is first or 
who is second or who did what . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Well fine, I’ll be second. Because this important issue is more 
than being first or second. 
 
What’s important is that we all join together and talk to Ottawa 
to ensure that we analyze the situation, that we know, if there is 
a need, who is responsible in light of the European and 

American subsidies and the loss of the Crow transportation 
benefit in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Minister, your comments to the 
Saskatoon chamber shows how really out of touch you are. The 
October 16 Star-Phoenix says, and I quote: 
 

Upshall . . . said farmers would have to rely on . . . (GRIP) 
and . . . (NISA), although he acknowledged it might be 
difficult. 

 
Well I’ll say it’ll be difficult. You were the guys that cancelled 
GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) six years ago. 
 
The article went on to say the minister doesn’t even want to talk 
to Ottawa about helping farmers yet. He said: 
 

I’m not sure that . . . would be . . . (a) responsible thing to 
do until we know exactly what’s going on in . . . (this) 
province. 

 
Well, Mr. Minister, if you don’t know what’s going on, I’ll tell 
you — $2 wheat, 70 cent barley, hog producers losing 20 to $40 
per finished hog, high taxes, and rising input costs. That’s 
what’s happening in this province. Farm families are suffering. 
And it wasn’t until we called an emergency debate today that 
you even realized there was a problem. 
 
Mr. Minister, where have you been? What have you done to 
address this crisis? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. If the member 
were to have read yesterday’s paper, he would have seen the 
retraction printed by the paper when referring to GRIP. So I 
understand that you read the paper and didn’t read the 
follow-up so I understand how you made that mistake. 
 
But let’s put that aside. The difference between you and this 
side of the House is a number. Number one, if you had 
representation as a federal party in Ottawa like we do, you 
could have had your member, like our member John Solomon 
stood up a number of weeks ago and asked for emergency 
debate but was turned down — number one. 
 
Number two, you can stand in your place and you can holler 
for, as I said if you read the rest of that clip in the Star-Phoenix 
interview, you could stand up and say, okay, wave the flag; we 
need fill-in-the-blank dollars. 
 
As a person who is responsible for the taxpayers of this 
province — not only the farmers, but everybody else — I say 
we have to do the analysis first. That’s what we’re doing. I 
know there’s a cash flow crisis out there. But you’re easy. It’s 
easy for you to stand up and say, just give us money, because 
you don’t have to have the responsibility. You don’t need to 
take the responsibility of ensuring that there’s a . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Next question. 
 



October 20, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 2033 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Crown Land Lease Rates 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Well I 
disagree with the minister that having a federal counterpart is an 
advantage. We have Mr. Goodale who’s done absolutely 
nothing for the farmers in this province. And I don’t remember 
your party doing . . . your federal party doing a darn thing. 
 
Mr. Minister, you like to blame everything on the federal 
government. And we agree that the federal Liberals have 
abandoned agriculture. And there is more that you could be 
doing as well though. 
 
This spring your government nailed farmers and ranchers with a 
25 per cent increase in lease rates. That’s how you’re helping 
farmers — by gouging them for more money. And you 
promised to review that decision, but we haven’t heard a peep 
out of you since, Mr. Minister. 
 
Will you stand in your place today and announce you have 
cancelled this unfair attack on farm families and adjust these 
Crown lease rates lower? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — The Crown lease rates have been set for 
this year. When we talked . . . We are reviewing the whole 
process for another year, and that process is ongoing and will 
come to fruition. 
 
But I’ll tell you something. You sit on your side of the House 
. . . I’ve told you what I’ve done. I’ve talked at length to the 
Minister of Agriculture; I’ve written letters. Table your 
representation today, I challenge you. And if you have and 
you’ve got it there, table it; I’ll have to read it. 
 
And if you have made representation to the federal government 
or the federal minister on this, show us, and then stand in your 
place today and support a common cause. Instead of standing 
there . . . I’ll tell you my friend, the days of Grant Devine are 
over and that’s exactly what you’re advocating — throwing 
money at the problem without responsibility. 
 
I’ll tell you we’re going to look after the people of this province 
in any way that we can. We’re going to make sure that the 
federal government is first and foremost in any decision of 
support, as you know is necessary. 
 
And I challenge you to stand in your place today and support us 
in calling on Ottawa to look at the situation of a very grave 
manner. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Emergency Hospital Services in Regina 
 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, my question is for the Minister of Health or her 
union-busting assistant. 
 
Madam Minister, it’s ironic that the first thing your assistant, 

the former head of the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, did as an 
NDP (New Democratic Party) MLA was legislate 1,100 union 
members at SaskPower back to work. 
 
Next up for the former nurses’ union president, shutting down 
emergency services at the Plains hospital. Madam Minister, this 
morning the Regina Health District announced the Plains 
hospital emergency room will close for good on October 30. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, what’s next for the member from 
Saskatoon Eastview — busting her former colleagues in the 
nurses’ union? 
 
Madam Minister, will you assure the people of southern 
Saskatchewan that emergency services at the two Regina 
hospitals that have escaped the NDP wrecking ball will be able 
to handle the increased workload from the closure of the Plains 
emergency room. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, how do you respond to 
that long preamble and diatribe that really was 
incomprehensible on this side of the House. Let me say this to 
the member. As we all know in the province of Saskatchewan, 
the Plains hospital is scheduled for consolidation into the other 
two hospitals in the city of Regina — the Regina General and 
the Pasqua. We anticipate that the consolidation of services will 
occur by the end of November and that there won’t be any loss 
of service as a result of this consolidation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. A further 
question to the Madam Minister. Madam Minister, we already 
have the longest hospital waiting list in the country. Even 
before the Plains hospital closes we hear media reports that 
Regina emergency rooms have turned away patients because 
they have no room. The government’s own polling, your own 
polling, Madam Minister, is telling your government that 
people are losing faith in the health care system. 
 
Almost half of the Saskatchewan people think the NDP’s health 
reform process will result in deteriorating health services over 
the next five years. Madam Minister, unfortunately, judging 
from today’s announcement from the Regina Health District, 
those people appear to be right. 
 
Madam Minister, do you really expect people to believe 
emergency services in Saskatchewan will get better when you 
are shutting down one of the busiest emergency rooms in the 
province? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, let me say this to 
the member. There is no question that over the last five years 
with the consolidation of various health services under one 
district board, that there has been change in this province. 
 
We moved from a system where there were over 400 
independent boards and agencies delivering health services in 
this province to a more integrated and a coordinated approach to 
the delivery of health. 
 



2034 Saskatchewan Hansard October 20, 1998 

As you know, your predecessor government had the Murray 
report. And one of the things that the Murray Commission told 
us was that there was a lack of coordination and integration 
between ambulance care, acute care, home care, mental health, 
and community-based services along with a whole host of other 
health services. And what we’ve tried to do is move to a more 
integrated approach. 
 
Now does that mean that health renewal has failed? Health 
renewal has not failed. Change is difficult for people. Change is 
difficult for people, but I believe that we’re moving towards a 
more coordinated and integrated approach to meeting the health 
needs of the people of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Public Utility Rate Review Process 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My questions are for 
the minister responsible for CIC (Crown Investments 
Corporation of Saskatchewan). 
 
Mr. Minister, on November 1 you’re nailing Saskatchewan 
families one more time. This time it’s a 12 per cent increase in 
SaskEnergy rates — one more attack on every family and every 
business in Saskatchewan. Of course you do have your 
phony-baloney rate review process to go through first. 
 
So I want to ask you, Mr. Minister: how is your rate review 
process going? Do you think it is working well? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, if you judge our rate 
review process in terms of our rates for natural gas in 
Saskatchewan versus Alberta or any other province in Canada, 
it’s working very well because we have the lowest gas prices in 
the country. 
 
I want to say as well that in Alberta the rates have been 
announced to increase by as much as 20 per cent in the next few 
months, which will mean, which will mean that the rates in 
Saskatchewan even after the 12 per cent increase on November 
1, if approved, will still be the lowest in Canada. 
 
Now the member opposite will know full well that gas prices on 
the commodity market have increased and increased 
significantly. He knows that. And so to be truthful, what you 
should do is stand up and congratulate the men and women who 
run our Crown corporation — I know this would be unusual for 
the members opposite — who have kept the rates in this 
province the lowest in Canada. Why don’t you just say thank 
you to the men and women who run that Crown corporation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, it’s too 
bad for once you wouldn’t try and confine yourself to the 
question. The question was with regard to your rate review 
process — you know, that phony-baloney little process that 
you’ve set up to review your . . . (inaudible) . . . to review your 
rate increases. 
 
Well let me tell you how well it’s working. In Saskatoon and 
P.A. (Prince Albert) about 10 people showed up, in Kindersley 

there were six people that showed up, and in North Battleford 
there were three people turned out to the meetings. And in the 
meetings in Maple Creek, Humboldt, and Weyburn one person 
turned up at each one of those meetings. 
 
Mr. Minister, there’s more people at the Liberal caucus 
meetings than are turning up at your meetings. Do you think it’s 
because they’re concerned about the rate hike? Yes it is, Mr. 
Minister. They think your rate review process is an absolute 
joke. That’s what they think, Mr. Minister. You’ve made up 
your mind. You’ve made up your mind; SaskEnergy’s made up 
their mind, and there’s nothing that anybody can do. 
 
Mr. Minister, the Saskatchewan Party has a Bill sitting on the 
order paper calling for a truly independent rate review 
mechanism. Will you support this legislation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
members opposite that when it comes to gas prices, I have here 
an article I believe from The Globe and Mail yesterday, and it 
says that some homeowners face higher heating bills and it 
says, gas prices to rise as supplies tighten. 
 
And this is a story not about Saskatchewan where there has 
been the recommendation of a 12 per cent increase, but this is 
about Alberta that the members opposite like to compare 
themselves to. 
 
And it says here that the average customer of Edmonton-based 
Northwestern Utilities Limited, for example, will see gas bills 
going up by $87 for the November through March winter 
period. That’s a 20 per cent increase, 20 per cent increase. 
 
Now they have a rate review process. But I want to say to the 
members opposite, how is the rate process working in 
Saskatchewan? It’s keeping the lowest gas prices in Canada. I 
would say that’s pretty good. 
 
As to how many people are coming out to the meetings, I think 
we’re getting a few more than the number of Liberals and 
Tories that have jumped across in the dark of night to join that 
little rump of a party over there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Dismissal of SaskPower Official 
 

Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. My 
question to the Premier is about former SaskPower diversity 
coordinator, Ed McQuarters. 
 
Mr. McQuarters was a 28-year veteran of the company, 
however Mr. McQuarters made the mistake of disagreeing with 
one of your NDP management appointees at SaskPower. After a 
complaint was filed with his office, Mr. McQuarters 
recommended that a harassment complaint by an employee 
against a SaskPower supervisor proceed. An independent 
investigator agreed, and in a written report the investigator 
stated that harassment of the employee had taken place. 
 
Then on July 14, 1997, in a confidential letter to the harassed 



October 20, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 2035 

employee and contrary to the independent recommendation, 
SaskPower executive VP (vice-president) Carole Bryant 
quashed the harassment complaint. So much for process and 
fairness at SaskPower. 
 
Now after all of this, Mr. McQuarters, who was just doing his 
job, was fired by SaskPower. Mr. Premier, why was Mr. 
McQuarters fired? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I want to say to the member 
opposite that as it relates to the issue of discrimination or 
non-discrimination, I want to make it clear that when the debate 
was going on over the last couple of days you would know that 
the issue of non-discrimination clause in the Bill was in fact 
dealt with. 
 
And so you would be pleased . . . And I was interested that I 
think you took the occasion to vote against that. If the record 
. . . I don’t have it here but if you, if you are concerned about 
that, I think you voted against that. So I think you should be 
clear on who’s supporting and who isn’t. 
 
As it relates to Mr. McQuarters, I’ve had conversations with 
him as recently as yesterday at 10 a.m., and Ed says that he is 
satisfied that the negotiations going on at the present time are 
going well and he wishes that people would leave it alone so 
that it can be resolved. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Supplementary, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to the 
Premier or Deputy Premier. We want to know which one of 
your NDP appointees at SaskPower authorized that Mr. 
McQuarters be fired. And has any severance been offered to 
him? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — As I mentioned in my previous 
answer when I talked about the non-discrimination issue, we 
debated it yesterday and in the discussion that went on a 
commitment has been made to deal with that issue. 
 
And as it relates to Mr. McQuarters, I said again, I have talked 
to him as recently as yesterday at 10 a.m. He believes he is 
being treated fairly. And there is discussions going on. And for 
you to try to play politics at this time I think probably doesn’t 
serve the issue very well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, we want to know what 
sort of discipline that this government intends to put towards 
their appointees for treating SaskPower employees like dirt. In 
other words, can we expect to see Bill’s hide? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — In dealing with this issue, we will 
deal with it in the proper manner. 
 
And I want to say something and that is about the discipline that 
Mr. Melenchuk is talking about putting on one of your own 

members, in a public and open way, saying that because he 
voted a certain way he may be disciplined. And I think it’s 
because the House Leader from the Shaunavon area has said 
that he wants him disciplined because he doesn’t have the 
wherewithal to use his influence through . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. If the members in the 
opposition are going to take the time to ask the question, they 
should take the time to listen to the answer also I suggest. So 
we would come to order, please. 
 

Home Care in Saskatchewan 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. My question this afternoon is for the Minister of 
Health. Madam Minister, the most vulnerable in Saskatchewan 
and their families are in a quandary. 
 
Individuals with chronic illnesses that prevent them from 
dressing themselves, from being able to get out of bed, even 
feed themselves, are unable to access home care. And some of 
the very nurses who provide that care are being sent into homes 
where in some cases they are in danger of not only potential 
physical assaults but contamination from filthy conditions. 
 
Madam Minister, what is your response to both the people who 
are in need of this care and to those who are providing care, 
who are of the opinion that the system of receiving and 
delivering home care is in — to the most needy of course — is 
in chaos? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I want to thank the member for this 
question. Mr. Speaker, there’s no question that in the last five 
years we’ve seen a significant increase in services delivered to 
people in their own homes. If I recall, I believe the home care 
budget has more than doubled and the number of people who 
are being served by home care has risen substantially as we 
make our way from institutional care to services provided in the 
community. 
 
There is no question that there are some difficulties in certain 
parts of home care. And one of the difficulties is being referred 
to by the member from Greystone. I can assure the member that 
we are taking a look at how best to provide community-based 
services to the types of people that she refers to. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Madam Minister. And I want 
to go into this just a little bit more because people are quite 
concerned with the amount of private care that they are now 
being held responsible for — the families in particular. And 
these things are inextricably linked. 
 
Nurses are worried because they must work in some conditions 
that actually require them to disinfect themselves, from such 
things as bed bugs, before they move on to the next patient to 
whom they travel oftentimes to care, to care for. And they also 
do not agree with how some persons, some individuals are 
chosen to receive care while others who are much more 
disabled are being passed over. And there seems to be so much 
concern in this that even the Ombudsman’s office has been 
involved in some of these cases and that there seem to be other 



2036 Saskatchewan Hansard October 20, 1998 

people pulling strings in this matter. 
 
So we have home care nurses wanting to care for some people 
and are told they can’t, home care nurses being sent into some 
situations which are horrific, and many individuals receiving no 
care at all. 
 
Madam Minister, what can be done soon for the many families 
struggling to get much needed help for their vulnerable loved 
ones while other cases that are questionable as to the safety and 
security of nurses, are being funded? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I want to thank the member for raising 
this because this is certainly something that we will need to 
address as we make our way away from institutional care to 
community-based services. 
 
And I think the member will philosophically agree that one of 
the best ways to provide care to our citizens is to ensure that the 
care is provided in the community. And this has been a huge 
transition all across the country, moving away from institutions 
to community-based health services. I can assure the member 
that this is something that has been brought to my attention and 
it’s something that we’re hoping to address in the next short 
while. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Public Administrator at Kindersley Senior Care Facility 
 

Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday we saw 
the trouble that patronage appointments has gotten this 
government into in SaskPower, but they didn’t seem to learn 
their lesson, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Looking through the health digest and the orders in council, we 
see that the NDP are at it again, this time in Kindersley, where 
they’ve appointed one of their patronage boys to run the 
Kindersley Senior Care Inc., and authorized the payment of 
$800 per day, Mr. Speaker — $800 a day. Now if you multiply 
that over the course of a year we’re talking about something 
like $200,000 or very close to it. But on top of that, they’ve also 
authorized extra expenses for travel and living allowance, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Minister of Health, your former minister talked about $100,000 
nurses. The only one I know of is sitting in the rows of the NDP 
right now. Two hundred thousand dollars! At that rate we could 
pay for two nurses a year — at the regular rate, five or six. 
Madam Minister, can you explain this? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I’d just like to say this, 
that one of the things that I have really grown to appreciate over 
the last 12 years that I’ve served in this legislature is the kind of 
respect that we show each other, and the kind of respect that we 
show each other when new members arrive at this legislature. 
 
I would say this, that my colleague the Associate Minister of 
Health has come to this Assembly to involve herself in change. 
And I really don’t believe that the kinds of comments that are 
being made by the members opposite elevate the public debate 

that is so important in this province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as the member will know, that there was a 
public administrator appointed in July of 1998 for the 
Kindersley long-term care home. And the appointment was 
made to ensure quality and safe care could be provided to the 
80 special care home residents at the Heritage Manor. What I 
can say to the member is that the public administrator has 
reviewed the financial position of the Heritage Manor and it’s 
been determined that there are some cost savings that can be 
made. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would ask leave to 
make a statement about the death of the former Chief Justice of 
the Supreme Court of Canada. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — As the legislature knows, the 
ministerial statements are usually to deal with the minister’s 
department on policy but the Minister of Justice has asked leave 
to deviate from that and to make a special . . . is leave granted? 
 
Leave is granted. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Death of Chief Justice Dickson 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I wish to 
advise the House that retired Chief Justice of the Supreme 
Court of Canada, Brian Dickson, died in his sleep on Saturday, 
October 17, at his home outside Ottawa. I think it is appropriate 
to review the life and achievements of a great Canadian, who 
was born and raised in Saskatchewan. 
 
Robert George Brian Dickson was born in Yorkton in 1916. He 
grew up in various towns in Saskatchewan, and attended school 
at Regina Collegiate Institute. Notably, two of his classmates 
were William Lederman, who went on to become one of 
Canada’s most highly respected constitutional scholars, and 
Sandy MacPherson, who became a judge in the Saskatchewan 
Court of Queen’s Bench, a very high powered class indeed. 
 
Chief Justice Dickson was well acquainted with this Assembly. 
His schoolmate, Sandy MacPherson, was the son of the then 
attorney general, Murdoch A. MacPherson. Apparently when 
this House was sitting in the evenings, young Brian Dickson 
and Sandy MacPherson would be allowed to do their homework 
in the attorney general’s office. If they finished their homework 
in time they could watch this House’s proceedings from the 
gallery. 
 
In later years, Chief Justice Dickson would say that knowing 
Attorney General MacPherson was one reason he became a 
lawyer. Chief Justice Dickson attended the University of 
Manitoba earning his law degree in 1938 where he was the gold 
medalist of his law class. 
 
When World War II broke out, Brian Dickson enlisted. He 
served with distinction from 1940 to 1945. While serving in the 
Normandy campaign, Dickson was mentioned in dispatches for 
his conduct, an important recognition in the military. He was 



October 20, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 2037 

also seriously injured resulting in the loss of one of his legs. 
 
Returning to Winnipeg after the war, Brian Dickson practised 
law with a private firm. He also was a lecturer at the College of 
Law in Manitoba. In 1963 he was appointed to the Manitoba 
Court of Queen’s Bench. In 1967 he was elevated to the 
Manitoba Court of Appeal, and in 1973 he was appointed 
Justice of the Supreme Court of Canada, replacing Justice 
Emmett Hall who had retired. In 1984, upon the death of Chief 
Justice Laskin, he was appointed Chief Justice of Canada, a 
post he held until his retirement in 1990. 
 
During his time on the Supreme Court, Chief Justice Dickson 
wrote an astonishing number of landmark decisions in all areas 
of the law. His knowledge of the law, his breadth of vision, the 
clarity of his reasoning, and his empathy for the individual all 
combined to ensure that his decisions are some of the most 
influential cases in our jurisprudence. 
 
Although Chief Justice Dickson wrote decisions on a great 
number of legal issues, it is his work on constitutional law that 
is particularly impressive. He was on the Supreme Court during 
two crucial periods in our constitutional history: the debate over 
the patriation of our constitution from Great Britain, and the 
initial years of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms. 
 
In both areas, his sense of balance and fairness stood out. In the 
Patriation Reference, Justice Dickson was one of the majority 
of judges who held that while the federal government had the 
legal power to amend the constitution unilaterally, as a matter 
of constitutional convention, substantial provincial support was 
required. That decision, recognizing the need for 
federal-provincial balance in our Confederation, broke the 
political log-jam and helped lead to the 1981 constitutional 
accord. 
 
Once the Charter was in force, Chief Justice Dickson wrote 
many of the initial decisions that set the framework for the 
implementation of the Charter. His decisions on freedom of 
religion, criminal law, and law in section 1 of the Charter all 
grappled with one of the essential issues of government — the 
appropriate constitutional balance between legitimate 
government action and the basic liberties and freedoms of the 
individual. 
 
Chief Justice Dickson had an abiding belief in the individual, a 
belief that informed many of his judgments. Perhaps one of his 
clearest statements is found in his decision in Regina v. Oakes, 
one of the landmark cases on the presumption of innocence. 
 
The presumption of innocence is one of the cornerstones of our 
criminal law and there are many legalistic ways to analyze it. 
However Chief Justice Dickson summarized it in a much 
simpler, non-legalistic fashion. He stated: 
 

The presumption of innocence confirms our faith in 
humankind; it reflects our belief that individuals are decent 
and law-abiding members of the community until proven 
otherwise. 
 

Brian Dickson served his country well in war at great personal 
cost and in peace to the benefit of us all. He’s survived by his 
wife Barbara Dickson, their four children, and several 

grandchildren. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that all members of this House share in 
expressing condolences to Mrs. Dickson and her family. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Heppner: — To respond to the minister’s statement. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. On behalf 
of the official opposition I would certainly like to add my voice 
in expressing regret at the passing of Chief Justice Dickson. 
Sadly this is the second day in a row that we’ve had to mark the 
passing of a great Saskatchewanian. 
 
Our province has a lot to be proud of, and in particular we 
should be proud of the quality and talent of citizens we have 
produced in Saskatchewan throughout our entire history. Brian 
Dickson rose to lead the highest court in the country, but only 
after serving his country honourably during the Second World 
War. Mr. Dickson served the court with dignity and dedication 
and was involved in several landmark cases. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, on behalf of the entire Saskatchewan Party 
caucus I would like to extend our deepest sympathies to Mr. 
Dickson’s family. His work for his country will live on. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Does the hon. member from Melville 
request leave? 
 
Mr. Osika: — Leave to respond, yes. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, my colleagues. Thank you, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. I too would like to add a voice on behalf of the 
Liberal caucus. And I share on behalf of all of the people of 
Saskatchewan who on this occasion have the opportunity to 
celebrate the life of a great native son. There are truly a great 
number of people that excel, who are our native sons and 
daughters, and this Chief Justice Dickson is someone that I’m 
sure has been and will forever be remembered as a 
highly-respected jurist and with pride as a Saskatchewan native 
son. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Boyd: — With leave, for the introduction of Bill 753 that I 
gave notice of yesterday. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member has requested leave to 
waive rule 45, the notice, and introduce Bill No. 753. Is leave 



2038 Saskatchewan Hansard October 20, 1998 

granted? 
 
Leave not granted. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Before orders of the day. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Move a motion of urgent necessity in 
terms of the subsidies involved in other countries to agriculture 
and the fact that we should have this House put forward a 
motion to be debated in emergency so that we send the message 
to Ottawa. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 46 
 

Farm Finances 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, at the end of my 
remarks, at the end of my remarks, I will be moving a motion 
along the following lines: 
 

That this Assembly urgently calls on the federal 
government to address the issue of recent American and 
European grain subsidies and the resulting low commodity 
prices immediately; work with trading partners to reduce 
subsidies; and in the event no immediate progress is made, 
bridge the current cash shortfall appropriately in order to 
protect Canadian producers. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, I know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know this is 
traditionally private members’ day and I can think of no better 
motion for private members and us all to debate today than this 
one. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I welcome the fact 
that I believe that the opposition members will support this 
motion because I think that they know the urgency and the 
necessity to ensure that the federal government understand the 
cash flow crisis in Saskatchewan today. 
 
The member says, we agree, let’s vote. I think the member from 
Wood River, I think that there’s a little more . . . he might want 
to say a few words just so that we know what he’s thinking 
before we vote. Now if anyone can figure out what he’s 
thinking, then please let us know. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m going to start out by telling a short 
story about the changing farming scene in Saskatchewan. At 
one time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we were . . . simply farming 
meant growing grain and raising animals. That has changed 
dramatically. We had a grains mentality for the most part, and 
that went on for many, many years. 
 
In western Canada, in Saskatchewan, we have diversified into 
many, many products. We’ve got bison, elk, herbs and spices, 
canola, like pulse crops, oilseeds, nutriceuticals, besides all the 

traditional grains that we’ve raised. 
 
In Saskatchewan, we the government have provided support for 
that. In fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in Saskatchewan we, on a per 
capita basis, provide more support than any other province in 
Canada including the federal government. We provide 4.7 times 
the provincial average; 2.2 times as much as Alberta; and 2.4 
times as much as Manitoba; and 4.1 times as much as the 
federal government. So on a per capita basis we do put in a lot 
of money into supporting agriculture in this province. 
 
If you look at other countries, the majority of the support comes 
from the federal government, but in Canada that has been 
slipping dramatically the last little while. So this change from 
the grains mentality has been aided by the support of the 
provincial government. We have put money into research and 
development, into helping farmers find other ways of making a 
living because of the traditional low prices in the traditional 
grains sector. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve had to look at the institutions to provide a 
climate for that to happen. We look at the Canadian Wheat 
Board and made improvements there. We have to look at the 
single-desk selling of hogs and we made changes and 
improvements there. We have to look at other market 
institutions and probably make some changes there. 
 
(1430) 
 
Mr. Speaker, we had in this province at one time 19 million 
acres of wheat. If the member from Wood River would listen, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, he might learn something. Not too many 
years ago, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we had 19 million acres of 
wheat sewn in this province out of about 33 million acres of 
total plantings. Now we are down to 9 million acres of wheat 
and all those other acres, those 10 million acres, have gone into 
other commodities. The farmers have made a tremendous 
adjustment, tremendous adjustment, to try to survive the times 
that we’re in. 
 
In fact 72 per cent of the grain planted is not wheat today. Even 
though we’re going to continue to plant and grow wheat and 
market it because it’s a staple around the world, we have 
learned that we cannot totally rely on that and we have gone 
into other areas. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I talk about farming within the margin at 
every opportunity I can. Farming within the margin means 
exactly what producers are doing. You can’t own and pay for 
the high, high-priced equipment as we used to own equipment 
in the past that was not so high priced. It’s very difficult today 
to buy a $250,000 combine, use it for 25 days of the year, and 
have it sit for the rest of the year; or a tractor and air seeder for 
the cost of it and have it sit for that length of time. 
 
So farmers are being creative. They’re looking at machinery 
co-ops as some have done in this province. They’re working 
together to share machinery. 
 
And governments along with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, have to 
look at some areas like farm tenure of land ownership, all the 
marketing institutions that we have, the ability for people to rent 
machinery from wherever. These things are discussion points 



October 20, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 2039 

and going to be talked about in the near future, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, in order that we might continue this change and 
ensuring that farmers have the support that they need. 
 
But what has changed mostly, Mr. Speaker, is the critical aspect 
of research to markets. We have a growing food processing 
sector in this province that is crucial in determining what the 
markets should be — what the markets will be rather — taking 
that information, feeding it back not only to the farmers who are 
people who will grow the product but right back to research and 
development. We do this so that we can be researching the right 
products to grow, so the farmers can grow it, so the food 
processors can add value to it, and it can be marketed around 
the world. 
 
That is a much more integral connection today than it’s ever 
been, and if we want to survive in this world, we have to do 
that. And it’s a much longer speech than I’ll give it today. It’s 
very integral. 
 
So the question is then, well what is agriculture today? Well 
agriculture today in Saskatchewan is $5 billion worth of sales 
on the farm, off the farm. Agriculture today is $4 billion of 
inputs to grow that $5 billion. The problem is there’s a lot of 
other costs involved there as well that has put us in a situation 
where our net farm income is going to be less than 50 per cent 
of the five-year average. It’s dropping dramatically. 
 
So then when we see what we’ve done, the support that we’ve 
given to agriculture, what farmers have done to try to survive 
and try to diversify and to make sure that their families are fed, 
try to contribute to the communities to try to add population to 
our country, we have a good thing going. 
 
But there’s a problem. Mr. Speaker, the problem is cash flow. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when I was in Ottawa . . . in Ontario this 
summer, at the federal-provincial agriculture meeting, we 
announced after that meeting that we decided that as Canadians, 
as food producers, we wanted to increase our share of the world 
market in agriculture from 3 per cent to 4 per cent. That’s about 
a $15 billion increase or a little more, going from about 22, $23 
billion to $40 billion — a tremendous objective, a great goal. 
 
And we can achieve that. We can achieve that growth if we 
continue to diversify, continue to find better ways, more 
economical ways of farming to make sure that we can farm, try 
to farm within the margin, which is very difficult. We must 
never forget that we’re continuing to try to increase the margin 
by lobbying federal governments, by talking to chemical 
companies to keep their costs in line, and all the other things 
that are going on. 
 
But the fact of the matter remains, if you look at the long-term 
graph of prices for crops — a basket price — and the input 
costs, it goes like this: it goes, a parallel line up and down. As 
the price goes up, the inputs go up; as they come down the 
inputs come down, but the margin remains very, very much the 
same and thinning all the time. So it’s farming within that 
margin is the challenge that we have and will be the success of 
keeping our people in Saskatchewan. 
 
So we’re going to try to increase our share of the world market. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, in order . . . This is a great goal, but in order 
to do that you have to have people producing. In order to have 
people producing you have to make sure that they bridge the 
gaps that are there created by things beyond their control; 
created by things like the federal government in Canada coming 
back after the last round of WTO (World Trade Organization) 
and saying, well we’re going to reduce our subsidy by 36 per 
cent like we said in the WTO. The agreement was basically that 
over six years you had to reduce your subsidies by 36 per cent 
but within those six years you could do . . . they had great 
flexibility. 
 
But our government came back and said, we’re going to do our 
share; we’re going to cut the Crow benefit. They had a 
budgetary problem at the time. We in Saskatchewan were 
concerned about that. I wish they would have done it differently 
had they had to do it. That means a gradual reduction but they 
did it. They did it in 1995. 
 
The other countries that are competitors — Europe and the U.S. 
(United States) — didn’t. Oh yes, the U.S. farm Bill, the fair 
Act, said that they were going to decrease their decoupled 
subsidies over the number of years and they’re doing that 
slowly. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m going to lay out some 
facts today that are going to be very startling I think to many 
people. 
 
I’ll tell you one thing. If there is a silver lining in Governor 
Janklow’s actions of stopping the border . . . or stopping our 
trucks at the border, it is the fact that I think it has been a 
wake-up call for federal governments, for provincial 
governments, for local governments, for farm groups and for 
producers, a wake-up call that says we’d better figure out what 
our neighbours to the south are getting for subsidies compared 
to us and our farmer friends in Europe. 
 
So we’ve gone ahead and done more research. And the federal 
government has to continue to do that and that’s why this 
motion’s put forward. We have to know exactly what they’re 
getting. 
 
If you look at, Mr. Speaker, some of the programs in the U.S., 
the fair Act for example, and this gets a little complicated, but 
under their fair Act they have added today, as a matter of fact, 
today the Congress in the United States is voting on — get this 
— a Bill that was vetoed by the President a week or two ago. 
The Bill had $4.6 billion of money for farmers. The President 
vetoed it, not because it was too little — too much rather — but 
because that it was too little. 
 
The vote in the Congress today is for $5.9 billion of farm aid — 
5.9 billion to U.S. farmers. In Canada we have very, very little, 
if any, subsidy in terms of fair trade. We’ve got the marketing 
assistant loans program in the U.S., the loan deficiency payment 
program, the production flexibility contracts payments, 3 
million going to the market loan payment, 825 million designed 
to cover crop losses over the last five years, 200 million for 
livestock assistance, 1.5 billion earmarked for disaster relief for 
1998 crop losses, a billion to Texas, 400 million to North 
Dakota, 370 million to Iowa, 320 million to Minnesota, all from 
the national treasury of the United States — all of it. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the result of this . . . Just let me put this in 



2040 Saskatchewan Hansard October 20, 1998 

a picture. And I’ll get to the European subsidies in a minute. 
The result of the Canadian government knocking out the $320 
million of assistance through a Crow benefit that would’ve been 
in Saskatchewan this year, in fact there’s been a billion dollars 
taken out of our economy because of that. As I said I’m not 
whining, because we’re diversifying and we will someday fill 
that, but in order to fill it we need the people. 
 
So you’ve got that loss coupled by subsidies from the 
Europeans and the U.S. dropping the international price, putting 
Canadians in a squeeze. I’ll describe that squeeze to you, Mr. 
Speaker, like this. I have here the OECD (Organization for 
Economic Co-operation and Development) 1997 crop 
comparisons of export subsidies. I’ll read them out for the 
record. This is 1997 crop subsidies as investigated by the 
OECD. 
 
And it found the level of producer subsidies on wheat and 
barley as a percentage of price — and oil seeds rather — as a 
percentage of price as this: in Canada the subsidies compared to 
price in wheat were 10 per cent, in the United States 32 per 
cent, in Europe 36 per cent. 
 
Other grains, the subsidies as compared to a percentage of price 
in Canada was 7 per cent — other grains, that’s barley, oats and 
the like — in the U.S. 28 per cent, and the European community 
45 per cent. 
 
In oilseeds, producer subsidies on oilseeds as a percentage of 
price are in Canada 10 per cent, the U.S. 28 per cent, and the 
European community 48 per cent. 
 
And you wonder why, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you wonder why 
we see the farmers in Saskatchewan, the producers, the farm 
organizations and governments in western Canada especially, 
calling upon their federal government to make some action. 
 
I always describe it to producers like this. If somebody says, 
well why don’t you do something, Mr. Minister of Agriculture 
of Saskatchewan, why don’t you do something; I say, we put on 
a per capita basis more than anybody else. But I’ll tell you 
something; think about it. 
 
If we were to make a payment — if we could — out of 
Saskatchewan, in a traditional manner on a cultivated-acre 
basis, there’s 50 million cultivated acres in Saskatchewan; $2 
an acre is a hundred million dollars. Anybody that can read 
knows what the budget surplus is this year because of the debt 
that we have and because of the demands in education and 
highways and health care and everything else — a hundred 
million dollars when we’ve got a small surplus. 
 
And you know what $2 an acre means — and all the producers 
know this — you know what $2 an acre means as far as getting 
you over the hump goes? I’m sorry, not very much. That’s the 
dilemma we’re in in Saskatchewan. And I’m sure the members 
opposite will stand up and say, well you do something. Well 
we’re partners in everything as far as Crop Insurance and NISA, 
and I don’t expect that’ll change. 
 
But I’ll tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it was nobody — nobody 
— in this government and few producers who asked the federal 
government to take away the Crow benefit the way they did. It 

was a unilateral Liberal decision in Ottawa that was started by 
the Tories. 
 
And I’m saying today, Mr. Speaker, that the federal government 
has to do a number of things. Number one, it has to show — 
and this is the catch — this the Governor Janklow thank you. 
The Government of Canada has to do the analysis even better 
than was done here, and we’re continuing to do it, to show the 
difference in subsidies between Canada, the U.S., and Europe. 
They have the nerve to come forward and say, here’s the 
comparison. And then have the responsibility to do something 
about it. 
 
If this were a result of actions in local government or provincial 
governments in Canada, then I would say, yes, we are part of 
the solution. And I always say we always contribute to the 
solution. 
 
But in this particular case I’ll guarantee you, if you think of it 
this way, in 1980 compared to today’s basket of prices: wheat is 
down 23 per cent over the five-year average; durum’s down 30 
per cent over the five-year average; barley’s down about 15 per 
cent over the five-year average; canola’s down only a few per 
cent, 3 or 4 or 8 per cent; flax is down a couple of per cent; and 
mustard’s down 1 per cent, not very much. But you take that 
basket of prices, compared to the 1980s when we went through 
the last major exodus, there’s not that much difference. 
 
Input costs have risen, yes; but this year fertilizer went down 7 
per cent, fuel went down 2 per cent, chemicals increased 2 per 
cent on average. But so the input costs have gone up but they 
haven’t been the sole contributing factor. But you know what 
the difference is, Mr. Deputy Speaker? The difference is $320 
million of transportation that we pay now that we didn’t pay a 
few years ago. If we had those dollars in Saskatchewan, I’ll 
guarantee you we wouldn’t be debating this issue today. 
 
So where does the responsibility lie in terms of making sure that 
we have producers for all the good reasons and all the good 
things that are happening in this province? Where does the 
responsibility lie to make sure that we have a gap-bridging 
mechanism to ensure that we have producers when the 
commodity prices come back out of this? And it’s all 
commodities. Pork is down, livestock is down marginally — or 
beef cow rather — and grains, like I say, down. 
 
(1445) 
 
But it’s the transportation costs, 140 per cent increase over the 
ten-year average that’s really killing us today. So what we see is 
time lags and issues change but the results of decisions made in 
Ottawa a number of years ago are really, really hurting today. 
 
And so what happens in the U.S.? Oh, they want to play this 
game. Well the Wheat Board’s a subsidy, you’ve got to count it. 
The Wheat Board’s been challenged seven times by the U.S. in 
terms of subsidies and seven times they’ve been denied by the 
international panels judging them — seven times. 
 
I talked to the U.S. — in fact I did a Kansas City radio program 
not too long ago, a phone-in — they were saying, well you got 
this transportation subsidy. I said, no we don’t anymore, it’s 
gone. Oh yes, you do. 



October 20, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 2041 

It’s incumbent upon the federal government to explain to their 
counterparts. It’s incumbent upon us as provincial governments 
to explain to the States and cross those lines. It’s incumbent 
upon producers and farm organizations to talk to their 
counterparts in the U.S. and explain in good, true, fact what the 
situation is. 
 
And when we do this — and this is why this motion, Mr. 
Speaker, is doing a number of things — first of all, we’re 
asking to go to the Europeans and Americans and say you have 
to stop this craziness. And if that doesn’t happen, then they 
have to clearly identify the difference in supports and make sure 
that we have appropriate support for our farmers in Canada. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I can go on about this for a long time 
because it’s a very compassionate subject for me. But I know 
other members want to speak, and so I want to end in a few 
minutes by reading the motion. 
 
I’ve got a lot of information here, but one of the things, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, is the Europeans’ grain area payment. Do you 
know what the support payment for grains was in Europe? — 
$175 an acre, Canadian — $175 an acre, Canadian. This is why 
we have to . . . Do you know what durum was? — $307 an acre. 
 
These are the things that the federal government has to bring 
forward, be honest — bring forward, identify, talk to provinces 
and farm organizations and farmers and producers and say look 
it, what are we going to do about this? And I think that we can 
come to a solution. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to end by saying that in 
Saskatchewan we have a tremendous opportunity. We have 
producers who have survived many, many things. Some have 
been lost over the time, every downswing we lose a few, and I 
expect, unfortunately, this will be similar. It can be helped and 
buoyed — they can be helped and buoyed though by some 
government in Ottawa doing their job. All of us will be there to 
support in whatever way we can do it. 
 
But identifying the problem is key. So this Bill says, Mr. 
Speaker, talk to your counterparts in Europe and the U.S. for 
immediate action on trade. If they don’t respond, then put in 
place a gap-bridging mechanism that will allow our producers 
to be there when the commodity prices come back up. If we do 
that, Mr. Speaker, if we stand in our places today and all of us 
send that similar message, I think we can make a difference. 
 
I’ll tell you one thing in closing. I’ve got to know Lyle 
Vanclief, the federal Minister of Agriculture quite well over his 
term in office, and I’ll tell you I have a lot of respect for the 
man. He’s a farmer and he understands when I talk about farm 
cash flow problems. He understands. I think he has to go to his 
Treasury and help them understand too. So the light of the 
tunnel is we have someone we can talk to. That’s a big plus. We 
have someone that understands. 
 
And I think if we all pull together that we can today send a 
message to Ottawa that will help the farmers of this province be 
equal or almost equal to those farmers in the United States and 
Europe. 
 
Because if we don’t, I know and you know, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, what will happen. Unfortunately we will lose more 
farmers. And our objective to try to create rural population, 
increase rural population through diversification, through 
value-added processing, is working. But we have to have 
producers there to provide the raw product so we can add value 
to it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I urge everyone to support this motion and I 
move, seconded by the member for Redberry: 
 

That this Assembly urgently calls on the federal 
government to address the issue of recent American and 
European grain subsidies and the resulting low commodity 
prices immediately; work with our trading partners to 
reduce subsidies; and in the event no immediate progress is 
made, bridge the current cash shortfall appropriately in 
order to protect Canadian producers. 
 

I so move. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Jess: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I am pleased to 
rise to second this very important motion. And I want to 
indicate my support for this motion today. Personally I started 
farming when I crawled on my tractor in 1959 and actively 
farmed until the tractor crawled on me in 1991. 
 
As a farmer in the Parkland region, I have personally dealt with 
many tough situations over my farming years, but I’m not sure 
that it has ever been any tougher than right now. And I have 
two sons that are attempting to become established in the 
farming industry. 
 
We as farmers were informed that our federal government had 
negotiated deals to protect us from the likes of European and 
U.S. subsidy wars. Such is not the case, and because of that 
unsuccessful effort, virtually every farmer in this country is in a 
loss position. Add to that the drought situation that impacted in 
some of our areas, and we have a very major problem. Today 
we are calling on Ottawa to accept some responsibility and to 
assist our farmers through a tough situation that is not of their 
making. 
 
I want to take this opportunity to also talk briefly about the 
transportation dilemma. We as farmers find ourselves in a tough 
situation. As a landlocked region of this country, our province 
is vulnerable to many problems other than commodity prices. 
 
We as provincial governments must work with our federal 
representatives to demand that Ottawa undertake programs to 
support our citizens, particularly our farmers, as we face unfair 
trade subsidies from the U.S. and Europe. 
 
I want to take this opportunity to discuss transportation as it 
impacts on us in this province. 
 
Recently I represented the Minister of Highways and 
Transportation at a grain transportation seminar in Glaslyn. I 
was pleased with the minister’s interest in the problems of 
farmers in my part of the province. Many options are being 
considered but the facts of the matter are quite simple. 
 



2042 Saskatchewan Hansard October 20, 1998 

Ottawa has abdicated their responsibility by privatizing CN 
(Canadian National) and turning the power to redraw the map 
of rural Canada over to the railways. They can do it and they are 
doing it with the co-operation of the grain companies. This is an 
example of how the Tories and now the Liberals rape and 
plunder rural communities. 
 
We as a provincial government, and including the rural 
municipalities, will not bear the costs because we cannot bear 
the cost to provide an adequate road network to replace that rail 
system. 
 
Over 130 years ago the leaders of this country had vision 
enough to realize that in order for this country to exist and to 
prosper, government had to provide a national transportation 
system, a system paid for by general revenue to service all 
citizens across the entire nation for the good of us all. 
 
With just a little look back at history of the great free enterprise 
system as it impacts on rail transportation. First of all the CP 
(Canadian Pacific) was built by the taxpayer, then turned over 
to private owners complete with land grants and coal deposits. 
We all know that success story was very well received by the 
corporate elite. Or as Tommy used to say: the system works on 
the basis of survival of the slickest. 
 
Besides CP success, some small private lines got in financial 
trouble. Well the Liberals and the Tories of the day bought 
them out so that the poor little capitalists would not be hurt. 
That is how we had a national rail system. One public; one 
private. Then, and this time it was the Liberals, the government 
placed the CN on the Toronto Stock Exchange— privatized. So 
now we have railways for profit only. 
 
Canada and the U.S. are the only two developed nations in the 
entire world that tolerate private enterprise in anything as 
important to their nation’s lifeline as their transportation 
system. 
 
Over the years, we as the taxpayers have had the privilege of 
paying the bill to upgrade the rail lines as well as to buy the 
rolling stock. But now we must not interfere with free 
enterprise, so we have a government that freely turns over what 
we have bought and paid for to some huge corporations. I guess 
that’s where the free part comes in. 
 
Now we hear the term “rail rationalization,” which means shut 
down lines, close elevators, build on the main lines, destroy 
communities, wreck roads, and then hand the bill to 
Saskatchewan people. I have no idea what is rational about that. 
 
I want to make a prediction — before this country is 150 years 
old, that some government will come up with a brilliant idea, a 
new idea that the best way to move grain is by rail, and what 
would really work well is a national rail system bought and paid 
for by the taxpayers. Too bad our governments hadn’t realized a 
good thing when we had it. 
 
Before I leave this subject, I want to say a few things about the 
new fragmented system that some point to with great pride as a 
newly formed success called short-line railways. There may be 
a place for them and no doubt there is, but not as long as the CN 
and the CP control the main lines. Our own local town has not 

been served properly by CN in the last 50 years; why would it 
be served better by them if we owned it locally? 
 
Just consider two facts. The elevator companies will not invest 
on such insecure lines and the CN as well as the CP know full 
well that they will get the grain on the main line in the end. The 
big corporations win again. Or as the late John F. Kennedy 
stated so many years ago, that the farmer is the only one who 
takes what he’s offered, pays what he’s asked, and pays the 
freight on it both ways. 
 
(1500) 
 
Nothing seems to have changed. Our provincial government 
and our federal members must lobby Ottawa for some control 
of input costs or some fair trading practices as well as some 
compensation for transportation. 
 
1998 Saskatchewan net farm income is projected to be zero. 
The last number of years it has averaged around $500 million 
net. Just think what the one item, the Crow benefit, meant — 
300 to $400 million per year. 
 
I know, I know you’ve heard it all before — farmers are never 
satisfied. In fact I had a guy tell me the other day that the 
difference between a 747 jet engine and a farmer is that the jet 
engine quits whining when it lands in Hawaii. 
 
Well my farmers aren’t whiners, but thanks to Ottawa’s lack of 
action, many may not survive. 
 
Well not just the farming industry but the whole economy is 
affected by the Asian flu as our export demand drops, and what 
do we hear from the right-wing governments is more free trade, 
less restrictions, hands off, let the market system work. But it 
doesn’t seem to be working all that well for business, let alone 
government, or the lowly worker. 
 
We need the government in Ottawa to stand up for us. And I 
will now take my seat to give others the opportunity to speak on 
this very important matter. Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m 
pleased to be able to stand today to speak to this emergency 
motion that we actually originated first thing this morning. And 
the agri minister saw it, realized there must be a problem in 
agriculture, and called for the same motion. 
 
I agree with some of what the past speakers have said, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, but I’d like to quote some of the things that 
our ag minister has said in the past week. And I go on to quote, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. He says that: 
 

If I wanted to be totally political and be popular, I’d just 
say, “Ottawa, we need fill-in-the-blank dollars.” That 
would be easy for me to do. (And) I’m not sure that . . . 
would be . . . responsible thing to do until we know exactly 
what’s going on in the province. 

 
The last spring session, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ve told this 



October 20, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 2043 

government and the ag minister that — on a number of 
occasions — that there is problems starting back in agriculture 
as we’ve saw in the past. The only thing this time they could be 
a lot worse. 
 
The ag minister goes on to say, and I quote: 
 

“We’re caught in the squeeze. We’ve been the good guys 
on the block. We’ve cut our subsidy.” 

 
Well he’s very definitely right there. It seems like we’re the 
only country in the world that’s forgot about agriculture and our 
farmers; everybody else still seems to be looking after theirs. 
 
He goes on to also say: 
 

If the meltdown spreads to South America Upshall said, 
Saskatchewan’s pork industry could be hit especially hard. 
 
“By this fall, we’re going to have capacity to produce two 
million hogs a year. A year-and-a-half ago we were 
producing a million hogs a year. 
 
“We may have to eat our way out of that.” (which is an 
impossibility Mr. Speaker). 

 
(Mr.) Upshall added (that) “there is optimism because 
things go in cycles. We always see the cycles.” ( Pork . . . 
comes up pork goes down). 

 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government should have known 
when they got behind the pork promotion into the big, big pig 
barns that hogs are probably the most radical market we ever 
see in this province. And they should have known that we’re 
going to go through highs and lows before they promoted the 
expansion at such a speed. They should have known that we 
were going to have troubles down the road, possibly not have 
known though that they would come this quick. 
 
I should mention too that we have noticed that Quebec has 
stood behind their farmers to the tune of $30 million; our 
government hasn’t even really said: is there a problem here. 
 
I’d like to touch on the federal government a number of times, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I’d like to talk about the funding that 
the federal government has cut for agriculture, just in 
agriculture transfers or agriculture programs. 
 
In the ’90s alone the federal government — early ’90s — were 
putting $400 million into agriculture programs. And at this time 
according to the Provincial Auditor they’re putting $50 million. 
That shows how they’ve downloaded on Saskatchewan farmers. 
And doing that, we have to remember, Mr. Deputy Speaker — 
and I think this number probably still holds true — that 45 out 
of every hundred jobs in Saskatchewan works off of agriculture. 
Agriculture is still the backbone of the Saskatchewan economy 
and no one seems to want to acknowledge that any more. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to touch on NISA because that’s 
one of the programs that farmers do have out there and I feel 
it’s a good program if you can afford to be part of it. And if you 
can’t, it doesn’t do you a whole lot of good. 
 

Some things that have happened in NISA this summer though I 
think should be brought to light. And I have contacted Mr. 
Vanclief about the exact thing because what they have said now 
that freight is not an expense; it’s an after sales cost so you 
cannot show it towards your expenses and income so it cannot 
be shown and cannot be contributed to accordingly. 
 
So what they have done . . . and I believe some bureaucrat in his 
wisdom has said, we’ll penalize these people 20 per cent until 
they give us the actual facts. So they sent out a questionnaire. 
 
Now if you were late filling out the questionnaire they took 
over 20 per cent of your account and who knows when they’re 
going to return it to you. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as we 
know many NISA accounts have thousands and thousands of 
dollars in them and many farmers need that money this fall or 
next spring and these people are sitting on 20 per cent until they 
get the bureaucracy out of the way. 
 
Another thing I think we’ve found out lately, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is that the federal auditor is now considering removing 
the interest-free cash advance. This isn’t the first time we’ve 
heard some person from down East decide that we don’t need 
the interest-free cash advance, can’t see any reason for it, 
doesn’t know why we want it. 
 
It’s the one thing that we have here to help our farmers get 
through until they can actually move their grain. And it’s really 
not a loan; it’s an advance on our grain that we supply and sell. 
As soon as we sell our grain, the cash advance is returned. It’s a 
program that Saskatchewan farmers rely on, have to have to 
survive. 
 
And it scares me when we get some high-powered bureaucrat 
saying that we don’t need something like the cash advance, and 
probably has never so much as seen a barn, a farm, a pig, a cow, 
or anything else, and is dictating what we need and what’s good 
for us out here. 
 
I would hope that the federal government, especially Mr. 
Vanclief and possibly Mr. Goodale — if he’s still down there, 
we haven’t heard of him for a while — would send a message 
that this is not going to be put up with and the cash advance, 
interest-free cash advance will not be removed. 
 
I’d like to touch on crop insurance a little bit, Mr. Minister, too 
and, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and say that I still believe there’s 
probably a third — and I’m sure you can correct me if I’m 
wrong — but a third of farmers do not carry crop insurance. 
And I think a number of the reasons are very plain and simple. 
They feel for the cost of the premium for what the coverage 
they have, it’s just not affordable. 
 
Now had this spring’s drought stayed with us for even another 
two or three weeks and the heat had have came, we would have 
saw a disaster in this province and farmers going down like we 
have never seen them before. So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think 
crop insurance is another area, even though it has been 
improved. 
 
I think we could maybe even look at the Manitoba Crop 
Insurance and take maybe some hints from theirs. I believe, and 
I could be corrected on this, but I believe the first 50 per cent is 



2044 Saskatchewan Hansard October 20, 1998 

free and then you buy it accordingly from there on. 
 
It might be one avenue, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we can get all 
our farmers to some degree insured, because there’s a disaster 
coming. We know there always is. It’s a cycle no different than 
the pig cycle. We have highs and lows. And what happens if we 
get caught with approximately a third of our farmers with 
absolutely no insurance? 
 
I’d like to just touch for a minute on, and we have talked about 
it in question period with the minister, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 
Crown leases. And as we all know, they went up 25 per cent 
this year. I believe that was probably the worst time that we 
could see an increase in any of our costs that we have again no 
control over. 
 
And I would hope that the minister, as he had told us in the 
spring that it works off a formula, so as prices have gone down 
now, I hope that same formula will return us to the prices they 
were at before or possibly even lower. And today he had told us 
in question period that they are studying it. I would hope we 
would get an answer and the farmers out there will get an 
answer on that. And a little good news would be very welcomed 
out there, yes. 
 
I’d also like to talk about our road system which is very close to 
the problems in agriculture right now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 
I think this is a little bit to do with both levels of government. 
But I’d like to start with the federal government, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and I’d like to go by some numbers. And we’ve talked 
about these before but I think they are somewhat amazing. 
 
These numbers come right from Transport Canada and it shows 
the breakdown of how much the federal government puts into 
our highway system and into roads in each province: 
Newfoundland, $671 million is their forecast for a five- to 
six-year period; P.E.I. (Prince Edward Island), $42 million, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and that does not include the bridge in Prince 
Edward Island; Nova Scotia, $253 million; New Brunswick, 
$630 million; Quebec, $447 million. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we get out of eastern Canada and 
we come to Ontario: $96 million; Manitoba, 35 million; 
Saskatchewan, 35 million; Alberta, 30 million; B.C. (British 
Columbia), 30 million. 
 
I can’t believe these numbers, Mr. Deputy Speaker. When you 
look at what . . . Take for an example what Newfoundland, a 
little province like that, gets for their highway system and look 
at the measly $35 million over that six- or seven-year period 
that Saskatchewan is going to get from the federal government 
for our roads, when we have the most roads in this country. 
 
It’s totally unacceptable. And where are people like Ralph 
Goodale who should be sticking up for us with the federal 
government and is doing absolutely nothing. I would hope Mr. 
Goodale does not expect to get sent down there anymore. I’m 
sure the farming community alone will be enough to put him in 
retirement. 
 
I think another area that the provincial government has a lot of 
input that’s hurt farmers is the downloading on municipalities. 
What has happened —farmers, municipalities have had to raise 

their mill rates and pass it on to the farmers directly. And it 
doesn’t stop there because the downloading on education is just 
another avenue that’s been dumped onto our farmers. 
 
You’ve taken funding out of education from 60 per cent 
government to 40 per cent municipal to reverse; 40 per cent 
government and 60 per cent municipal and they’ve had nowhere 
to pass it on but to our farmers. So our taxes in some cases have 
almost doubled. It’s adding to the problems that farmers are 
facing in this cash crunch this fall. And it’s a cash-flow problem 
but that’s not the only problem out there, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
We have low grain prices; livestock prices are not at an all-time 
low, but they certainly are not at an all-time high. Hog prices 
are in the tank. Many producers that I’ve talked to in the last 
month are losing from 20 to $40 per head; of every finished hog 
they sell, they’re losing 20 to $40. And I’ve talked to some of 
the farmers, the pig farmers out there, big and little; and I 
believe it was one of the farmers out there who farms with his 
dad that was the fourth biggest hog producer in this province 
that said they probably will weather the storm. They’re big 
enough, they could get through it. But he said he knows, and 
has had many good friends that are smaller producers, that will 
not survive the winter unless hog prices improve. 
 
And I believe you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this 
government is a wee bit responsible for that. Because when the 
Sask Wheat Pool said that we want to get into hogs, we want to 
remove SPI, let’s promote the hog industry, they jumped in 
with all fours — hands, feet, everything. We pushed the hog 
industry, double production. And oh, oh, look what happened! 
The bottom fell out and that’s happened before. When 
government gets into private business, they usually see the best 
hog producers going down. 
 
(1515) 
 
The problem out there, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I’m getting it 
from RMs (rural municipality) already where tax arrears are 
rising. My local RM, where the highest I believe tax arrears 
have ever been were 21 per cent, are at present day 28 per cent 
and climbing. And that’s another indication of the shortfall in 
cash and the problem in agriculture. 
 
I think what we’re going to see and I believe you would agree 
with me, Mr. Minister, that unless the federal government gets 
on the ball, lobbies all over around this world and tries to stop 
the ridiculous subsidies that the Europeans are putting on and 
the Americans, that we’re going to see a whole new round of 
foreclosures. We’re going to lose a whole new round of 
farmers, and actually on top of that, even the fellows that can 
carry through are going to be in a lot worse debt situation than 
they even were before. 
 
I’ve sat on RM councils, Mr. Minister, and I’m sure you’ve 
talked to people that have, and it’s not a nice thing to have to do 
is foreclose on one of your own, apply for title to land. It is one 
of the hardest things that I’ve ever done, when you have to do 
that to one of your neighbours. And it’s no different than any 
lending institution, no different than anything you deal where 
you deal with people and have to be responsible for public 
money. At some point you can’t let it keep going; you have to 
apply for title. 



October 20, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 2045 

And I’m sure as you know and I know, but it’s coming back 
where we’re going to get into another round of that, and it’s a 
very, very poor feeling for the councillor, the reeve, and so on. 
So you can just imagine how the poor guy feels that they’re 
taking his land. It might be third generation land, paid for once 
probably, and it’s going down the drain. 
 
I think another thing that’s adding, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to our 
problem, is native land claim settlements and the way the taxes 
are going to work from it. And I’m sure you’re very aware of 
this, Mr. Minister. And I think you would agree with me on 
this, it’s just another problem that many RMs and many farmers 
are seeing out there. And I have RMs in my constituency that 
have as high as 60 quarters of land that have been settled out 
with native land claims. 
 
And they’re honouring claims from years ago, and I guess they 
have to be honoured, but then the federal government should 
have the intestinal fortitude if they’re honouring these claims, to 
honour the grant in lieu of taxes along with them as they did the 
other claims. The first set of claims they gave 22 times in lieu, 
and all of a sudden in their wisdom say no, four to five will be 
adequate. 
 
And I can’t understand this, but here we go again. We’re having 
people from eastern Canada deciding what’s good for us, and 
we hear absolutely nothing out of our own representatives . . . 
I’m sorry, representative, from Saskatchewan. Once again Mr. 
Goodale is quiet. 
 
So as these native land claims add to the burden of farmers out 
there, the few farmers that are left to pay taxes are going to be 
asked to pay more. 
 
I’d just like to touch on the Wheat Board for a minute, Mr. 
Minister, and I know we definitely don’t agree on this issue. 
The Wheat Board is actually adding, I believe, to our woes 
when they come out with ridiculous initial prices like 2 bucks 
for wheat; at my local point, 68 cents for barley. 
 
That 68 cents that the Wheat Board announces for barley sends 
a message to everybody in western Canada, feedlots included, 
what will we have to pay for barley this year? Well the Wheat 
Board’s not very optimistic — 68 cents. And yet on the open 
market right now, barley is not a fantastic price, but I believe in 
some areas about a buck sixty. 
 
Well that leaves a whole dollar on the table. So they’ve not only 
left the message out there that barley is going to be a terrible 
price all year, they’ve kept a buck of our money. And yet you 
people sit there and say no, there’s no room for improvement in 
the Canadian Wheat Board. 
 
Well I think it’s time the Wheat Board had a little competition 
and we wouldn’t see garbage like this coming out of them. We 
would see just how efficient they could become. At present time 
we have no idea is the Wheat Board efficient, because they’re 
competing with no one. 
 
And I found it interesting, Mr. Minister, and Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, when we check just to see how big the Wheat Board 
is. And we find that a year ago the Wheat Board had 500 
employees. Well now, think about that for a minute. What 

would those 500 employees do this fall? They’re not moving 
wheat. We’re told that very little wheat will move until New 
Year’s. Absolutely nobody is selling them barley at 68 cents, 
unless they’re in need of medicare — the psychiatric kind. So 
what would 500 people do? 
 
And yet you’re telling us that the Canadian Wheat Board is very 
efficient, but it takes 500 people to do absolutely nothing. Well, 
I shouldn’t say that. They give us an increase in our last year’s 
initial price, I believe of $8. So it will take 500 people to work 
out that little increase, send us our allowance for what? — the 
third, fourth, fifth time this year. Like little kids, we’re going to 
get a little bit of pawn to make us happy. 
 
I think the biggest thing the Wheat Board needs is competition, 
Mr. Minister. The payroll costs, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of those 
500 employees is $26 million. That’s not administrative costs 
alone. That is just employee costs and benefits. That’s $26 
million that comes our of our pools before we get our final 
payment. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I think you’ve got the message from us, I 
think especially from myself, where I feel there is room for 
improvement. And I think there is things that you could do, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
I agree the biggest thing you have to do, and we would hope 
you would do, is lobby hard on the federal government, Mr. 
Vanclief, the Premier’s friend; Mr. Chrétien. Let’s call in some 
debts that he owes the Premier, and maybe we’ll get somewhere 
for a change. 
 
So there’s things that you can do, Mr. Minister. The Crown 
leases was one example; high taxes is another problem that 
farmers, no different than anyone else, are trying to abide with 
and pay. Lower taxes would help them. Lower fuel taxes would 
certainly help farmers and all business. 
 
You could quit downloading on RMs and all municipalities. In 
fact it would be nice if you even started to return some of the 
money you’ve taken from them since you’ve come to power in 
1991. 
 
But you know, an example of what you could do as a province 
is just a couple of states south when we see what the governor 
of South Dakota did. And yes, he was playing politics. But look 
at the attention he got the farmers in South and North Dakota. 
 
And they’re no different than our farmers; they’re going 
through exactly the same things we are. And I think you would 
agree, Mr. Minister, he brought to light some of their problems 
and it looks like he’s getting some action. 
 
And I guess what we’re calling on you to do, if you have to play 
politics, do anything you have to — cause a fuss, get the federal 
government’s attention, and please let’s start addressing this 
problem now, not a year from now when it’s far too late for 
many of our farmers. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



2046 Saskatchewan Hansard October 20, 1998 

Ms. Murrell: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, it gives me great 
pleasure to join in this debate and to speak in favour of the 
motion. 
 
I’d like to raise some points that are worth noting. The fact that 
there are 56,995 farms in the province of Saskatchewan in 
1996. The fact that the average age of a farmer in Saskatchewan 
today is 49 years old. And the fact that the Saskatchewan Wheat 
Pool is closing 235 elevators in rural Saskatchewan in the 
upcoming year. 
 
What does the future hold for rural Saskatchewan? Is there a 
future for rural Saskatchewan? And are we prepared for our 
future? 
 
I’m a farmer’s wife and a partner. I have experienced 30 years 
in rural Saskatchewan watching the changes, enjoying the good 
years, and worrying through the bad years. 1998 is a year of 
extreme stress. The north-west part of the province has 
experienced severe drought in many areas. Since last fall the 
average rainfall there was 3 to 4 inches. And this did not bode 
well for crops nor pastures. 
 
My husband fed cows until the middle of May, and in late 
September started to do so again. The pastures are bare and the 
water source is dry. Sloughs that had water in the ’30s are 
empty. And the crops that were planted with such high hopes — 
canola averaging 8 to 15 bushels; wheat was number one, high 
protein but poor yield; peas, 25 to 40 bushels per acre and little 
market value. 
 
Rail line abandonment, elevator closures, school closures, farm 
sales, bankrupt businesses, smaller tax base, vacant 
communities. How do you remain optimistic when you are so 
dependent on the weather. 
 
When CN and CP rail informed the public that rail lines were 
going to be abandoned, producers, government, and marketing 
companies began to look for solutions — solutions that would 
help to keep rural Saskatchewan viable. Discussions regarding 
short-lines and highways have been taking place the past four 
years and changes are being implemented. 
 
For those of you who travelled throughout Saskatchewan this 
summer, you may have experienced highway construction. For 
example, Highway 21 is being upgraded to accommodate heavy 
grain traffic to the new terminals in Unity. 
 
Terminals are being built in targeted centres to handle grain 
from a larger trading area. Unity elevator used to handle about 
100,000 tonnes of grain. Now the Sask Wheat Pool terminal 
and the north-west terminal handle about 400,000 tonnes of 
grain. 
 
Yes, Sask Wheat Pool phasing out more than 200 elevators will 
be devastating to some rural communities, but let’s not forget 
that when our forefathers settled in the rural areas they had to be 
creative and innovative to survive, and that is exactly what 
these communities are doing now. 
 
The closure of Sask Wheat Pool has opened the doors for 
competitors, and Louis Dreyfus Canada recently announced 
plans to construct a large capacity elevator in Wilkie. 

And all is not gloom and doom in the livestock industry. The 
marketplace is brimming with emu, elk, buffalo, hogs, and 
cattle. Hog production has increased, providing jobs for our 
young people in our rural areas. 
 
We have also seen growth in the beef industry which is 
increasing interest in feedlot operations. Since we lost the 
annual 300 million Crow benefit, we as producers must be as 
cost-effective as possible and use our grains to feed our stock, 
our hogs, our beef, our chickens, our elk. 
 
I do believe the Saskatchewan prairies will once again see 
buffalo grazing in large groups. Factories for processing are 
developing. The Battlefords are seriously being considered for 
this venture from North Dakota, and what better place for it. We 
have the buffalo, we have the space, and we have the labour. 
 
I had the opportunity to tour an emu ranch in Luseland this 
summer with our friend across the floor. Eggs were being 
incubated, chickens were being raised, and the oil and meat is 
being marketed. 
 
Maverick Tannery in Unity opened a store several years ago. 
This business now tans ostrich, bears, bison, deer, elk, moose, 
and coyote hides. A group of entrepreneurs in Wilkie are soon 
to open a business that is a plus for elk producers. 
 
People are venturing into new crops to make their land viable. 
The community of Lucky Lake has seen this happen. Potatoes 
are being grown for export. Last year the people of Lucky Lake 
and Outlook area and the Lake Diefenbaker Potato Corporation 
built a fresh-pack plant in Lucky Lake. 
 
There’s construction for a new flaking and dehydration plant 
began this spring, creating 125 full-time jobs and 100 seasonal 
jobs for the Lucky Lake, Beechy, and Outlook areas. 
 
Fifty-eight hundred acres of seeded potatoes were grown this 
spring with planned expansion to 8,000 seeded acres by the year 
2000. And in addition, the company plans to create a trucking 
division to transport its products to the north-western United 
States. 
 
DELSA Manufacturing of Delisle is providing jobs for people 
in this area. Here potato and cabbages are being processed for 
Kentucky Fried Chicken franchises. Coleslaw and potato salad 
by the bucket. Local products are being purchased here first, 
then from Manitoba and Alberta. The potential for growers is 
increasing, as Saskatchewan doesn’t grow enough to meet their 
demand. 
 
Echinacea is being grown in small quantities but there are more 
farmers getting interested. It is a high investment crop but it 
also has a high return. At one time it was grown for an Asian 
market, but now North America is becoming more 
knowledgeable about its use. And our farmers are 
experimenting in spices such as dill and caraway. These crops 
have an unlimited market, but once again are very dependent on 
the weather. 
 
Which takes us back to our future. I believe that there will be 
fewer farms in Saskatchewan and throughout Canada. Gone are 
the large families and the half-section farms. 



October 20, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 2047 

Big is not always better, but it is the future and it is driven by 
the marketplace and the input costs. I believe the average age of 
a farmer will decrease because of the marketplace. Who but the 
very young will be adventurous and be willing to experiment 
with new crops and high-tech machinery. 
 
What the future holds for rural Saskatchewan depends on us. If 
we want to see our communities survive and grow, we must be 
willing to make changes and to accept change. If we grow 
crops, then we must find a way to process it and encourage 
more . . . (inaudible) . . . and mavericks to open their doors so 
that we ship finished products to waiting markets. Let us be 
adventurous and show our pioneering spirit. Where there is a 
will, there is a way. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, farmers today face some very 
difficult and outside pressures. They can and must be addressed 
at the national level. Farm net income levels continue to decline 
in Canada while Europe and U.S. recognize the importance of 
agriculture. 
 
Let us not forget that Europeans have been hungry and will 
continue to protect their farmers so that they never experience 
this threat again. The U.S. farmers protest our trucks crossing 
the border. Elections are in the near future and the senators 
respond with emergency aid. 
 
(1530) 
 
We farmers have been inventive. We have diversified and we 
have adopted new ideas into our daily living. However, we 
cannot compete with the subsidies that European and American 
farmers enjoy. They do need assistance on the national scene if 
they are to survive their period of low commodity prices and 
high input costs. 
 
But we as farmers and producers have responded to the 
changing marketplace and the global influences. Our provincial 
government has worked to make NISA more responsive and to 
reduce crop insurance premiums and we will continue to do so. 
 
But Saskatchewan, with its population of 1 million, cannot 
afford to compete with European and American subsidies. We 
need our federal government to be proactive, to show their 
commitment to Canadian farmers and to the West. When there 
is an opportunity at the World Trade Organization negotiations, 
let us hope they don’t forget the reality of Saskatchewan. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to rise here today and join in the debate on the 
difficulties facing farmers in this province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this NDP government is once again 
standing up here today claiming to speak for Saskatchewan 
people. This time it’s farmers. But as always, I have to question 
their sincerity. 
 
That Saskatchewan farmers are facing difficulty is not a matter 
with which anyone would take issue. Indications are that 
Saskatchewan farm income will drop dramatically compared 
with the five-year average as the minister has mentioned earlier. 

Statistics also indicate that gross income for the first six months 
of this year is also down close to 9 per cent from the previous 
year. Last year was also one which witnessed the drops in the 
prices of the major grains. 
 
Now gross income, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is by no means a 
measure of profitability in itself. So a drop in gross income, 
regardless of the number, is probably far more damaging than 
that number would ever suggest. 
 
Most of these problems, Mr. Deputy Speaker, come from 
subsidizations introduced by our foreign competitors as we’ve 
heard this afternoon, mainly the United States and the European 
union. 
 
Some of these problems though are also a product of the 
currency crisis which has overcome much of Asia and many 
other parts of the world which are either major consumers or 
suppliers of many farm products. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in recent weeks in the United States, 
Republican and Democratic representatives have been debating 
on how much aid to provide American farmers. The 
Republicans want 3.9 billion U.S., while the Democrats want 
7.3 billion to help address the great glut of grains and livestock 
produced on American farms. In total, American farmers could 
receive as much as $20 billion U.S. in subsidies and disaster 
assistance. This falls somewhat short of the damaging 26 billion 
U.S. dollars Congress provided to American farmers in 1986. 
 
It’s my understanding that after all of these subsidies are said 
and done, the Canadian farmers received somewhat more than a 
third of the financial support that their American and European 
counterparts received. Canada in effect, while a strong 
supporter of global free trade as a means of ridding the world of 
distorted trade subsidies which harm farm families, is becoming 
the last Boy Scout. 
 
All our competitors are breaking the rules and we are suffering 
as a consequence. Clearly if they’re going to continue to 
undertake such practices, governments must take actions to stop 
such distortions and find ways of helping farmers through these 
tough times. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, not only are subsidies a difficulty which 
we have to overcome, but so too is the economic crisis 
overcoming many areas of the world. While currency 
speculation, banking problems, and other factors have helped 
create the Asian flu, it’s my hope that major economic powers 
including Canada will seek means of remedying these problems 
on a global scale so that we might have an economic recovery 
elsewhere in the world. 
 
Healthy economies in Asia, although distant, are very important 
to the well-being of export-oriented economies like ours in 
Canada and Saskatchewan. A good example of how these 
problems hurt us can be seen in China’s recent decision to 
purchase malting barley from the European union. 
 
Regrettably, some of this feed, like a similar purchase from 
Australia, is destined to be used for malting because, like most 
Asian countries, China is not in a position to afford the barley 
as malting barley. This further depresses our malting barley 



2048 Saskatchewan Hansard October 20, 1998 

prices. And it’s important that governments across the world do 
their best to straighten this world economy out. 
 
Those things aside, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the real question we 
are facing here today is whether the NDP members opposite are 
the least bit sincere about helping our Saskatchewan farmers 
and our rural communities. 
 
While they sometimes will pride themselves on supposedly 
speaking up for Saskatchewan people, the truth I think is more 
in their record, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
In April of last year I received a letter from the Minister of 
Agriculture, and I believe it shows just how much those NDP 
members really care about Saskatchewan farmers. While they 
pride themselves with speaking up, I believe that this letter 
shows just how little they really do care, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
In it the Minister of Agriculture says, and I quote: 
 

I understand the concerns of your constituents. Farmers 
have long felt left to the mercy of grain companies, 
railroads, banks, and manufacturers of farm equipment and 
inputs. 
 

While the Minister of Agriculture recognizes that farmers feel 
they’re at the mercy of grain companies, banks, and input 
manufacturers, what is this government willing to do about it? 
Well at least they’ve spoke up about railways. They’ve done 
nothing about the other issues. 
 
Even what they’ve done about the railways is undermined by 
the fact that they’ve done little, if anything, to help our ailing 
and crumbling Saskatchewan highway system. All they’ve done 
in that regard, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is give the people of this 
province . . . And I would quote from another article here, 
“Romanow roads,” which deserve to be called such because 
they’re not fit to be called highways. 
 
If the members opposite have done anything else on the issue of 
transportation, it’s to create local transportation committees and 
attempt to force them to participate in choosing which parts of 
the road infrastructure should be abandoned as quality roads. 
Rather than try and get people to help you to choose how to 
downsize the road system, you should be getting rural people to 
help you to decide on how to improve it. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government recognizes that farmers 
are at the mercy of banks, grain companies, and input 
manufacturers. But does it care enough about rural communities 
to speak up for them? The answer of course is no they don’t 
care, and no, the NDP has no intentions of speaking up for 
people in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Recently, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool 
announced its intention to shut down 235 elevators in some 170 
Saskatchewan communities. This will cost many precious rural 
jobs, tax revenues, and numerous delivery points. In the past the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool has avoided selling these facilities to 
local producers, other grain companies, or organizations. It’s 
just ripped them down, and in recent memory we’ve seen some 
good elevators destroyed even though local producers wanted 
the chance to help seek out another buyer. 
 

Without delivery points farmers will be forced to travel greater 
distances and potential short lines will have much less chance 
of succeeding. Without elevators to deliver to, there’s little 
chance that a short line can attract the traffic that it needs to 
become a viable operation. 
 
A couple of weeks ago I wrote to the president of the Pool and I 
asked him to address these problems, particularly the issue of 
destroying elevators without first giving locals an opportunity 
to purchase them, despite the great loss of rural jobs, the 
significant damage this will do to potential short-line operators, 
and the additional distance that these decisions will force 
farmers to have to haul for greater distances. 
 
And I have a copy of that letter here that I wrote to — I guess 
for lack of a better description — ConAgra North, in the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool. I’d like to see if any of the members 
opposite have raised any of these concerns with the Pool on 
behalf of Saskatchewan farmers. I think the answer, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is that they haven’t because they don’t care about 
Saskatchewan farmers. Once again they place large business 
ahead of the interests of average working people. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture says that he 
and his NDP colleagues recognize that farmers feel that they are 
at the mercy of banks. Well recognizing is one thing, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, but caring enough about the people to do 
something about it, now that’s an entirely different story. 
 
Earlier this year I asked the government in this House whether 
they intended to raise any of the concerns of Saskatchewan 
residents on the issue of mega-bank mergers to the federal 
officials and ministers that were studying that matter. In a 
written response from the Minister of Justice I soon learned that 
they’d done little, if anything, and they had no intentions of 
making any submissions to federal officials. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as an MLA that represents a rural 
constituency, I thought it was important to ensure that the views 
of my constituents were brought to the attention of federal 
officials. The motion before us today talks about the difficulties 
that farmers are facing. Unlike the members opposite I realize 
that access to credit, off-farm jobs, and a host of other issues 
that revolve around mega-bank mergers will have an impact on 
our farm population. 
 
Mega-mergers threaten to give this province as many as 50 
fewer branches, and increase service charges and reduce 
competition. These items will affect producers across the 
province by increasing costs and reducing their access to credit. 
They’ll likely also result in the loss of precious rural jobs which 
are often necessary as off-farm sources of income, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Because I care about how these mega-mergers will affect my 
constituents, including producers, I made an effort to assess 
their concerns and opinions on this issue; and I made sure I 
brought them to the attention of both the federal Minister of 
Finance and to the Premier. I called on the federal minister to 
remember that an overwhelming majority of people who 
responded are worried about how mega-mergers will affect 
farmers, other small businesses, and their rural communities. 
Without access to reasonably priced credit and understanding, 



October 20, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 2049 

the well-being of many farmers will be put in jeopardy. 
 
I also urge the Premier to follow the lead of his B.C. 
counterpart who not only assessed the views of B.C. residents 
but commissioned studies on how this would affect the B.C. 
economy. Glen Clark made sure federal officials were aware of 
those concerns. In this province it’s a different story, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. Despite my urgings to follow the lead of his 
British Columbia counterpart the Premier has done nothing. 
Even though his Agriculture minister knows farmers are at the 
mercy of banks, the Premier is willing to let mega-banks with 
billion-plus profits merge to the detriment of Saskatchewan 
farmers and other people in this province, without saying, 
without saying a single word to represent the interests of 
average people. 
 
Once again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government is willing to 
put money and mega-profits ahead of the interests of average 
people, be they farmers or anyone else. Not only do we have to 
question how sincere they are about speaking up for 
Saskatchewan farmers but we should question, we certainly 
should question, whether they still have the ability to care. 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the NDP members opposite today are 
trying to create the impression that they want to speak up for 
Saskatchewan farmers. The sincerity of their attempts is at best 
questionable, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And another example why can be seen in how they’ve handled 
the issue of rising farm input costs. The Minister of Agriculture, 
as I said before, recognizes that farmers feel they’re at the 
mercy of farm input manufacturers. If he and his colleagues 
were sincerely concerned about farmers — like they try and let 
on — then they’d speak up on this issue as well. 
 
Over the last couple of years, I’ve repeatedly brought this very 
issue to the attention of both the federal and provincial 
ministers of Agriculture. I wrote to a variety of input 
manufacturers and I expressed concerns on behalf of producers 
in the province and asked them to justify their actions on input 
costs. 
 
I’ve yet to see what the Minister of Agriculture or any of his 
colleagues have done on this matter. Have you written one 
single input manufacturer and asked them to justify the 
burdensome costs they’re charging for producers who are now 
being squeezed by international subsidies and low commodity 
prices? If you have, then show us. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, a good example of how little this 
government cares about farmers can be found in what they’re 
doing with respect to grazing fees. In a recent letter dated 
October 6 from the Minister of Agriculture, the minister states 
and I quote: 
 

That Saskatchewan has and continues to do everything 
under its control to control those inputs under our control. 
 

Well despite this claim that they’re trying to stand up for 
farmers, this NDP government has increased or will increase 
grazing fees to producers by 20 to 25 per cent. 

I’d like the minister to explain how gouging farmers on a fee 
that is under his government’s control, how that represents 
doing everything under your control to curb rising farm input 
costs. 
 
Once again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, like with cancelling GRIP 
contracts, health cuts, and letting our highways crumble, this 
government places money before people. Once again they show 
they just don’t care. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, if the government wishes to speak up for 
farmers and do so effectively, it has to show it cares. And the 
member from Estevan speaks up now; he’s showing he’s caring 
today for farmers just like he showed he cared for IBEW 
(International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers) workers 
yesterday. Yes, they saw. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, if this government wishes to speak up for 
farmers and do so effectively, it has to show it cares. If the 
members opposite really care about the plight of farmers in this 
province, they’d fight for farmers on all important issues 
affecting them, rather than picking a few which give them a 
chance to create, just create an impression that they care. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, if the members want to be sincere about 
the motion before this House today, it’s time they started 
speaking up on important issues affecting farmers, like elevator 
closures, the impact of mega-bank mergers, and rising farm 
input costs. It’s time they remembered when they used to care 
and start placing farmers and average people ahead of money, 
profits, and big business. 
 
So in the interests of allowing my colleagues across to show the 
opportunity that they do care, that they are prepared to do 
something, I’m ready to propose an amendment to the motion 
before us here today. I move the amendment as follows: 
 

That the words “federal government” be deleted and 
replaced by “federal and provincial governments.” 
 

This is moved, seconded by the member from Melville. I so 
present. I so move. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — I find the amendment in 
order, and rule that debate on the amendment and the main 
motion shall be done concurrently. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’ll just speak 
briefly to the amendment, having listened to the Agriculture 
minister’s motion and some of his comments subsequent to 
presenting the motion where he spoke about the need for us 
here in Saskatchewan, in order to increase our economic 
activity and to assist the agricultural community, we needed to 
add population. We needed to diversify. We needed to do 
something about prices. We all agree. That comes as no 
surprise. 
 
The member from the opposition spoke about the downturn in 
the agricultural economy. We all know that. We’re all aware of 
that. We need to come up with some solutions. It’s very easy to 
stand up in this House and point fingers and criticize and slam 
people when they’re not here to defend themselves and not hear 
any solutions or suggestions as to how we resolve these 



2050 Saskatchewan Hansard October 20, 1998 

problems. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to get back to this business of 
adding population to this province. In a recent Public Accounts 
Committee meeting, the deputy minister of Economic 
Development pointed out, in response to a question, the five or 
six major industries in this great province of ours. After some 
thought, brief thought, he came up with number one — 
agriculture. No question about it. Yet how much attention does 
the NDP government pay to agriculture. You don’t hear 
anything about supporting agriculture in this province. 
 
I went on to enquire about what sort of plans did the NDP 
government have for creating some assistance or some help for 
our agricultural economy. Well, there was nothing in policy . . . 
that was a matter of policy and that was yet to be decided by the 
agriculture department, Agriculture and Food. 
 
But what distresses me is when we talk about adding 
population, and you hear of people that do in fact come to 
Saskatchewan and do attempt to start up a farming operation 
and bring with them their equipment and their families and 
make an effort to settle in, and then they get faced with 
additional bills from the NDP government for provincial sales 
tax on the equipment that they bring with them. Is that 
encouragement for people to come to our province to start a 
business? That’s discouragement. These are people that now 
say had we known that we would have to pay provincial sales 
tax on our vehicles after bringing them in here then we would 
not have come to this province. 
 
Now how do you add population to a province when the 
oppressive rules and regulations and tax laws are such that they 
do not welcome people of this province? That’s what bothers 
me. 
 
I call on the Minister of Agriculture and the members opposite 
and all members of this House to support our amendment, 
because it’s not one level of government alone that needs to be 
involved in addressing a issue as serious as what the 
agricultural situation is in this province. And anybody from 
rural Saskatchewan realizes and appreciates that. All they’re 
looking for is people to work together to resolve that problem; 
to help resolve that problem, not nitpick and point fingers and 
holler at one another about not doing this or that. You resolve 
more problems by working together than you do butting heads. 
 
So I urge all members of this House to support the amendment 
that was proposed by my colleague, the member from Thunder 
Creek, in order that we bring all members of this House and all 
members of both levels of government working together to help 
our ailing agricultural economy in this province. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, some people have said they’re pleased to 
engage in this debate today. I’m not very happy. I wish this 
circumstance did not exist in Saskatchewan where we have to 
talk about the difficulty that some of our most determined and 
committed citizens and entrepreneurs are engaging in. It’s 
important that we talk about it, but it’s certainly anything but a 
pleasure. 
 
I’m a bit disappointed by the amendment moved by the 

members opposite. Surely there’s a recognition that 
Saskatchewan people are doing much to assist the circumstance 
for farmers here. We’re spending four and a half times the 
amount that any other government is spending in Canada. We 
are now asking for the federal government to become a partner 
with us in this. 
 
I think it’s a bit of a travesty that members opposite in the 
Liberal Party would suggest that the federal government does 
not have significant responsibilities in the areas of international 
trade. We understand that Saskatchewan’s voice is often 
important in making changes in the federal position. But this is 
clearly a matter of federal jurisdiction and federal 
responsibility. 
 
The previous speaker, the member from Thunder Creek, was 
speaking about the things Saskatchewan should be doing. It 
sounded like the federal government was helpless unless 
Saskatchewan’s holding their hand and carrying them along the 
way. Surely it isn’t a provincial responsibility that the federal 
government cut $6 billion out of the health care system which 
we’ve backfilled every penny. Surely not. 
 
Surely no one in Canada — no Liberal, no Conservative, no 
New Democrat — believes that. Even the federal minister 
acknowledges they need to start restoring money. Whether it’s 
employment insurance, surely, surely nobody would propose 
that the federal government should keep taking the money of 
workers and of the small businesses of Canada, and use them as 
a federal tax, as a federal tax write-down. 
 
Surely, surely, surely nobody would accept the fact that in 
Saskatchewan, where farmers more than anybody are dependent 
on the road system, that the federal government who spends not 
a penny on the road system ever, except by a few special 
programs here and there, that they should somehow . . . that we 
should also somehow rescue them from their cuts to the 
transportation system here. 
 
They’re allowing the railroads to abandon. They’re allowing the 
rules to be so soft that a short line rail company wants to set up 
— the rail lines can fragment and frustrate the negotiations. 
We’re supposed to help the federal government. We certainly 
trying to help the farmers but we can’t help the federal 
government. That’s their job. 
 
We can’t help the fact that the federal government cut out the 
support for transportation for our grains. What is one of the 
single biggest shocks to every farmer every time they take a 
load to the elevator? They get the cheque and what? A third of 
it disappears in freight. With today’s prices a half of it often 
disappears in freight. It is a travesty what has happened . . . 
what the federal government allowed to happen to the 
transportation costs for farmers. We cannot help the federal 
government to stop making mistakes. We can remind them 
what they should do but we cannot do their work for them. 
 
(1600) 
 
The Bank Act . . . The member from Thunder Creek says we 
should be doing the Bank Act; the Bank Act is a federal Act. 
We have amended provincial legislation to make credit unions 
fair players in the economy. We are not the participants that 



October 20, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 2051 

have to try and make the Bank Act work for farmers. Your 
colleagues in Ottawa have that responsibility. 
 
And one more issue. On international trade, your colleagues — 
on the question of the MAI (multilateral agreement on 
investment) — your colleagues in Ottawa initiated the 
negotiation of that without telling anybody in Canada. Your 
colleagues offended virtually every Canadian, every individual 
citizen, every small business who feels there’s a huge risk. And 
it was the voice of Saskatchewan that took a strong message to 
Ottawa that resulted in the ending of those MAI talks today. 
 
Today, finally the voice of Saskatchewan was heard in Ottawa 
and in France and the MAI negotiations have now ended, but 
we can't help the federal government. Now I didn't enter this 
discussion in order to engage in a partisan debate but I could 
not let those comments of the member opposite stand without 
being challenged. We as a government are very, very 
committed to making Saskatchewan work for farmers and all 
the rest of our community. But we cannot do the work of the 
federal government for them. And we will continue to point out 
your shortcomings, but we will not try and do your work for 
you, we cannot. 
 
Now I want to say about the farming situation in Saskatchewan. 
The reason that it makes me a bit . . . a lot sad about the present 
circumstance, as I said earlier, is that we have the hardest 
working sector of our economy, the longest standing, the base 
of our economy since Saskatchewan joined Confederation, 
feeling some real income stress. I want to also begin by saying I 
don’t want to cause further negative feelings about agriculture 
in Saskatchewan. The cash crunch in agriculture in 
Saskatchewan is enough to create some pretty negative feelings. 
 
I want to say that this is a very, very solid industry in 
Saskatchewan. It’s a very solid industry that’s experiencing a 
current cash shortage. It’s a very solid industry since the day it 
was begun when 900,000 immigrants came to Saskatchewan to 
take advantage of this new place of hope and opportunity in 
order to raise their families in an agricultural lifestyle. 
 
We are still the most agricultural province in all of Canada but 
it is a sad state when those families do all the things they do — 
and I want to say in a moment the many things they do do to 
help themselves — and they continue to suffer the kind of 
income stress they presently suffer. 
 
The farmers of Saskatchewan have done everything within their 
power, going back historically to the formation of the Canadian 
Wheat Board, in order to secure the best market price that they 
can secure. 
 
Now some people want to challenge that. But I want to say to 
the members opposite and to every Saskatchewan person, that 
there is no challenging the basic logic that farmers working 
together through a single agency in a marketplace gets them the 
best price. No challenging that basic conclusion. 
 
Now the fact that the Wheat Board is now in the middle of 
elections, this is an evolution. We now are going to have 
farmer-elected representatives running that board. And I think 
all of us have said we want the Canadian Wheat Board to 
continue to respond to new and current challenges and 

circumstances. And I have full confidence that they will. 
 
And I want to say that the Wheat Board is one of the many 
things that farmers have done in their own interests and they 
will now, with elected members to that board, as long as we are 
very careful to elect members who believe in the Wheat Board. 
Let’s be very careful in choosing who we elect so that that 
Wheat Board will continue to serve farmers as it has in the past, 
delivering hundreds of millions of dollars of extra money into 
farmers’ pockets no matter what the market conditions. That’s 
the first thing farmers have done to help themselves. 
 
Farmers have adapted to every new circumstance, to every new 
opportunity in the marketplace, and Saskatchewan farmers 
more than any, Saskatchewan farmers have diversified into the 
list of products that others have mentioned, but if I just run my 
mind through the crops I see and the facilities I see in my 
constituency when I drive by, whether it’s borage or chickpeas 
or canola in an area that never grew it, or herbs and spices or 
fish farming now and an expansion of potato farming and bison 
and elk and emus, and the list goes on and on and on. But these 
are new products. 
 
The minister spoke earlier about the degree to which farmers 
here have shifted away from a traditional wheat economy to an 
economy that takes advantage of every opportunity they see. 
Our farmers have the bragging rights to being the most 
responsive of farmers to changing world conditions of any in 
the world. And they leave American farmers in the dust a 
hundred miles back. 
 
American farmers, as you know, challenged Saskatchewan 
farmers only a few weeks ago on the grounds that somehow we 
were excessively subsidized. I can tell you, Saskatchewan 
farmers had their subsidies reduced when the federal 
government removed the subsidy for transportation. And the 
other major competitors, the European Union and the American 
side of our partnership here, they transferred their subsidies into 
longer-standing subsidies that are still there. 
 
And it’s not unusual for Americans to be getting a dollar and a 
dollar and a half Canadian worth of subsidies on their grain. 
And it’s not unusual for Europeans to get a hundred and two 
hundred dollars an acre in subsidy for the land on which they 
grow crops. These are the issues that we want to address in our 
motion today, the unfair challenges to our farmers who’ve done 
everything in their own power to succeed and are faced with 
these sort of circumstances. 
 
We want the federal government to take the responsibility — 
not have their provincial cousins pretend they don’t have any — 
we want the federal government to take that responsibility and 
examine that question, and if there is unfairness to address it. 
And if they cannot address the unfairness, then make sure our 
farmers are treated fairly in this marketplace that they have 
worked so effectively in. 
 
But farmers haven’t just expanded their variety of crops and 
their contributions to community in that sense, our farmers have 
also begun to do value added on the farm. 
 
One of the great joys of the job of being a MLA is to listen to 
the new challenges farmers face, and only a few months ago 



2052 Saskatchewan Hansard October 20, 1998 

one of the farmers in the southern part of my constituency had 
the problem of trying to get ocean containers from his farm to 
the ocean liner over highways that didn’t allow primary 
weights. Those are nice kinds of challenges. You see farmers 
on-site processing product right on the farm for the international 
market, and then we have to adjust our policies. And we work 
very hard to make sure these policies are . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . every policy on earth needs continual review. 
 
So we’ve seen farmers increase the diversification in processing 
on their own facilities and the wide variety of products that 
they’ve made in that regard, whether it’s with llamas and wool 
or say fish or oat flour or anything that comes to mind in the 
marketplace, the farmers are doing their part. 
 
But beyond that, beyond that, farmers have also, farm families 
have also taken the opportunity, and many lament the fact that 
this has been necessary, but they take the opportunity to earn 
off-farm income. And so farmers have sought, when the farm 
income is inadequate, to go off the farm and seeking these other 
opportunities for income off the farm when diversification on 
the farm isn’t enough. 
 
It is a credit to our farmers that they have done everything 
within their own power. And in doing that they not only help 
our communities and the national economy, they also help our 
environment. Our farmers have adjusted their farming practices 
and we’ve seen a huge increase in no-till farming, in 
minimum-till farming. And I have to give credit to the member 
from Kindersley who was one of the early participants in this. 
 
But the change in farming practice in Saskatchewan is one of 
the single biggest contributors to the reduction of greenhouse 
gases in Canada. The single project that can reduce in one fell 
swoop the greenhouse gases in Canada the most is leaving the 
organic matter in the soil and not tilling it in and having it break 
down. 
 
Now this is a practice that is still being tried in a number of 
areas in our province. And with the squeezed economies of 
higher transportation costs, we’re finding that it does work very 
well; but in some areas it cannot work because there isn’t 
enough cash around to put the input costs into those kinds of 
operations. So we’re seeing farmers test the limits of those sorts 
of new changes. 
 
But in every way they can, they are beginning to try to address 
their own needs. But when you’re faced with the challenges that 
others have raised here with respect to prices in the international 
economy, when you look at the costs that have been introduced 
because of the abandonment of the railroads, because of the tax 
costs associated with higher road costs now because trucks are 
going over them, these are real, real challenges for our farmers. 
 
And I want to say that we need our farmers to be fully confident 
that we are aware of these circumstances; but more importantly 
that the federal government is aware of these circumstances and 
that they will not abandon them to circumstances they cannot 
control. 
 
Because, if there is anything important to Saskatchewan now, as 
it was 80 years ago, it is the root in the agricultural community. 
It is the heart of the co-operative nature of Saskatchewan. It is 

the source from which many of our gifts of Canada have come 
— the most notable of which is our health care system where 
farmers working together recognized that a co-operative 
approach to providing health care was important — whether it’s 
the co-operative nature of our communities, these things 
together have created the best place on earth in which to live. 
 
These are rooted in the original farm communities which have 
now evolved to being larger communities and even to our cities. 
This is a value system that comes from the very earliest of times 
in Saskatchewan. And we should honour and respect that that 
has given a great gift to this country; and we should honour and 
respect that that tradition needs to continue. And we need to 
assure our farmers that we’re behind them as they’re facing this 
circumstance. 
 
I, therefore, will put my strong support behind the motion that 
the Minister of Agriculture has moved and invite all of the 
others to join me in supporting the farmers who’ve done so 
much for our province. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I want to 
make a few brief remarks here today, especially after hearing 
some of the members opposite speak on this motion. And I’m 
going to encourage them to support the amendment because not 
only is it fair to do so, but it’s, I think, an obligation on their 
part to do it. 
 
Now I’ve listened to the Minister of Agriculture making some 
points, I guess about the Crow benefit and oh, I guess they’re 
still supporting the Crow. And I sat back thinking, you know 
that’s most interesting coming from the minister who really has 
hung his hat on hog production here in this province. And you 
know, I know he would like to also have finishing for cattle, but 
really hanging his hat on hogs. And how’s that going to 
happen? It’s because you’re having a feed grain that doesn’t 
have a subsidy put on to it, and so that we can afford to have 
those kinds of finishing operations here in this province. 
 
And I would have to ask him to explain to the people, I guess of 
Heartland, and the people in places like Wood Mountain, where 
I was at only a few days ago, where they have a 12,000 pig 
operation, multiplier barn, just about finished. What would he 
say to them, if in fact we were still putting that heavy subsidy 
on grain, setting it out — what’s going to happen to that hog 
production there, or the one that’s being proposed in Ponteix, or 
one the one that’s being proposed in Shaunavon or several 
around the province? 
 
Now I think what we want to talk about here is the role of this 
provincial government. Now firstly, they’ve cut hundreds of 
millions of dollars from the agriculture budget since they’ve 
been in power and I think it’s . . . What is it somewhere around 
6, 700 million bucks that they have cut out of that budget? That 
doesn’t show to the people out there, to rural Saskatchewan, or 
to the farmers that in fact they’re sincere when they say that 
they want to stick up for farmers. 
 
(1615) 
 
They have cut hundreds of millions of dollars from, of course 



October 20, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 2053 

like I say, the agriculture budget but also our highway budget 
and our highway system, and look what we’ve got today for 
highways. Now it wasn’t too many years ago we heard the 
Premier travelling the province making the comment that you 
know, these highways are Grant Devine’s golf courses — 18 
holes to the mile. 
 
Take a drive around rural Saskatchewan today and take a look 
at what there is. It really makes those 18-hole-to-the-mile golf 
courses look pretty good. You know, today we have highways 
that they’re saying that — they don’t want to gravel highways 
just yet. They’re half gravelled now. The potholes are touching 
and seriously that is getting to be a real problem because for 
those people that are going to be wanting to be transporting 
their product, whether it be hogs or cattle or grain, well how are 
they going to do it on these kind of highways? 
 
And you look in the south-west, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what 
they’re doing. They have said nothing when the branch lines are 
going to be ripped out and they, at the same time, are not doing 
anything about the highways. It’s one thing to call on the 
federal government to share in the national highway program of 
No. 1 and No. 16, but what about the highways? 
 
Oh I encourage the Minister of Highways and Transportation to 
take a drive down in the south-west, all throughout the Wood 
River constituency. It is a real shame and I know the member 
from Thunder Creek is bringing in a Bill I guess now and in the 
next session as well, calling on some of these highways which 
have become so poor in condition to be now called Romanow 
Roads. Well that should be . . . you know, you shouldn’t be able 
to look to yourself in the mirror and say that you have done a 
service to this province the way you have let it go downhill. 
 
So when we talk about this amendment, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 
say if the NDP vote against our amendment of including the 
provincial government with the federal government into having 
a responsibility to agriculture and rural folks of this province, 
then they are completely abdicating any and all responsibility 
for agriculture. They are completely washing their hands of it. 
 
Under the Constitution of Canada there are only two subject 
matters that require both federal and provincial concurrent 
responsibility — immigration and agriculture. They know that 
and that is why, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the provincial 
government in their own emergency motion — they should 
have had themselves included under the Constitution of Canada, 
Mr. Speaker, and they’re trying to let on they didn’t even know 
it was there. 
 
And you can’t pretend it’s not up to you because you have this 
obligation. In fact that’s why the feds contribute to crop 
insurance and the Agri-Food Innovation Fund. So we’ll be 
watching very closely how you vote, and we want you to live 
up to your responsibility. 
 
You know, you’re paying . . . You’re forcing farmers to pay 
record-high taxes, and yet you sit back and you do nothing — 
nothing at all — about the record-high input costs that farmers 
are forced with. And a lot of it is directly the result of your 
provincial policies, your taxation policies. 
 
Well you say that agriculture in this province is king. You sit 

back, you do nothing. You sit, you cry, and you whine, and you 
take no responsibility. I ask you to take a little bit of action, get 
a proper, long-term safety net program in place. You’re not 
doing that. You talk the talk but really you’re not walking the 
walk because the programs that you have in place are not 
adequate, and it’s really starting to show today. 
 
Take a little bit of leadership in this transportation stuff. Don’t 
just let the railroads be yanked out — fight for them. And if you 
see that it’s not going to work in all locations, make sure that 
they have a highway system or some sort of system to get their 
product to market. Take a little action yourself. And please take 
a drive into the south-west and you’ll see exactly what I’m 
talking about. You have let this thing go far too long. 
 
So I support — strongly support — the motion as amended. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I too would like to add my comments to support the 
motion and the amendment to the motion. I do believe that the 
provincial government has some say in what happens to 
farmers, not so much in what way farmers should act or should 
conduct their business, but certainly in the way that they can put 
forward policy that would alleviate some of the burden that 
farmers are looking at today. 
 
I believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the problems associated 
with agriculture and with farming, the problems worldwide as 
far as our financial crisis are so complex, that it seems almost 
unresolvable. And so I believe that short-term assistance or 
subsidies to farmers are necessary in order to cushion the shock 
that farmers are undergoing right now, and by no means do I 
believe that long-term subsidies are the answer. They distort 
market prices and certainly aren’t a true picture of what’s 
happening in the world. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the provincial government and some of 
the members across were mentioning that they believe that it 
was not in their hands; it’s in the Canadian government’s hands 
to assist farmers and to take care of this crisis that farmers are 
in. 
 
What I would like to suggest, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that 
farmers are self-determining and they wish to self-determine 
their business and their future. And in adding to that, I would 
just like to challenge the provincial government and encourage 
them to take this time historically to put forward to the federal 
government and to everyone in this country that possibly this 
should be the time when farmers should have the freedom for 
dual marketing. In that way they can determine just how they 
end up with the profit they need in their pockets. 
 
It is up to them. If it doesn’t pan out, it is nobody’s problem but 
their own. If it does pan out, they will feel very good about their 
own self-determination, and government will not have to take 
any flack for it. 
 
So at this time I’d also like to ask the provincial government to 
reconsider what has happened due to reassessment. Last year in 
this House, or rather last May or June, I did bring up to the 
Minister of Agriculture that in a sense this government is 
contributing to the demise of farmers through the high property 
taxes that they are now responsible for for education. 



2054 Saskatchewan Hansard October 20, 1998 

The financial burden that farmers are undergoing now due to 
falling grain prices, due to the transportation issue, due to so 
many things, input costs and so on, are in fact pulling them 
down to a point of no return. The provincial government does 
have a mandate to try in every way they can to alleviate this 
horrible burden that farmers are undergoing. One way of doing 
that is to certainly look at the whole reassessment issue and 
hopefully alleviating some of that burden that farmers are 
looking at right now. 
 
One more comment on the debate that surrounds the 
responsibility for highways and roads. Of course it would nice 
if the federal government would put more money into 
highways. But the fact remains that regardless of why and how 
the highways have deteriorated, it is provincial jurisdiction; it is 
provincial responsibility. 
 
The province does have gas taxes and they do have licence fees 
as well as other means to come up with revenue for the highway 
system. It is their responsibility and there is no getting out of it. 
We are asking the provincial government to come up with 
certainly a way to look at their revenues in the next budget to 
assist the highway system and in fact to assist farmers. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am somewhat concerned about what this 
agriculture crisis is going to do to the people in this province. In 
the ’70s and early ’80s we had numbers of suicides. We had 
farm families that were being displaced practically and having 
to go into the urban communities. We had chaos and we had 
trouble. 
 
What concerns me also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the sort of 
negligence that we have, or the sort of not recognizing that if 
our farm and rural communities go down the drain and no 
longer exist, that our urban communities will also suffer and 
end up being in the same turmoil as rural communities are. 
Many urban people are now finding it a major struggle to make 
a living, but it is going to get even worse. 
 
So I ask the provincial government to take on their 
responsibility along with the federal government and to do what 
they can in the short term to face and alleviate this crisis. But I 
ask them also to free up the regulatory burden, to free up the red 
tape, and to allow our farmers to make their own decisions on 
how to market their products so that they can be 
self-determining, and in effect I believe this will end up having 
a better result for all the people of the province. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
support the motion that has been put forward today by our 
Minister of Agriculture which urgently calls on the federal 
government to address the issue of recent American and 
European grain subsidies and the resulting low commodity 
prices immediately, work with our trading partners to reduce 
subsidies, and in the event no immediate progress is made to 
bridge that cash shortfall appropriately in order to protect our 
Canadian producers. 
 
Our federal government has abdicated their role, their 
responsibility, to agriculture and to grain transportation, and 
many of my other colleagues have already eloquently spoken on 

these issues. 
 
And I think when we look at what the provincial responsibility 
is, we have been there. We’ve been there in agriculture on a per 
capita basis as we have provided 4.7 times the provincial 
average of any other province to agriculture and support; 4.1 
times as much as the federal government per capita; 2.2 times 
as much as Alberta, the next highest province; and 2.4 times as 
much as Manitoba. So clearly Saskatchewan government, 
Saskatchewan taxpayers, contribute more than any other 
taxpayers in Canada to helping make our agricultural sector 
grow. 
 
And it is a sector, as other colleagues have said, that it is a 
strong industry in our province. It’s one that’s done a lot of 
work on diversity, value added. We have innovative and 
creative farmers, and they’re seeking opportunities as best that 
they possibly can. 
 
So I do not believe at all that our provincial government has 
abdicated their role. But the federal government’s 
responsibility, looking across at what other countries are doing 
not only in transportation and in other aspects, have abdicated 
their responsibility. 
 
As we have seen on talking about high input costs, where we 
have jurisdiction in crop insurance rates, we’ve been able to 
reduce those rates. 
 
In transportation we have done more than just talk about the 
transportation needs. We’ve actually put in a budget in which 
there is increased dollars to go into transportation but also 
addressing, with all of the western provinces, the impact of 
what is happening from the federal level policies on grain 
transportation in this province and right across western Canada. 
 
Our premiers across Canada and western Canada called for a 
halt to rail line abandonment at least during the review of the 
grain transportation system. We all called for abandonment as 
Transportation ministers because it seems to be that if you're 
reviewing a system and you truly want to review that system, 
that you don’t let it be dismantled during the review. 
 
Every premier, every Transportation minister, called on the 
federal government to do that, and they have not heard us and 
they have not halted abandonment. This is one aspect again at 
the federal level of not listening. 
 
(1630) 
 
Recently when we had the federal Minister of Transportation 
here in Saskatchewan, he said that we were exaggerating a 
crisis in Saskatchewan — exaggerating it — that really the rail 
lines are dealing very effectively with producers. 
 
Well I’d like them to go out to the communities that are facing 
this abandonment where producers that I want to congratulate 
are trying to do everything they possibly can, putting together, 
looking at the options of running their own short lines as 
possibilities. The provincial government is trying to help them 
in those initiatives and we put some dollars towards those 
initiatives. 
 



October 20, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 2055 

But we need a federal government that listens, as they also 
know. The changes to the Canada Transportation Act — federal 
officials have even said this, which is almost unbelievable — 
they said it was the railway’s turn to have favour. Well they did 
get that favour and it’s not working in the best interests of our 
producers or the people here of Saskatchewan, or right across 
western Canada. 
 
When we look at the impact of what the commodity prices are 
doing and we look at what the increased freight costs are, the 
$300 million difference in annual freight costs and increased 
grain handling charges, is the impact of what we have seen of 
$300 million has a huge dollar value back to our producers in 
this province. 
 
Freight rates now of a third to a half of what the grain receipt is. 
When we’re into Montana, the producers there are saying their 
freight rate costs are two-thirds, where they’re captive to one 
rail line system. And we have said over and over and over, even 
as western provinces we’ve been able to come to a consensus in 
coming to some of the solutions that need to be put into place, 
which is at the federal level. There needs to be . . . we need to 
ensure that the freight cap stays in place until you know that 
there’s actual competition in the system, which we know there 
isn’t. 
 
In order for short lines and producers to have other choices, we 
need to have provisions of common access or at least access to 
either main line carrier. 
 
In our submission to Justice Estey, in spite of the political 
differences across the western provinces, we again saw the 
absolute need of the federal government to recognize the 
importance of transportation and this chance to review a system 
that can put dollars back to producers. There is no use in getting 
an efficient system that does not maximize returns to the 
producers. 
 
One of the pieces that we also said again was the extremely 
important role that the Canadian Wheat Board needs to play and 
will continue to play in not only sourcing the grain, finding the 
customers, but also still in transportation using all of the kinds 
of tools that can be there for an autonomous elected Wheat 
Board. 
 
We also, when we did that submission, looked at what the road 
impact is of federal government policy, on literally of the 
dollars that it takes to improve the road system when you’re 
transferring grain from rail to road and where the federal 
government still says that they have no obligation for dollars to 
go into that. 
 
They took out the Crow benefit. Their policies are impacting 
our producers in our province. And they say . . . our friends 
here, the provincial Liberals, say the federal government has no 
responsibility in this. Not part of their jurisdiction. Well of 
course it’s their jurisdiction. And every government across 
western Canada has said that. 
 
We need to have dollars put back into the transportation system 
in this country, into grain transportation. We need to have 
policies that allow producers to have choices in their system. 
We need to have a system that is not dismantled at any cost. We 

need to have our producers and our taxpayers protected. And 
the federal actions have been unconscionable in this as they say 
that we’re exaggerating what is happening in the impact of their 
policies. 
 
As I said earlier, as never before we need a federal government 
that recognizes the importance of agriculture, the importance of 
transportation to western Canada — to actually all of Canada. 
We are facing unbelievable pressures in all of the other 
countries in which billions of dollars are going into their 
infrastructure systems at a federal level. Billions of dollars are 
going in in subsidies, and we have a federal government that 
seems to be turning a blind eye and a blind ear to the concerns 
of western Canada, to the concerns of our producers here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
When I look at the member opposite that suggests that one of 
the solutions should be is to change the name of a highway to a 
road, it seems to me again it sounds like Liberal policy. Don’t 
give us any dollars, don’t talk about a system that will actually 
be in place in which what we are doing and working on; they 
say, just change the name. Somehow that’s one of their Liberal 
solutions. 
 
I think from now on, as never before, this provincial 
government has stood up for the producers in this province. But 
also we’re seeing a united voice coming across western Canada 
to our federal government that transportation, producers, 
agriculture need to be protected in our province of 
Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — I thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, we all know that this is not a good fall in our province. 
When we are told that net farm income could be cut in half, we 
know that that has a ripple effect to every man, woman, and 
child, every community, every business in this province. 
 
And it is certainly turning up first of all in our farm implement 
dealerships. That is the first place that the downturn in the farm 
economy, besides of course the farmers themselves, is in our 
implement dealers. But it is going to ripple through our villages, 
our towns, our cities. Nobody can come unscathed when farm 
income is drastically cut as is happening now. 
 
The government proposes a motion calling on the federal 
government to intervene as it’s happening in other countries, to 
provide subsidies. This is what happened in the 1980s. 
 
We, here in the Liberal opposition, acknowledge that it is 
absolutely imperative that Ottawa stand with the producers of 
this province and this country. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — However I must note that under the 
Constitution of Canada there are only two things, two areas of 
jurisdiction which are given both to the federal and the 
provincial governments. Everything else is divided up. Foreign 
affairs is given to Ottawa, education is given to the provinces, 
monetary policy is given to the federal government, while 
highways are given to the provinces. 



2056 Saskatchewan Hansard October 20, 1998 

Only two things are given to both levels of government, and 
one of them is agriculture. I think that shows how the fathers of 
Confederation, how serious they took agriculture, when they 
said that both levels of government had to be concerned with 
agriculture. 
 
So obviously the federal government and the provincial 
government both have to address the present crisis we are in. 
And that is something which dates back to the founding of our 
nation. The fathers of Confederation said that agriculture is 
something that is of such great importance, it is so foundational 
to our nation, that both levels of government must be concerned 
with the future of our farmers and of our producers. 
 
In that respect not much has changed since 1867. Our country 
has seen enormous changes in many areas, but agriculture 
remains foundational to this province as it has been since the 
moment of our creation in 1905. 
 
We know that our farmers have done a magnificent job in 
recent years in adapting to changes in transportation and 
marketing. We know that they are doing enormous things in the 
areas of crop diversification, value added. And we know that 
things are being produced in this province that only a few years 
ago would have been unthinkable, or even thought of as absurd, 
and yet we are now producing them here in Saskatchewan. 
 
So our farmers are rising to the challenge as much as they 
possibly can. But when they are faced with the problem of 
competing with the treasuries of the European community or 
the federal government of the United States, that’s asking an 
awful lot from our Saskatchewan producers and they can’t do it 
unless their senior governments stand behind them. 
 
We think that the federal government must do much more on 
behalf of our primary producers. But this cannot absolve the 
provincial government which last year cut the Agriculture and 
Food budget by $122 million and total agriculture spending by 
over $32 million. This is not a good example of commitment to 
agriculture and to our farmers. This is the commitment shown 
in the government’s own public accounts for 1997-1998, the 
commitment they showed and in their own records, Ag and 
Food department spending dropped by $122 million. 
 
That’s very sad, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And it’s even more sad 
today when members opposite say, yes, we believe in 
agriculture, in fact we believe in agriculture so much that we 
think that Ottawa should spend more money but we should 
spend less. 
 
Well, we all know that Grant Devine made his share of 
mistakes as premier of this province, but we also know that he 
showed an enormous commitment to the farmers of 
Saskatchewan. And at the same time as he was asking for 
Ottawa to come to the aid of our hard-pressed farmers, he was 
showing an example himself as premier of Saskatchewan. If 
charity begins at home, by the same token giving assistance and 
coming to the aid of those who need it, we have to give an 
example ourselves before we can ask that others will. 
 
So nothing in the amendment moved by my colleague from 
Thunder Creek deludes from the responsibility that the federal 
government must demonstrate to saving agriculture in this 

country. We are passionately committed to that. 
 
We only say that if we really think there’s a crisis out there, and 
if we really believe in saving prairie agriculture, then we will 
say it’s a challenge for both levels of government, which is 
what the Constitution of Canada says. And if we say well, yes 
there’s a crisis, but one level of government has no 
responsibility and can wash its hands. That sounds to me, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, like hypocrisy. That doesn’t sound to me like 
we’re taking the farm crisis very seriously. 
 
If we are taking the farm crisis seriously we will ask both levels 
of government to do their very level best. Well I know it’s been 
mentioned from time to time but I’m not a farmer. True, I was 
raised on a farm. But the one thing I know is that in this 
province the future of each and every one of us, no matter how 
close or distant we may be tied to the farm, the future of each 
and every one of us depends on the health and strength of our 
primary industry which is farming. 
 
If we want to save our villages, if we want strong cities, if we 
want a strong provincial economy, it has to start with the farm 
economy. We take the farm crisis seriously. I have been 
spending a lot of time this fall talking to producers and farmers 
and farm implement dealers in my constituency. I know what 
they’re up against. They tell me that they are disappointed that 
the provincial government raised Crown leases this year. Was 
this the year, I ask, to raise Crown lease on pastures by 25 per 
cent? Does that show, in this year of all years, does that show a 
commitment by the provincial government to save western 
agriculture? Or does that show an indifference to the crisis that 
our farmers are facing? 
 
So while I appreciate very much the spirit and the wording of 
this resolution brought by government members, it is my 
position and the position of my colleagues that it is not 
weakened but in fact strengthened when we say loudly and 
clearly that the farm crisis must be addressed by both levels of 
government and not just one. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1645) 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’ve watched and 
listened with great interest to the debate this afternoon about 
agriculture and the concerns surrounding agriculture, and 
listened to the member from Rosetown-Biggar, and the member 
from Weyburn-Big Muddy blaming the federal government for 
everything — no responsibility whatsoever for anything that 
happens in Saskatchewan. The Minister of Agriculture the same 
way. It’s everybody else’s fault. 
 
And then they . . . Probably what I thought was the most 
incredible thing though was the member from Melville getting 
up and saying, if you haven’t got any solutions you shouldn’t 
have the right to stand up and speak about the issue, and then 
sits down. 
 
Doesn’t say a word about one single solitary solution at all, not 
a single solitary solution, not one intelligent thought at all, and 
then sits down after scolding everybody in the place and saying 
that they have no right to speak unless they have some solutions 



October 20, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 2057 

to the concerns of the farmers here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Is that all? Is that all? I’ll give you a few solutions in a moment. 
Is that all you have to offer? That is to scold everybody in the 
place and say you only have a right to speak if you have a 
solution? 
 
Some of the things that we talk about in agriculture . . . I’ll give 
you some of the things that we’ve talked about in agriculture 
that were solutions. 
 
Earlier this summer we called for earlier withdrawals from 
NISA. And what happened? The federal government agreed to 
it and launched a program of early withdrawal. Part of a 
solution for the farmers’ cash flow difficulties. 
 
Earlier this summer we called for a . . . earlier this summer we 
called for some changes in the cash advance program to get 
farmers more money earlier in the season. And what happened? 
The federal government responded. Part of a solution to the 
cash crunch here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Earlier this summer, earlier this summer, just a few weeks ago 
in fact, we called on the federal government to move towards 
awarding initial price . . . raising their initial prices sooner so 
that the farmers would have more money. A solution once again 
for trying to help with the cash flow difficulties of farmers. 
 
Those are three solutions that we’ve advanced in the last few 
weeks. And the member gets up and says, you don’t have a 
right to speak in this Legislative Assembly unless you have 
some solutions. There are three right there that we’ve talked 
about in the last few weeks. 
 
Where’s your solutions? Where’s your solutions, Mr. Member? 
Where’s your solutions, Mr. Member from Melville? None 
whatsoever. None whatsoever. 
 
Those are three that we think are important. 
 
We think the provincial government has a role to play in this. 
We think that the provincial government definitely has a role to 
play. Highways, transportation, highways, transportation, 
highways, transportation . . . Where’s your solutions though? 
You say you have solutions. You present nothing to the 
Assembly in terms of solutions, Mr. Speaker. Speaks about 
responsibility, speaks about responsibility, but doesn’t take any 
himself. 
 
In the interest of time here . . . We’ve got a lot of things that we 
wanted to discuss about agriculture and we’ll be doing them 
over the course of the next several weeks, Mr. Speaker, but in 
the interest of time and wanting to ensure that we get on the 
record of voting this very, very important issue that should be 
sent to the federal government as soon as possible, I will take 
my place. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. It is my duty to warn 
the Assembly that the hon. member from Watrous is about to 
exercise his right to close the debate and afterwards all 
members will be precluded from speaking on this question. 

Therefore if any member wishes to speak let that member do so 
now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 
gives me pleasure to close the debate. Just to make one point, 
and that point is that we will not be supporting the amendment. 
And I just want to clarify that statement. 
 
Well the member for Wood River boos, but he knows that this 
resolution calls on the federal government to address the recent 
American/European subsidies. International trade, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, international trade is a responsibility, an owned 
responsibility for negotiation at the federal level. So while we 
can provide support like this motion, if you add the words 
provincial government in there it would indicate that we, along 
with the U.S. . . . or the federal government, would be obligated 
to talk to Europe and the U.S. in terms of international trade. 
None of the provinces can do that. So that I just wanted to 
explain that’s why we won’t be accepting that amendment. 
 
However, we do accept our responsibility as outlined by many 
members that spoke on this side of the House, with the support 
that we give to agriculture being greater than other province on 
a per capita basis, and the fact that we’re 60/40 partners in 
NISA, 60/40 partners in crop insurance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s the tradition. And that’s why I think this 
motion should go forward as it was submitted. Thank you very 
much. 
 
The division bells rang. 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 13 
 
Krawetz Bjornerud Toth 
Boyd Draude Gantefoer 
Heppner Osika Hillson 
McPherson Aldridge Haverstock 
Julé   
 

Nays — 22 
 
Calvert Wiens MacKinnon 
Shillington Johnson Whitmore 
Upshall Kowalsky Van Mulligen 
Teichrob Bradley Koenker 
Trew Nilson Cline 
Hamilton Stanger Jess 
Wall Kasperski Ward 
Murray   
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — By leave of the Assembly, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, to move a motion to send the transcripts and the 
motion we just passed to the federal government. 
 
Leave granted. 
 



2058 Saskatchewan Hansard October 20, 1998 

Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
move, seconded by the member for Kindersley: 
 

That the Legislative Assembly requests the Speaker to send 
copies and transcripts of the Rule 46 debate motion 
regarding low commodity prices and grain subsidies to the 
Prime Minister of Canada, the federal Minister of 
Agriculture, and the federal Minister responsible for the 
Canadian Wheat Board. 

 
I so move. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Leaves of Absence 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — By leave of the Assembly, to 
propose two routine motions, and the opposition has one as 
well. The first is: 
 

That leave of absence be granted to the member for Carrot 
River Valley and Saskatchewan Rivers from Monday, 
October 19, 1998 to Friday, October 23, 1998 inclusive, to 
attend the CPA Canadian Regional Council in Washington, 
D.C. on behalf of the Assembly. 

 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — I propose the said motion. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — By leave of the Assembly: 
 

That leave of absence be granted to the member from 
Moose Jaw North from Monday, October 19, l998 to 
Friday, October 23, 1998 inclusive to attend the 44th 
Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference in Wellington, 
New Zealand on behalf of this Assembly. 
 

Leave granted. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — By leave of the Assembly, to stop 
the clock to allow the Third Party to propose a routine motion. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

Substitution of Members on Committees 
 

Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The motions I have to 
propose are changes in committee members. 
 

That the name of Mr. Jack Hillson be substituted for the 
name of Mr. Ron Osika on a list of members composing 
the Standing Committee on Public Accounts. 
 

And by leave, Mr. Speaker, I’ll continue with the balance: 
 

That the name of Mr. Glen McPherson be substituted for 

the name of Mr. Jack Hillson on a list of members 
composing the Standing Committee on Crown 
Corporations; 
 
That the name of Mr. Ron Osika be added to a list of 
members composing the Standing Committee on 
Environment; 
 
That the name of Mr. Ron Osika be added to a list of 
members composing the Standing Committee on Private 
Members’ Bills; 
 

and: 
 

That the name of Mr. Jack Hillson be added to a list of 
members composing the standing Committee on 
Regulations. 
 

I so move, seconded by the member from North Battleford. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. The member from Melville 
has requested leave to move a number of motions and you’ve 
heard all them. Is leave granted to move them all? 
 
We’ll have to vote on them individually though. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I move: 
 

That the name of Mr. Jack Hillson be added to a list of 
members composing the standing Committee on 
Regulations. 
 

Moved by myself and seconded by the member from North 
Battleford. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Mr. Osika: — I move: 
 

That the name of Mr. Ron Osika be added to a list of 
members composing the Standing Committee on Private 
Members’ Bills. 
 

Seconded by the member from North Battleford. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Mr. Osika: — I move: 
 

That the name of Mr. Glen McPherson be substituted for 
the name of Mr. Jack Hillson on a list of members 
composing the Standing Committee on Crown 
Corporations. 
 

Moved by myself, seconded by the member from North 
Battleford. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
(1700) 
 
Mr. Osika: —I move: 
 



October 20, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 2059 

That the name of Mr. Jack Hillson be substituted for the 
name of Mr. Ron Osika on a list of members composing 
the Standing Committee on Public Accounts. 
 

Seconded by the member from North Battleford. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

That the name of Mr. Ron Osika be added to a list of 
members composing the Standing Committee on 
Environment. 

 
Seconded by the member from North Battleford. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The seconder has to be present to 
second the motion and the hon. member from North Battleford 
is not present. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I move: 
 

That the name of Mr. Ron Osika be added to a list of 
members composing the Standing Committee on 
Environment. 

 
Seconded by the member from Thunder Creek. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:04 p.m. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................2029 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................2029 
  McPherson...............................................................................................................................................................................2029 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................2029 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................2029 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................2029 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Trew .........................................................................................................................................................................................2029 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................2030 
  Whitmore.................................................................................................................................................................................2030 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Anniversary of Person’s Case 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................2030 
 90th Anniversary of Person’s Decision 
  Trew .........................................................................................................................................................................................2030 
 Eric Malling 
  Haverstock...............................................................................................................................................................................2030 
 Village of Livelong Booming 
  Stanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................2030 
 Congratulations to the Community of Outlook 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................2031 
 10th Annual SADD Convention 
  Murrell.....................................................................................................................................................................................2031 
 University of Regina Convocation 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................2031 
 First Woman MLA 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................201 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Financial Assistance for Farmers 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................2032 
  Upshall .....................................................................................................................................................................................2032 
 Crown Land Lease Rates 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................2033 
  Upshall .....................................................................................................................................................................................2033 
 Emergency Hospital Services in Regina 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2033 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................2033 
 Public Utility Rate Review Process 
  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................2034 
  Lingenfelter .............................................................................................................................................................................2034 
 Dismissal of SaskPower Official 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................2034 
  Lingenfelter .............................................................................................................................................................................2034 
 Home Care in Saskatchewan 
  Haverstock...............................................................................................................................................................................2034 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................2034 
 Public Administrator at Kindersley Senior Care Facility 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................2036 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................2036 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Death of Chief Justice Dickson 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................2036 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................2037 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................2037 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................2037 
MOTION UNDER RULE 46 
 Farm Finances 
  Upshall ...........................................................................................................................................................................2038, 2057 
  Jess ...........................................................................................................................................................................................2041 



 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................2042 
  Murrell.....................................................................................................................................................................................2046 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................2047 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................2049 
  Wiens .......................................................................................................................................................................................2050 
  McPherson...............................................................................................................................................................................2052 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................2053 
  Bradley.....................................................................................................................................................................................2054 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................2055 
  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................2056 
 Recorded division (amendment)................................................................................................................................................2057 
MOTIONS 
 Leaves of Absence 
  MacKinnon..............................................................................................................................................................................2058 
 Substitution of Members on Committees 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................2058 
 
 


