





























































Hansard: April 03, 1998


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 439 
 April 3, 1998 
 

 

The Assembly met at l0 a.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have 
petitions to present today. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions come from the town of Weldon, Mr. Speaker. I 
so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present to do with Jack Messer’s severance. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts around the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The petition is signed, Mr. Speaker, from the people from 
Regina. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as well to 
present a petition to this Assembly. And reading the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this petition, Mr. Speaker, is signed by individuals from 
the Saskatoon, Melfort, Yellow Creek, and Nipawin areas of the 
province. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — I too rise enthusiastically to read the prayer 
for the petition that I have here this morning. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
of the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And these are signed by people from Tisdale, Melfort, Wadena, 
Gronlid. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I rise as well to present 
petitions from people in my home community of Melfort. The 
prayers reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Ms. Draude: — I also have a petition to present today. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the people are from Tisdale and Melfort. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I as well have a petition 
to present today. The petitioners are concerned about the issues 
surrounding Channel Lake and Jack Messer. The petitioners 
come from the Melfort area of Saskatchewan and I’m pleased to 
present on their behalf. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition this morning as well. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains hospital 
may be continued. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed this morning by the good 
folks in Assiniboia. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I too rise to present 
petitions on behalf of people concerned about the Plains Health 
Centre closure, many of whom I’m sure to expect to see out at 
our many public forums that we’re going to hold on this very 
issue throughout the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Now the hon. member 
will recognize of course that in presenting petitions to the 
House the hon. member is not to enter into debate, and I’ll ask 
him to go directly to the prayer. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 



440 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 1998 

 

by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Those who’ve signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
communities such as Shell Lake, Saskatoon, and the city of 
Regina. I so present. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also present a petition 
on behalf of people concerned about the closure of the Plains 
hospital. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The signatures are all from Pilot Butte, and I so present. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I join with my 
colleagues today to bring petitions forward in regards to the 
Plains hospital. 

 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition are all 
from the Ponteix area and fully intend on being in Assiniboia on 
Tuesday night. I so present. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy this 
morning, Mr. Speaker, to present petitions. I’ll read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reach necessary agreements with other levels of 
government to fund the twinning of the Trans-Canada 
Highway in Saskatchewan so work can begin in 1998, and 
to set out a time frame for the ultimate completion of the 
project with or without federal assistance. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these today come from the communities of 
Robsart, Consul, and Regina, as well as Gull Lake, and I’m 
happy to present them on behalf of those people today. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly 
respecting the twinning of the Trans-Canada Highway; 
saving the Plains Health Centre; ending the practice of 
night hunting; and cancelling severance payments to Jack 
Messer. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I shall 
on day no. 24 ask the government the following question: 
 

At a Saskatchewan Wheat Pool meeting in Cudworth last 
November, the past MLA for Humboldt, Mr. Armand Roy, 
stated that he and others have been appointed by your 
government to hold area meetings regarding the grain 
transportation and short-line railway issue: please list all 
those appointed for this purpose; what is their mandate; 
what is their remuneration or pay for providing this 
service; which department or agency is paying for the 
appointees’ services; has the remuneration for these 
appointees been included in last year’s budget or this 
year’s budget; please indicate where such remuneration is 
documented in the 1997-98 or the 1998-99 Saskatchewan 
Estimates. 

 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. — I think it’s 25 maybe — ask the government 
the following question: 
 

Minister of SERM (Saskatchewan Environment and 
Resource Management) and Minister of Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation: how many water wells are there in the 
province; how many of these water wells are now mildly 
contaminated; how many are classed as unfit for human 
but still fit for animal use; how many are not fit for use at 
all; how many require chlorine, fluorine or filtration 
treatments before use; and, how many water wells contain 
heavy metals associated with the development of 
Alzheimer’s disease? 
 

I so submit. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I would like to 
introduce to you and to my colleagues in the Assembly, some 
very special people that are sitting in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
My daughter Kim, my wife Barbara, and my wife’s sister, 
Beverley Mahon, who travelled here from Thunder Bay to be 
with us today, and please welcome them here this morning. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Langford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have some 
special guests here this morning. There’s 24 students from the 
William Mason High School — or School — in Choiceland. 
And you may recognize some of them, Mr. Speaker, we had the 
privilege together to visit them this winter. 
 
With them is their teacher, Mrs. Betty Reiter, Mrs. Marilyn 



April 3, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 441 

 

Elchuk, Mrs. LeAnne Clarke, Mr. Jeff Smith, Mr. Glen Brazier, 
Mrs. Cindy Leyh, and Mrs. Shelley Korol. I will be meeting 
with them later on for photos and drinks and a few questions 
and answers. Would everyone please help introduce them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Can-Oat Milling Opens in Martensville 
 

Mr. Langford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Not so long ago 
raw oats were shipped out of Saskatchewan for processing, 
usually to the U.S. (United States). That meant that we also 
shipped out of the province, jobs. I am happy to announce, Mr. 
Speaker, that this is no longer true. 
 
Yesterday I attended an official opening of the new Can-Oat 
Milling facility in Martensville. This plant will double the 
output of Can-Oat Milling. It will process more than a million 
pounds of processed oat products each day. And, Mr. Speaker, 
the plant employs 33 people permanently. This is jobs that once 
were shipped out. This plant is now 100 per cent owned by the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, which means that these jobs will 
stay in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a state-of-the-art facility and it is good news 
for the Saskatchewan farmers, the Saskatchewan workers, and 
to the Saskatchewan economy. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Kelvington Students Celebrate Canadian Citizenship 
 

Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, recently 
the Robert Melrose Elementary School in Kelvington held a 
very unique and special celebration. Sara Piot, a 17-month-old 
girl from China, was adopted by her parents, Laurel Irving-Piot 
and David Piot, and she received her citizenship papers. 
 
As part of the educational experience, the students watched a 
video on Canadian heritage. The Universal Declaration of 
Human Rights and freedoms was read, reminding the students 
of how hard Canada fought for, and has enjoyed, these rights 
and freedoms. 
 
The students then took an oath of reaffirmation of Canadian 
citizenship and were presented with a celebratory certificate 
issued by the Hon. Lucienne Robillard, Minister of Citizenship. 
 
At a time when Canadian unity is an issue and Canadians are 
considering what the country means to them, these students 
have been given a very valuable lesson on citizenship and 
shared in a unique experience. 
 
In closing, I would ask the members of this House to join with 
me in welcoming Sara as a Canadian citizen. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Swift Current Pioneer Co-operative Has Record Year 
 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Pioneer 

Co-operative of Swift Current and area had a banner year in 
1997. Sales were 79.2 million while net savings were 4.8 
million — profits that stayed in Saskatchewan and did not flow 
out to New York, London, or Zürich. Ninety members turned 
out for the annual meeting where general manager Stuart 
Dryland gave the good news. 
 
Numerous improvements to rural co-ops, which were partly 
responsible for the record year, were highlighted at the meeting. 
Some of the new improvements were as follows: a new service 
station at Tompkins; a new store in Stewart Valley; a new office 
warehouse addition at the Kyle farm centre; a chemical 
warehouse in Morse, complete with a key lock upgrade; and 
scanners installed at Cabri, Gull Lake, Hodgeville, Kyle, and 
Tompkins — investing in rural Saskatchewan, the 
Saskatchewan way. 
 
With record profits come record patronage allocations for 
cooperative members. This year members received well over $2 
million in cash refunds. Dryland adds that providing the best 
service possible remains the cooperative’s primary objective. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I congratulate the Pioneer Co-operative of Swift 
Current and area for continuing to add to the strength of an 
already strong Saskatchewan economy. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

The Educated Corpse 
 

Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My members’ 
statement this morning is entitled “The Educated Corpse.” 
 

We’ll be the very smartest dead people 
Saskatchewan has ever seen! 
If you’ve been watching the news lately 
You’ll know exactly what I mean 
 
$ Just how many million 
By the time they’re done adding on 
The Plains is getting a facelift 
And they don’t see anything wrong! 
 
Waiting lists are lengthy 
Some are backed up for a year 
Turning a hospital into a school 
Is supposed to make us cheer?! 
 
Priorities have fallen by the wayside 
The health care system’s come undone 
We may be dead - but educated 
The smartest corpses under the sun 
 
If the Government can’t accommodate 
Sick people with hospital beds 
What makes them think we'll be well enough 
To go to school and use our heads 
 
Without a healthy body 
The mind won’t learn or grow 
Change a hospital into a school 
Smart move - I don’t think so! 
 

Mr. Speaker, this thought was sent to me by Peggy Millman 
from Imperial, who is one of the 6,600 people on our 



442 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 1998 

 

waiting-list today in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Weekly Newspaper Headlines 
 

Mr. Ward: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Here are five headlines 
from Saskatchewan weekly newspapers: 
 
(1) “Jo-Lin Plumbing and Heating opens outlet in Preeceville.” 
The Preeceville Progress, March 12. 
 
(2) “North East Terminal Ltd. embarking on $1.5 million 
expansion.” The Wadena News, March 11. 
 
(3) “Manufacturing new opportunities for Saskatchewan prairie 
farmers.” The Kinistino-Birch Hill Post-Gazette, March 17. 
 
(4) “McLean’s agra centre completes expansion.” The Melville 
Advance, March 18. 
 
(5) “Ochapowace establishes financial services partnership.” 
The Broadview Express, January 27. 
 
These five stories have two things in common, Mr. Speaker. 
They each give evidence that the Saskatchewan economy is 
alive and thriving throughout the province, in our small towns 
as well as our cities. And each comes from the constituency of 
an opposition member. 
 
I’m happy to share this good news with their constituents, with 
all the members of this Assembly. And like the members before 
me, I wonder why they are not interested in promoting the hard 
work and initiative of their own constituents. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Peewee C Champions 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 
pleased to rise today to talk about the provincial peewee, or 13 
and under, C champions. The Lampman-Alameda Imperials 
won the C championship last Saturday, March 28. 
 
They played a tough series against Redvers, Midale, Pense, 
Richmound, and finally the northern champions, Watson. The 
Imperials received a real scare in the Richmound series when 
they fell behind 7-1 after the first period in Richmound. The 
game ended with an 11-all tie. The return game in the 
Imperial’s home rink ended with them winning the series with 
an overall score of 22-21. Great for the shooters but not so good 
for the goalies. 
 
The team was made up of 15 boys and one girl, Jenna Waugh, 
of Lampman. The coaches are Murray Wheeler and Darrell 
Fornwald. Congratulations to the team and coaches for a fine 
end of a good season, the peewee C champions, 
Lampman-Alameda Imperials. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Prince Albert Bottling Plant 
 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, if you wanted the best bottle 
of Coke in the world where would you go? — Right in my 
hometown, Mr. Speaker, in Prince Albert, Saskatchewan. 
 
For the second month in a row, the Prince Albert bottling plant, 
which is owned by the Hauser family, has been awarded the 
overall Coke quality award for Canada. And when you consider 
that Canada is recognized as the country with the highest 
overall quality, it could be argued that the Prince Albert bottlers 
makes the best Coca-Cola anywhere. 
 
Management and staff are quick to point out that the quality 
awards are the result of total team effort, from the syrup maker, 
to the label operator, to the truck drivers. 
 
The production and quality tests are based on pre-set production 
and packaging specifications by Coca-Cola. The company tests 
for accuracy in several areas, including carbonation, sugar 
content, taste, and appearance. The testing process is 
completely random, and no bottling plant knows when an 
inspection will take place. Therefore the consecutive 
back-to-back awards indicate that the Prince Albert plant has a 
consistently high-level product. 
 
The Hauser family’s bottling plant is the only privately owned 
bottler in the province, and they have shown that they can 
compete with anybody by beating out large corporations in 
Winnipeg and Toronto. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we now have evidence when it comes to Coke 
from Prince Albert, Saskatchewan, it’s the real thing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Save the Plains Public Forums 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Liberal opposition and the Save the Plains Committee are going 
to give the people of Regina and southern Saskatchewan a 
voice. The NDP (New Democratic Party) may not care; the 
Tories may have thrown in the towel. But the people deserve a 
say in the future of the Plains hospital and the dangerous road 
that this government is taking at the expense of our health care 
system. 
 
We announced yesterday that a number of public forums will be 
held, including one in Regina on April 29, and invited the 
Minister of Health to attend. The minister says he doesn’t know 
how appropriate that would be. He doesn’t know what he could 
possibly add. 
 
Well he might start by explaining to people why the NDP 
government is taking a path that makes no sense in health care 
or financial terms. He might end by explaining why this 
government has ignored the wishes of a hundred thousand 
people who have signed petitions opposing the closure. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the first rural meeting has been scheduled for next 
Tuesday in Assiniboia. And if this government truly cares about 
what people have to say, at least one member of this 
government will attend to explain. Because this issue is now 
more than just about saving the Plains, it’s about saving our 
health care system and saving lives. 



April 3, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 443 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Regina Hospital Emergency Services 
 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Health. Mr. Minister, yesterday 
afternoon we got a call from a nurse at the Plains Health Centre. 
She informed us last night the Plains was going to be the only 
hospital in Regina with an emergency room open. Staff at the 
Plains were told that the Pasqua and General were shutting 
down their emergency rooms because they were full and they 
had nowhere to put patients after they got out of emergency. 
 
Mr. Minister, this is a crisis situation — a city the size of 
Regina with only one emergency room open in a hospital that’s 
going to be closed in a few months. Mr. Speaker, how can this 
happen? Were you even aware of this crisis and what are you 
doing about it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, to the member from 
Moosomin. I have here a front page story yesterday from the 
Leader-Post . . . or the third page story, and the third page story 
reads, and it’s a quote from the chairman of the district health 
board, and what the chairman of the district health board says is 
that they’ve been conducting an audit and they’ve been 
conducting this audit of health services now in the Regina area 
for some months. 
 
But he says in the first two weeks of March they revealed that 
the health district was running a 5 to a 10 per cent vacancy rate, 
the equivalent of 20 to 70 hospital beds. The health district has 
675 beds currently, and today the district health board continues 
to tell us on a regular basis that there are vacancies. 
 
Now I’ve said from time to time that there are peaks. But the 
audit that the district health board is doing on an ongoing basis 
says that they have 10 to 15 per cent vacancy rate on a regular 
basis. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
minister didn’t answer the question. His audio obviously isn’t 
working. Mr. Speaker, not only did the Pasqua and General 
close their emergency rooms, but the emergency room at the 
Plains was so swamped they had to keep extra staff on for the 
night. And this, Mr. Minister, is the hospital you’re closing. 
This isn’t planning, it’s crisis management. 
 
Mr. Minister, this is a disaster waiting to happen. 
 
What if a disaster did happen? What if there was a major 
medical emergency such as a plane crash or a bus crash or a 
poison gas leak? What would happen then? Two full hospitals, 
inadequate emergency services, and that’s before the Plains 
closes. How bad is it going to be after it closes? 
 
Mr. Minister, are you prepared to take responsibility for the 
lives that will be lost if there ever is a major medical emergency 
and we can’t handle it because the emergency rooms are 
closed? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important 
for us to realize that in this province we have established 
services in such a fashion that you can deal with emergency 
crises. And I think if the member would just pay some attention 
to what’s happened in this province. 
 
And let’s just take the example, take the example of the plane 
crash at . . . or the train crash at Biggar where, at Biggar, we had 
a major catastrophe; where we had a huge issue; where a 
number of individuals, of people, required emergency services. 
 
And did the province’s health care system respond quickly and 
adequately? The answer, Mr. Speaker, is that it did. Not only 
did it respond adequately and quickly, today we’re receiving 
letters from people across Canada who were on that train, who 
say to us that they have a tremendous appreciation for the 
emergency services that were provided out of the Biggar 
hospital, out of the Saskatoon hospital. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, that when the members opposite, 
whether they’re Tories or whether they’re Liberals, they stand 
up in the House and abuse the health care system in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, they fearmonger and they need to 
get in touch to what’s happening with health services across the 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, when the 
minister talks about meeting the needs of people, the minister 
forgets that he’s closed even more hospital beds since the last 
tragedy took place in this province. 
 
Mr. Minister, a second nurse who spoke at the General says this 
is not an isolated incident. It’s a regular occurrence. They close 
down the emergency room at least once a month because the 
hospital is full. And I’ve talked to ambulance drivers who have 
indicated that’s a problem they face on an ongoing basis — 
because the hospital is full. 
 
You keep telling us everything is fine. Mr. Speaker, the minister 
says we have plenty of beds. He’s saying, don’t worry; be 
happy. Mr. Minister, people in Regina and southern 
Saskatchewan are worried. It’s time for you to pull your head 
out of the sand and start addressing that concern. 
 
What are you doing to address emergency room shut-downs and 
what are you going to do to ensure that we have enough beds 
available in Regina to address emergency situations? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to reiterate one more 
time to the member opposite, that in this province we just 
completed a review of some of the acute care beds in the 
province, and it was done by Health SURC (Health Services 
Utilization and Research Commission). 
 
And what Health SURC did in the review of 780 patients across 
the province is they said this on the final outcome of their 
review. They said today, Mr. Speaker, that of the 780 people 



444 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 1998 

 

who were occupying acute care beds, they are non-acute care 
patients. They’re non-acute care patients. Which says, Mr. 
Speaker, that we have some way to go yet. We have some way 
to go yet in terms of establishing our efficiencies in the 
utilization of some of our acute care beds. 
 
Now they didn’t say that we didn’t have enough beds in the 
province. They said we have enough hospital beds in the 
province. It’s how we use the hospital beds in the province into 
the future, Mr. Speaker. And we’ll continue to work with the 
district health boards; we’ll continue to ensure that we have 
quality health care services that are provided out of our 
emergency services. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Inquiry into Channel Lake 
 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
questions this morning are for the Premier. Welcome home, sir. 
It’s good to see you again. 
 
Everyone’s been kind of wondering lately if you’re going to 
show up at the Crown Corporations Committee and take the 
witness stand, or are you going to order your hand-picked NDP 
committee to vote us down again. 
 
In one hour of sworn testimony, Jack Messer has already 
revealed that cabinet knew what was going on in Channel Lake 
every step of the way, including yourself. I expect Mr. Messer 
is going to tell us a whole lot more about what he knows before 
this is over —$300,000 and a free lawyer, I don’t think is going 
to be enough to keep him quiet. 
 
Mr. Premier, are you going to come to the Crown Corporations 
Committee and take the witness stand or are you going to hide 
behind the NDP committee? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I want to remind the 
House and you, Mr. Speaker, that it was the government under 
the leadership of the Crown Investments Corporation minister, 
who tabled 100-150 pages of independent reports by Deloitte 
Touche and by the CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 
Saskatchewan) — documentation. So we’re on a path of 
making sure that all of the facts are out; all of the facts are 
basically out now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I understand that a good work schedule and a fair 
one has been established by the Crown Corporations 
Committee. Let it do its job. If at some appropriate time more 
information is required that has not already been required and 
the committee feels they can add . . . that I can add some 
pertinent information, I’d be pleased to be helpful. 
 
After all, as I say, we tabled the reports and we want this to end 
on a very positive experience for the Crown corporations of 
Saskatchewan which the people of the province support very 
strongly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, we have a 
whole lot of questions for you about the whole Channel Lake 

situation. We think that the witness list should be extended to 
include yourself and the Deputy Premier and a number of other 
cabinet ministers. Jack Messer has already given sworn 
testimony before that committee. 
 
Will you confirm, sir, that if you are asked by the committee to 
attend Crown Corporations and give sworn testimony before 
that committee that you will indeed attend that committee? 
 
I think everyone in the province is asking that question. 
Everyone wants to know the answer to that question. Will you 
confirm, sir? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Speaker, what everyone in 
the province of Saskatchewan is asking is whether or not the 
Tory Party over there is committed to keeping the Crowns, 
judging by today’s Leader-Post opinion poll. 
 
And it’s strange, Mr. Speaker, it’s strange that the numbers of 
the opinion polls indicate this time round exactly what they 
indicated about a decade ago. Three out of five of 
Saskatchewan voters do not want our Crown corporations 
privatized. 
 
And here we have the candidate, one of the candidates of the 
Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Hermanson, saying on March 14 the 
following: 
 

I think after 10 minutes debate, people of Saskatchewan 
would be willing to sell the Crown corporations of 
Saskatchewan. 

 
That’s their position. So that’s the question that’s on the minds 
of the people. The question on our minds is how to make the 
Crown corporations more accountable, govern better. 
 
And as I’ve already indicated before, if the committee should 
make a request, would you support it, after all the information is 
in, that I might be able to add some additional new information, 
I’d be very pleased to be of help if at all possible. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Premier, last week you denied 
that you stepped in to stop the SaskPower board from firing 
your NDP buddy, Jack Messer. But people who were on the 
board at the time don’t seem to back it up. Today’s Leader-Post 
quotes from one former SaskPower board member saying that 
there was a strong opinion on the board that Jack Messer should 
be fired. 
 
Mr. Premier, will you admit that you stepped in and overruled 
the wishes of the SaskPower board to save Jack Messer from 
being fired? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, this is a very old 
question to which I’ve already answered on Monday of this 
week and has been written on many occasions in the previous 
reports before Channel Lake and post Channel Lake. I refer the 



April 3, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 445 

 

member and I refer the House to my answer on March 30, 1998, 
to Hansard, where I say in part, quote: 
 

I’m informed that the SaskPower board held several 
in-camera meetings, and that many members of the board 
concluded they had . . . serious issues with the personality 
and . . . management style of Mr. Messer. 

 
I made that comment. And then I said the following, quote: 
 

After considering all the matters, I indicated to the minister 
that Mr. Messer was doing a good job in terms of debt 
reduction; reorganizing — although it was difficult with 
respect to the unions and others; the corporation was in the 
black — in a profit position; and that the minister should 
go out and try to work out the differences between the 
board and the CEO in order to make sure that the 
corporation functions and continues to function in that 
direction. 
 

And that’s what happened with the board eventually. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Health Care Services in Melville 
 

Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
people of Melville are anxiously awaiting word which will 
confirm that this government will finance 65 per cent of the 
anticipated cost of constructing a new hospital. 
 
However the North Valley Health District is running a deficit of 
a half a million dollars even after a hiring freeze, and cutting its 
spending to the bone. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question for the Minister of Health: the people 
of Melville are concerned that they may have a shiny new 
hospital but won’t have adequate funding for beds or staffing. 
How do you intend to address this concern, sir? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the question 
from the member for Melville and to say to the member from 
Melville that, as he knows, we just completed our budget 
process and have announced to the district health boards what 
in fact their allocations are going to be for 1998-99. 
 
And the member knows that there is going to be an enrichment 
to the district health board in terms of the funding that they’re 
getting this year, to assist them with dealing with some of the 
issues that are prevalent in their district as it relates to 
emergency services, as it relates to acute care and long-term 
care. And we’re going to continue to provide that support to the 
districts across the province. 
 
The member knows, the member knows that this year, Mr. 
Speaker, we’ve provided an additional $30 million to the 
districts across the province and it’s going to assist them and 
enrich and help them provide services across the piece for all 
districts, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary. The fact is this 

government is talking about helping the health districts, and the 
North Valley Health District particularly, finance a new 
hospital. However, bricks and mortar mean nothing if there isn’t 
appropriate funding for hospital beds and the front-line health 
care people. 
 
Will you make a commitment to the people of Melville and the 
North Valley Health District today, that you will in fact provide 
the level of funding that is needed to fully staff and operate a 
new hospital? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure what the Liberal 
members are really asking us to do here in health, because 
today the member from Melville stands up and talks about how 
important it is to continue to put money into the operations of 
health districts across the province. 
 
And I say to him that over the last four years we’ve continued 
to enrich that piece so that health districts can provide a 
comprehensive level of services. And then he says, the member 
says that he’s not interested in seeing the government putting 
any money into bricks and mortar, when I know that the 
member from Thunder Creek has been saying to me now for the 
last three days, and will likely stand up again today, and say to 
me that what we need to do is we need to save the Plains Health 
Centre. So we should be putting more money into bricks and 
mortar, more money into bricks and mortar and less money into 
services. 
 
What is the member from Melville asking? He’s asking us not 
to put any money into the bricks and mortar piece; then he 
should be talking to the member from Thunder Creek and 
saying to him that those services are no longer required at the 
Plains Health Centre. 
 
Our role, Mr. Speaker, is to provide comprehensive funding for 
facilities, for staffing, for direct services. That’s the objective of 
this government, Mr. Sir, is to provide a balanced approach to 
providing health services to all people in the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. People in rural areas 
and all over this province are extremely concerned. We talk 
about all the money that the government is putting into health 
care, but where is it going? We still close hospital beds and we 
have front-line care workers that are fired or let go or cut to the 
bone because the health districts don’t have the money. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government is providing $30 million in 
additional funding for health districts. But the fact is that this 
funding is not going to improve front-line health care — it’s 
going to meet deficits. Regina Health District faces $5 million 
deficit; Saskatoon district, $5 million in the red. The Living Sky 
District faces a one and a half million dollar shortfall. The East 
Central District is saddled with $2.4 million deficit. The 
Battlefords needs $1 million to break even. And now we learn 
that in the North Valley Health District, they also face a half a 
million dollar deficit. 
 
To the minister, Mr. Speaker: you’re only pumping enough 



446 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 1998 

 

money into the system to keep our districts barely afloat. 
There’s no extra funding to improve the system. When are you 
going to end this vicious cycle? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I know that the 
member from . . . or the Leader of the Opposition has recently 
been travelling the province and having some discussions about 
where the funding is coming from to deliver the services. And 
the leader is asking for, the leader is asking for some additional 
funding, that it be provided, to more funding for the province. 
 
Now in 1996, the good doctor said, in his comment when he 
was asked about what would he do in terms of reducing the debt 
in the province, and the good doctor said what he would do is 
take the money out of health care — he would take the money 
out of health care. He said he would find a portion of the 
savings of the debt in the $1.3 billion that we were spending 
then in health care. 
 
And when I asked the member opposite and the good doctor, 
what is happening in terms of Ottawa’s participation in the 
funding, the answer is that we aren’t getting any. 
 
I say to you, you table me the letters, table us the letters that the 
good doctor has written to Ottawa asking Ottawa to participate 
in enriched funding for health care in this province. Could you 
table that? Because I suggest, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order. Next question. 
 

Compensation for Hepatitis C Victims 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 
appears that once again another province has taken the lead in 
doing what is right. British Columbia’s NDP Premier says he’s 
not comfortable with the compensation package being provided 
to victims of hepatitis C. 
 
Mr. Minister, your NDP cousins, your cousins believe that all 
victims of hepatitis C who contracted the disease through 
tainted blood should be entitled to compensation. Mr. Minister, 
you plan on discussing this matter with your federal and 
provincial counterparts this weekend. Will you open up the 
process to include all victims and their immediate families? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
member opposite and to all members of the House today that 
this issue of compensation of people who have been infected by 
hepatitis C has not been a political issue. It has not been a 
political issue. And today the member opposite raises it in that 
light. 
 
Because over the past four months, members of all parties, 
members of all governments, whether they’re federal ministers, 
whether they’re Mr. Rock, whether they’re in fact all of the 
provincial health ministers, or whether they are territorial folks, 
we’ve all come together to make a decision about how it is that 
we can ensure that we can compensate people who have been 
infected by hepatitis C. 
 
And at the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, we’ve said we will 

provide a compensation package that will be fair, that will be 
comprehensive, and that will be unilateral for all people across 
the country. This, Mr. Speaker, is not a political debate. This is 
about a debate about being fair and equitable to all Canadians 
who have been infected by hepatitis C. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, your 
decision has nothing to do with being fair. Nothing at all. Mr. 
Speaker, I would think that if a government is going to err, it 
should err on the side of the victims, who in this case contracted 
the disease through no fault of their own. It simply isn’t fair that 
governments will only compensate those who contracted the 
disease during an arbitrary period. Mr. Minister, by refusing to 
include these victims in the package, you are simply inviting 
more legal action. Your government, however, seems to like 
that. 
 
Why are you forcing these people to spend their last days in a 
courtroom battle. Will you recommend to your federal and 
provincial counterparts that this package be opened up to 
include all victims and their immediate families? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to go back to my 
earlier comment where I said to the member, and will reiterate 
again, that this is not a political debate and should not be a 
political debate. The member opposite should recognize that his 
good friends in New Brunswick, his cousins, who are also 
Liberals, have said that they support this package. 
 
The people from . . . the federal minister, Mr. Rock, has been on 
his feet every day saying that he believes, he believes that we 
have a fair and comprehensive package, his Liberal cousins 
from Ottawa. 
 
And collectively, Mr. Speaker, we as provincial ministers and 
the federal minister have said that in order for us to provide the 
best comprehensive package for Canadians irrespective of 
where they live, whether it’s in New Brunswick, or whether it’s 
in British Columbia, or whether it’s in Ontario, we want to 
ensure that they get the best package that will serve them well 
into the future, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Grain Transportation 
 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The issue of grain 
transportation is high on the agenda of farmers in this province, 
Mr. Speaker. On February 19 a meeting was held in Saskatoon 
for the purpose of reviewing the future of our grain 
transportation network. At that meeting the Premier was asked 
to initiate a court challenge under the combines Act against the 
rail and grain companies for colluding to effect elevator 
rationalization. 
 
Mr. Premier, at that time you stated you would familiarize 
yourself with the combines Act. Have you examined the Act, 
and will you now comply with the request by farmers to initiate 
a court challenge? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, this is a very important 



April 3, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 447 

 

question affecting large numbers of farmers, because the 
railway companies, it appears, are determined to proceed with 
their plan with respect to rail-line abandonments 
notwithstanding the fact that Mr. Justice Estey has been asked 
by the federal government to study this whole project. Our 
position at the policy, political in the best sense of the word, is 
first to say that all of the western governments agree that there 
should a standstill or a moratorium on the policies of the 
railway companies; that there should be an encouragement to 
look at short-line hauls, making sure that the transportation 
railway network system is as efficient as possible; to try to get 
the federal Prime Minister to say to the railway companies, as 
he can by law, do not do this until Mr. Justice Estey complies. 
 
I was speaking in Rosetown and in the west side of 
Saskatchewan — I’m very surprised that none of the Tories 
members raised this issue at all in the House. There are 
hundreds of farmers concerned about this, hundreds of farmers 
concerned about this. 
 
So we are pursuing it on this basis and we think that is the 
appropriate way to go to save money and time and get solution. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — The question that I asked you — I asked you if 
you would now comply with a request by farmers to initiate a 
court challenge. That is what the farmers asked of you and that 
is what they want to know. 
 
Mr. Premier, at that same meeting you were asked if your 
government was willing to look into a north-south, 
Churchill-Mississippi railway linkage system in order to 
increase effectiveness and ensure costs savings. You stated and 
I quote, “We are actively examining north-south linkages.” 
 
Could you please state, Mr. Premier, how you are actively 
examining this proposal, and what is the status of your 
examination. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — I think this is an important question. 
And there is no new news in my answer but I’m going to repeat 
it because of its importance. 
 
The Minister of Highways has indicated that as part of 
Saskatchewan’s overview of the entire transportation policy, 
we’re looking at the actions of the railway companies. We’re 
looking at the question of north-south linkages. We’re looking 
at the question of Vancouver and the Port of Vancouver. We’re 
looking at the question of the damage being done by the trucks 
to the highway system as they shift from rail to highways. 
We’re looking at all of this. 
 
What we need to do here, and I say this with utmost genuine 
sincerity in terms of federal-provincial cooperation, we need 
truly a national transportation plan which takes into account the 
exigencies of today’s world and the changing nature of 
marketing grain products; but involves Ottawa support together 
with the province of Saskatchewan and the provinces of the 
West — in fact all the provinces of the country who are 
desperately in need of more money for highways and the like. 
 
So the status of the report is that it is ongoing. It is only one 

piece of a large puzzle and a complex puzzle and an expensive 
puzzle. What I would really like to do, as I close my answer, is 
to make sure that the Prime Minister directs the minister 
federally and ministers provincially. We’re ready to come right 
away. We’re ready to fly to Ottawa. We’re ready to protest to 
Ottawa. I don’t want to do this, but whatever we need to do to 
elevate this issue so that the railway costs and the railway 
actions don’t add an unfair burden to our producers. 
 
So the study is ongoing. It’s not complete, but you have to 
understand, Madam Member, that it’s part of a large matrix. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, as it pertains to question 20 
regarding Highways and Transportation, I am very pleased to 
submit the answer to the question. 
 
The Speaker: — The answer for question no. 20 is tabled. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that the Assembly resolve itself 
into the Committee of Finance, and the proposed amendment 
thereto moved by Mr. Gantefoer. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure, Mr. 
Speaker, to address the budget on behalf of my constituents 
from the constituency of Saskatoon Sutherland. 
 
I’d like to begin by welcoming the pages to the Legislative 
Assembly and to thank them for all the work that they do on our 
behalf. And not only the pages but also all of the staff of the 
Legislative Assembly and the building — the housekeeping 
staff, the janitorial staff, the people who repair our phones and 
type our letters and so forth. They help us do our jobs. 
 
I want to begin this morning, Mr. Speaker, with a little bit of a 
history lesson supplied by a friend who’s a member of the 
Sutherland business association in Saskatoon. We had this 
conversation about a month ago, before the session started. 
 
And he tells the story of his sister-in-law. The place was Leask, 
somewhere actually outside of Leask, on the farm. The situation 
was that his sister-in-law had just begun to go into labour and 
needed to get to the hospital. The time was April of 1960. 
 
And in April of 1960, for his sister-in-law to get to the hospital 
in Shellbrook, that journey started with a three-and-a-half mile 
ride by tractor over the fields in fourth gear at about 8 miles an 
hour. And once the sister-in-law crossed the fields by the tractor 
to the highway, she was met there by a neighbour who then 
drove her 35 miles to the Shellbrook Hospital — on gravel the 



448 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 1998 

 

whole way, about an hour’s drive. And there at the hospital she 
delivered her child and everything was safe and sound. 
 
Now I share this story supplied by my constituent because it 
illustrates for me the change that we have seen — the profound 
change that we have seen in Saskatchewan, not just in the last 
century, but in the last few decades. How far we have come in 
terms of upgrading our highway system and what massive 
change we’ve seen to our health care system. 
 
It’s not like the ’70s when someone who was in labour and 
delivered a baby would have to spend a week or more in the 
hospital. And how far we’ve come now in the ’90s when stays 
for maternity are only a matter of days, and there’s provision 
for services in homes — postnatal. 
 
The story illustrates how far we’ve come, not just in terms of 
change, but in terms of expectations, Mr. Speaker. Expectations 
about the level of program services that we want or require in 
our province. Expectations about what our tax dollars go for 
and our need to attack debt. And these are some of the things 
I’d like to talk about today, basically predicated on comments 
from constituents of mine as I circulated in my constituency the 
day after the provincial budget and went door-to-door to talk to 
them about it. And I think the story I’ve just told about the 
travel to the hospital puts into perspectives some of the budget 
comments I heard from other constituents. 
 
I think of the man, for example, one of the first doors I called 
on, who said that he was quite satisfied with the budget and 
then went on to comment that he was glad that we were making 
movement or progress on the deficit. He indicated that he was 
an upper income earner with 15-year-old and 12-year-old 
children, and how happy he was, how pleased he was that we 
were making progress on the deficit so that his children 
wouldn’t have to carry this burden and pay it for themselves. 
That someone . . . He felt that they shouldn’t have to pay for the 
deficit that they hadn’t created. And he indicated in typical 
Saskatchewan spirit, I would say, that he would much sooner 
pay it himself than see his children pay it. And I think that’s a 
tribute to this man, and really to the people of Saskatchewan, in 
terms of the attitude that they take to the deficit and the fiscal 
responsibilities that we have. 
 
I think of another man who, in the course of my travels that 
afternoon as I presented myself, indicated that he felt badly for 
me because we shouldn’t have to deal with that problem. And I 
didn’t know what he was talking about when he said we 
shouldn’t have to deal with that problem. And it turned out that 
he was talking about the Channel Lake problem. 
 
He felt badly, that we shouldn’t have to deal with that problem 
because we had done such a good job in dealing with the 
province’s finances. And in his perspective, although it wasn’t 
acceptable that there were problems with Channel Lake, in 
terms of the larger perspective of government he didn’t see that 
as conditioning all of reality in terms of the way government is 
dealing with its responsibilities. 
 
He too was interested in the provincial debt; that was on his 
mind. And he wondered why we didn’t do as government a 
better job of explaining to people the interest on the debt and 
the implications of that interest for program expenditures and 

the fiscal health of the province. And unfortunately, at that 
point in our conversation, the phone rang and he had to run to 
answer it and we were able . . . we weren’t able to continue the 
conversation. 
 
A woman on that same street was actually quite well informed 
when I came to the door, and asked some very thoughtful 
comments. Again she was concerned about Channel Lake; she 
didn’t like what had happened with Channel Lake. And it was 
very interesting that she said she didn’t want the numbers; she 
wasn’t interested in the numbers and the amount of money that 
was lost. She didn’t like what had happened and she wanted to 
know what we were going to do about it in terms of a public 
inquiry. I thought that was a very interesting comment. 
 
She also asked about the number of individuals in 
Saskatchewan who were paying income tax. Someone had told 
her that there were 300,000 taxpayers in the province of 
Saskatchewan and she wondered whether that was true, whether 
everyone was paying their way if we had such a small number 
of taxpayers. 
 
I didn’t know the answer to that question at that time, and so 
subsequently I’ve taken some steps to find out the answer. And 
I’m told by Revenue Canada’s taxation statistics, which are 
supplied to the Government of Saskatchewan, there were 
675,220 tax returns filed for the tax year 1995, which are the 
most recent statistics, by individuals in Saskatchewan. And of 
these tax returns, how many of them had tax liability, were 
paying taxes — 460,800. So it means that basically about half 
of the . . . more than half of the people in Saskatchewan submit 
an income tax return and that almost half of them are paying 
something on their income tax returns. 
 
This raises the question of why taxes are so high. And when 
people ask me that question as I go door to door, I have a very 
simple little exercise. I turn to page 67 of the provincial budget 
and I show them the statement of general revenue and 
expenditure and I point out the interest on the public debt. But 
before I point out the interest on the public debt I show them the 
table and I point to the highest expenditure by the Government 
of Saskatchewan — for health care at 1.7 billion — and I ask 
them, is that as it should be? Yes. 
 
What about the second priority. Education, 560 . . . well 
basically half a billion dollars; I won’t go into the particular 
numbers. I say, what do you think about that? Yes, that’s as it 
should be. You can add to that even another half a billion 
dollars almost, for Post-Secondary Education and Skills 
Training, which would mean we spend about 1.7 billion on 
health, basically about 1 billion on education. What’s the third 
largest expenditure of the Government of Saskatchewan? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Interest on the public debt. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — No, no, no, not interest on the public debt. 
People tell me, well what about welfare. I say no, no, not 
welfare. Well what about farmers, they say. I say no, it’s not 
farmers. I say, would that we were giving that money to people 
on welfare; at least we would be providing food and shelter and 
clothing for people. Would that we were spending that money 
as the third largest expenditure for farmers in Saskatchewan. At 
least they would be seeing some benefits. 



April 3, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 449 

 

The third largest expenditure of the Government of 
Saskatchewan, unfortunately, is something called servicing the 
public debt, at about three-quarters of a billion dollars. And that 
gives them pause to think, and to realize the scale of the 
problem that we have in Saskatchewan when we are spending 
as our third largest expenditure simply the interest payments 
alone on our public debt. 
 
(1100) 
 
And it’s no wonder then that we have some of the highest taxes, 
in Saskatchewan, in all of Canada. It should be no surprise or 
secret to people once we understand that we have one of the 
highest levels of public debt. And that, as I go through the 
crowd talking to people about the budget, brings me to talk 
about the need for a balanced perspective in terms of the 
province’s finances. 
 
With the interest total of total expenditures being so high, we 
simply have to deal with this problem and do something to 
reduce debt, to pay down our indebtedness. It’s like people 
paying off the mortgage on their house. They have to take some 
of their income and spend it not just on food and clothes and 
entertainment and holidays, but they simply have to deal with 
attacking the mortgage on the house and not just meet the 
interest payments but to pay down the principal. 
 
And so that is one of the three priorities — top priorities — of 
this government, which is to pay down the public debt. 
 
We need a balanced approach of course, and that means it’s 
pretty tricky when you’re trying to pay down debt, to lower 
taxes, and to increase expenditure for services at the same time. 
But that’s exactly what we’re doing in this budget, what we’ve 
done in previous budgets, and what we will continue to do for 
the people of Saskatchewan — to provide a balanced approach 
between debt reduction, tax reduction, and some modest 
improvement or expenditure on services. 
 
I just want to close this part of my remarks by talking about the 
interest on the public debt, just to put it in perspective another 
way. If you take the sum total of the interest that we have paid 
as a New Democratic government on public debt since we’ve 
assumed office, that total is five and a half billion dollars — 
that’s with a “b”, billion with a “b” — five and a half billion 
dollars. And that, as my colleague says, is more than the total 
budget of Saskatchewan this year. That is more than the total 
budget of the province of Saskatchewan this year just that has 
gone on interest payments alone since we have formed 
government. 
 
Well this is all basically because the subsequent . . . the 
previous government, the legacy that we inherited, was a legacy 
of $15 billion worth of debt. And we are working at reducing 
that debt down to $12 billion this year, and reducing it further 
by the year 2002 to $10.9 billion. It doesn’t go down very fast. 
 
There isn’t very much to show for all that debt except interest 
payments on it, but we are determined to tackle that debt so that 
we can, as we tackle it and we pay less and less on interest, we 
can put more and more to services. But I caution people and say 
today this is a slow, slow draining away of debt. It does not 
happen overnight. It does not happen very fast even over the 

course of a year or two or three. It is a long-term prospect and I 
dare say our children will still be paying for some of that legacy 
of debt. 
 
I have many things to say, Mr. Speaker, on many different 
subjects. I’d like to talk about the increase in expenditure for 
health care in this budget — $88 million in new spending on 
health care. Is it enough? No it isn’t enough. But given the 
legacy of debt that I’ve talked about and the need to attack the 
interest payment that is draining away our ability to enhance 
services, I say $88 million is basically all we can afford to put 
into health care this year. It represents the highest expenditure 
in health care in the province’s history but it really isn’t good 
enough. We need to get rid of that debt. 
 
I’d like to talk a lot about the good news for post-secondary 
education, an increase of $48 million in expenditure for higher 
education in our province — $48 million this year. Is it enough? 
No it isn’t enough, but it’s all we can afford. We have to be 
careful. We have to be prudent. We have to be responsible in 
our public expenditure. And so this has to be good enough for 
this year. It’s a significant investment but it’s not good enough. 
 
Part of that expenditure, I’m proud to say, goes to revitalization 
of the University of Saskatchewan and the University of 
Regina, the additional funding of $18 million. That’s a hopeful 
sign; boy we got a long way to go. Part of that increase in 
funding, that $48 million, goes to student financial assistance 
for student loans programs. That’s helpful. It’s not good 
enough, but it’s as good as it gets at this stage. 
 
And I especially want to talk about one program, and I won’t 
talk long about it. I could go on for quite a length about the new 
social programs that the Minister of Social Services and the 
Minister of Finance have introduced with this budget. The child 
benefit program here in Saskatchewan, the investing in families 
programs that have recently been announced with the budget. 
 
With these initiatives, Mr. Speaker, this government is turning 
welfare on its head by investing $93 million in new social 
programs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — And if there is one thing, and one thing only 
in this budget, that should bring joy to the hearts of 
Saskatchewan people, all Saskatchewan people, it’s that we are 
finally beginning to have some fiscal freedom to target financial 
resources to those people who are most in need. 
 
It has been a shameful decade or more, that approaches almost 
two decades, where we have not spent money on people in need 
— on the poorest of the poor — the way we should have; on 
hungry families and people struggling in poverty. And this is a 
blight and a shame on our province and our society. Poverty is, 
as the Canadian Council of Catholic Bishops have said, is a 
damning indictment of our whole society and we as government 
and as individual citizens, have to be our brother and our 
sisters’ keepers. This is our calling, I believe. 
 
And so when we have increased funding of $93 million for 
standing welfare on its head and bringing assistance to people 
in poverty, and the working poor, so that they can get out of 



450 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 1998 

 

poverty; so that they can provide clothing and food for their 
children under the new child benefit plan; so that they have 
expanded protection for health benefits, for medicine and for 
eye glasses and for dental care under the health benefit plan; so 
that there is an income supplement program that doesn’t 
penalize people on welfare from going out to work, but 
encourages them to go out to work so they can keep more, so 
they can become independent and free of the welfare and 
poverty cycle — I say we’re on the right track. It is enough? 
No, it isn’t enough in my judgement, but it’s a huge start in the 
right direction, in tearing down the walls of welfare that keep 
people dependent and a huge step in helping people toward 
independence. 
 
And in this regard I’d like to pay tribute to one individual who 
is a friend and a mentor and a fellow sojourner on life’s path. 
And I’m speaking of Father Bob Ogle in this connection. Father 
Bob Ogle really was one of the people who inspired me to enter 
public life and to seek public office. And it began when he 
asked if I would accompany him as he went door to door as he 
was seeking the nomination in Saskatoon-Humboldt back in the 
. . . 1977, and after he won the nomination in September of 
1977. 
 
It was Father Ogle who really taught me how to go door to door 
and to engage in political activity. But he taught me something 
much more important than the politics. He taught me something 
very profound and important about personal values and a 
profession of faith, I would say. 
 
He taught me about what he referred to as his support for a 
preferential option for the poor. And he kept using that term — 
a preferential option for the poor — and for those in need. A 
preferential option for the poor, for supporting those in need, 
for being our brothers’ and our sisters’ keeper. 
 
And that connected with me, Mr. Speaker, on a very profound 
level and it encouraged me to enter public life and to try to 
work toward that objective of exercising, as we have any kind 
of personal or even political power, of exercising a preferential 
option for those who are most in need — for those who are 
poor, for those who are sick, for those who need a helping hand 
of some sort, for those who need advocacy. And in the final 
analysis, isn’t that the work of a public servant, any one of us 
who is elected to this legislature. 
 
And so I want to pay tribute to Father Bob Ogle this afternoon 
as a man who cared deeply about people, especially those who 
were in need. And I want to thank him for the gifts that he 
shared with me and with countless other people in and through 
his person and through his values and through his Christian 
faith. And so I say to Father Bob, well done, thou good and 
faithful servant. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — And while there are many, many other things 
I could say this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, would that these same 
words could be said of each of us in this Assembly in different 
ways — well done, thou good and faithful servant, in exercising 
a preferential option for the poor. Not just serving your 
constituents, but serving those who are most in need of 
advocacy, of assistance, of financial help, of government 

programs. Would that those words could be said of us. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1115) 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 
glad to have the opportunity this morning to speak on this 
year’s budget. And I certainly do not rise to embarrass the 
government; they’re doing a good enough job of that 
themselves. 
 
But I would like to make some points out here that affect my 
constituency and, for that matter, the people of Saskatchewan. 
What did this budget actually do for the people of 
Saskatchewan. It was a very lacklustre budget. It lacked 
anything in it that the average person out there could really say, 
oh here, this helped me. 
 
We had a 2 per cent income tax drop, which is a step in the 
right direction; a very small step, but at least it’s a step in the 
right direction. But having gone by that, there’s really nothing 
for the average person in the province of Saskatchewan. It 
works out to about a half a cup of coffee a day for someone in 
Saskatchewan. And I guess they should be thankful, because the 
Prime Minister in their budget, Mr. Martin, filled the other half 
a cup. So the highest taxed country, probably in the world, and 
the highest taxed province in Canada — what did we gain? A 
cup of coffee. And you don’t even want a refill because you’ve 
got to buy that yourself. 
 
Really, this budget, what did it do for the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan? Nothing. What did this budget do for families in 
Saskatchewan? Nothing. What did this budget do for young 
people, our most important resource? Nothing. What did it do 
for our seniors, the people who built this province? Nothing. 
What did it do for business, the backbone of this province? 
Nothing. They are the ones that are saying taxes have to go 
down if we’re going to survive. 
 
What did it do for the communities in this province? Absolutely 
nothing. We’re losing them at the highest rate we’ve ever lost 
them in the history of Saskatchewan. The numbers are 
dropping, and from what I understand, that a study done by 
your government, or at least looked into by a professor at the 
university, says we’re going to end up with about 60 
communities in this province down from the number of over 
500 now. 
 
That should be another embarrassment to the people on that 
side. We’re changing our whole way of life in this province. 
And we’re actually promoting it. We’re not trying to stop it 
from happening. 
 
What did this budget do for municipal governments, the 
whipping boy of the government since they were elected in 
1991? Absolutely nothing. Last year you cut $29 million from 
these people. And what do you do this year after being telling 
them for the last year that this province is doing wonderful? 
You give them a measly $3 million. What will that do when you 
thin that out over the municipalities of this province? It won’t 
even affect the bottom line at all. 



April 3, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 451 

 

The City of Regina grants in lieu, this great big announcement 
last summer, the saviour for the cities of Saskatoon and Regina 
— because it really doesn’t affect anyone else. Twelve million 
dollars for the City of Regina and they were ecstatic — oh this 
is great. 
 
But it isn’t so. Again, what does the government do? It backs 
out on another one of its promises and I believe now it’s down 
to about 3 million — well we’re not sure, maybe one and 
one-half million — so Mr. Archer and company, who were 
counting on the 12 million, can start raising their municipal 
taxes again. 
 
You know really what this is doing to the heartbeat of the NDP 
supporter out there which was really wavering to start with? 
Well it’s hardly beating and the light’s going out very quickly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to touch on health care, health care 
which is a main issue in question period these days. And really 
this responsibility goes to the present Health minister, the past 
Health minister, and actually the Health minister before because 
she was the person that started health care reform. And that was 
the problem we have now with our health system. Because 
really when you think about it, Mr. Speaker, this is one area that 
government is putting more money into. 
 
And what is it doing to solve our problem? Absolutely nothing. 
In fact I believe maybe it’s creating a bigger problem because 
the government thinks it’s healing, it’s fixing, it’s really 
bringing something together to help us with our health care. 
 
And what did he see? The Plains is closing. That’s after what? 
Fifty-two hospitals closed, then another one, then another one. 
And now the Plains, probably the most important hospital to 
southern Saskatchewan and to the people in Regina. I know, 
Mr. Speaker, because my constituency has many people that 
have had their lives saved or tremendously good health care 
provided them at the Plains. 
 
A great positive to the Plains is how quick we can get there. I 
know, because last year, or the last time, last election, my father 
had a heart attack on election day. And it wasn’t because he was 
so surprised I was elected, because it was before it was over. I 
know what you were going to say. 
 
But he came to the Plains. And, Mr. Speaker, that 15 or 20 
minutes, the difference between the Plains and the General, 
could have saved his life —and has, that 20 minutes has saved 
many lives out there. 
 
And I would ask the present Minister of Health to reconsider 
the closure of the Plains and think about that one. Because I 
believe here what is happening is the Regina Health Board is 
taking directions from this government, through funding or any 
other means this government has saw fit to instruct them, to 
close the Plains Health Centre. 
 
We hear today in question period that the General and the 
Pasqua emergency rooms had to shut down last night because 
they were full; they had no beds. 
 
Well think about that for a minute. What if the Plains was 
already closed? There wouldn’t be one emergency room bed 

left in the city of Regina, and that covers all of south and east 
Saskatchewan plus every person that lives in Regina. This is a 
crisis and it could have been a catastrophe if something bigger 
happened last night. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have the Minister of Health telling us, oh, we 
still have 675 beds in Regina. Not going on to mention that 
that’s down from the thousand beds or more that used to be 
before health care reform took over. And I know a little bit 
about health care reform because I was a member of a 
municipal government out there who was asked by one of the 
previous ministers of Health, come out, take part, help us 
reform health care. 
 
And we took her at her word. We did come out. And we spent 
about two months of going to meetings, meetings, meetings, 
and really felt we had some input. We were asking our people 
what they would like to see happen. We all knew health care 
had to be fixed; it couldn’t continue like it was. We never once 
dreamt what was going to happen. 
 
We got about two months into our meetings with our people 
and deciding how we would like to see it, and before we were 
finished, the Minister of Health came along and said, well 
you’ve had input, now this is what we’re going to do. And 
that’s what’s gone on all the way along. 
 
It’s happened. You’ve pretended to listen to the people, the 
municipal people who are elected out there, and then you come 
along and do as you wish. And the Minister of Health, I really, I 
wouldn’t, I don’t, I wouldn’t envy the position he’s in. Because 
what I believe is happening is that the bureaucrats are running 
the health care department not the Minster of Health. I believe 
he’s the puppet they send out to explain the programs that 
they’ve decided to come up with. And I haven’t seen too many 
of those bureaucrats living outside the cities. 
 
So I really don’t think they have rural people’s health care at 
heart. In fact I know they don’t. I’d be a wee bit embarrassed if 
I was a Health minister to have to keep running out and passing 
the word that the bureaucrats are telling him to do and say. And 
this is what will happen in health care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also have a concern because when I was elected 
to Regina, and in fact even before as I used to come into Regina 
quite often, I saw that big H on that sign coming in on east 
Victoria and I guess I was a little naïve because I was really 
certain that that said hospital. 
 
And now we find out, Mr. Speaker, what it really stands for is 
the Howard Johnson, the overflow for our health care system in 
Regina. If you have an operation in the afternoon and, as usual, 
are out of beds, where do you go? You go to another part of our 
two-tiered health system — to the Howard Johnson. And I want 
to thank the people at the Howard Johnson for taking care of 
our sick in this province. They are to be commended. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another part of my concern out there coming from 
the Saltcoats constituency, and for that matter what’s affected 
the Melville constituency, Canora-Pelly, all those constituencies 
out there including Yorkton, is that Yorkton — that it should be 
a really strong, viable, regional hospital — is being migrated 
into the city of Regina or Saskatoon and will end up being 



452 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 1998 

 

nothing more than a band-aid station if we don’t take direction 
action now. Because the smallest accident out there only stops 
at Yorkton to really change ambulances and head for Regina. 
And it’s happening more and more and more. 
 
And the way the system is set up, the minute the patient is 
transferred to Regina, the funding migrates with it. When the 
next budget is done, they say, well see, they came to Regina so 
Yorkton doesn’t get that money the next year. And it won’t be 
long before Yorkton is neutered to a point that we don’t even 
need that hospital. We have to come to Regina anyway. 
 
And this is happening all over the eastern part of this province 
and the whole south side that rely on the Plains Health Centre. 
And we’re going to lose it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I would like to touch on a minute, Mr. Speaker, and commend 
the Minister of Health for finally getting to the point where he’s 
providing dialysis treatment in the city of Yorkton — 
something I have lobbied hard for for the past two, two and a 
half years. And it took a long time coming, but there is a lot of 
people out in my constituency and on the east side that are very 
grateful that they are finally this fall going to have access to 
renal dialysis in the city of Yorkton. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, and I have a hard time understanding why 
it took so long, because from my understanding it costs about 
30,000 a year to treat . . . to provide dialysis here. And part of 
our health care problem, I think, is showing up now with . . . I 
know I have two people from my constituency that are living in 
Saskatoon that are waiting for a kidney transplant and I believe 
there is a lady in Regina also doing the same, but it costs 30,000 
to provide renal dialysis for the average patient in the province 
a year and it costs 15,000 for the transplant. 
 
Those numbers tell you there’s a problem here because of the 
lack of beds we have in this province. And it once again shows 
that we have a two-tier health system. 
 
An example of that, Mr. Speaker, is the ambulance costs. 
They’re astronomical for the average person out there. I hear of 
stories of $1,100 to get to Regina by ambulance — $800, $700. 
Well the people in the city of Regina, yes, they have to use 
ambulance, but they never get to the point I’m sure of where 
they have to pay in excess of $1,000 to phone an ambulance to 
get to the hospital. 
 
An Hon. Member: — They don’t have to take out a loan 
anyway. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Exactly. They don’t have to borrow to get 
to the hospital and that’s what’s happening in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of my critic areas is highways. And last year 
we heard the member for Tisdale, I believe it was when he was 
Minister of Highways, make this great announcement about two 
and a half billion dollars for highways over 10 years. And I 
actually applauded him because we definitely need that money 
for highways; in fact we really need more but I realize it’s a 
good start in the right direction. 
 
But again, as this government has done in the past with every 

other part of their budget, every other part of the funding they 
have for different areas, comes out with a great announcement 
about how wonderful we are, this is what we’re going to do. 
 
Well guess what happened with highways? Last year we spent 
208 million — that’s 42 million short of the 250 million that 
you promised shortly before. So I thought well at least that’s 
only a one time thing. You’ll have the gusto to come this year 
and catch up because we’ve been told the province is doing so 
well. 
 
Whoops! This year 218 million. Well in my calculations that’s 
about 80 million already we’re short over the 10-year period. 
 
Now when are you going to catch up? Because at this rate we’re 
going to be about 4 or $500 million dollars short in 10 years 
from the big announcement that you made last year of spending 
on highways. 
 
Again this should be an embarrassment. If you’re not going to 
spend it, don’t come out and announce it if you want to take 
accolades for that announcement. But then when it comes to 
backing up what you say? You don’t do it. 
 
Municipal governments, people . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Before things get out of hand 
here I’m sure that the hon. member for Saltcoats will recognize 
that rule 28 asks the hon. members, requires the hon. member to 
direct his debate through the Chair, and I’m sure that he’ll want 
to continue his budget debate in the spirit of the rules of the 
Assembly. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I apologize. I 
will so do. As you can see though, Mr. Speaker, I really take to 
heart some of the things that are happening here and I really 
believe we have a better way on this side and we will show that 
in ’99 when we get there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, municipal government is one that has been hit by 
the last six, seven budgets. I believe we have used municipal 
governments out there who, by the way, have kept their house 
in order, did not run deficits as past governments all over this 
country and here in Saskatchewan have done. And now what 
are we doing? We’re punishing them for having done that. 
 
And our road system out there, our sewer system, our water 
systems, everything that municipal governments whether it’s 
town, city or rural have to deal with are short of funding. And I 
thought this year, Mr. Speaker, because the Premier had gone 
around this province telling everyone how great the job that the 
Finance minister has done, that he has done, and that the 
government has done, and I believed him because he is our 
Premier. 
 
But we get to things like this and municipal government 
funding should be one of the first to have money returned to 
because they actually were the ones that balanced the budget. 
And what do we see? Very little of anything for roads out there. 
Those roads that are deteriorating and falling apart a fast rate, in 
fact falling apart so fast we’re going by now where we can do 
maintenance to keep them up, we’re going to have to start 
rebuilding them at a fast pace. 



April 3, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 453 

 

President of SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities), Mr. Speaker, Sinclair Harrison, made the 
comment that they needed, I believe, $56 million this year just 
to keep the roads in the shape they are now. What did they get? 
Three million dollars, and has to be shared, Mr. Speaker, all 
through municipal governments. 
 
(1130) 
 
How really did the Minister of Finance balance the budget this 
year? And let’s take a look at this for a minute. Number one, 
they privatized the upgrader. And there’s nothing wrong with 
that; that’s fine. But there’s the first portion of money that went 
to help balance the budget. A draw down on liquor and gaming 
— part two of balancing the budget. 
 
Part three, Mr. Speaker, was the hand-out from the federal 
government because we’ve got ourself in a position again that 
we’re a have-not province. And I believe that was what the past 
minister of Finance wanted us to be. And guess what — we’re 
there. 
 
The other part is the Crowns. We’re taking money out of the 
Crowns again to balance the budget but at a much faster rate. 
And, Mr. Speaker, we all know how that money got into the 
Crowns was by jacking every utility rate in this province to the 
highest level that we have ever seen so that we can create the 
profits of SaskPower a year ago, 153 million. What was 
SaskTel, Mr. Speaker — $80 million? And the list goes on. 
 
Then when we get in a pinch we have to take that money, dump 
it into general revenue so this government can balance its 
budget, because it isn’t happening unless we sell something or 
we borrow from the Crowns or the federal government bails us 
out. That same federal government, by the way, that has been 
used for the last six or seven years to blame for the woes of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Education, Mr. Deputy Speaker, affects my area and many areas 
in this province because of the lack of funding. The 60/40 split 
that when this government came to power were 
government-funded — 60 per cent of education and 
municipalities 40. The first thing this government did was 
change that. It’s still 60/40 but it’s completely the other way, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Out in my area and in many other areas . . . The member for 
Kelvington-Wadena has it happening in her area and a number 
of other members, even members on that side are having school 
closures in their constituencies, and the Minister of Education 
says, well it’s all due to the number of pupils dropping in our 
communities. But that doesn’t hold true in every area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in my area the school of MacNutt is slated for 
closure. But the numbers in that school are actually going up, 
not going down. There’s a hog barn being built in that area. 
There’s economic development happening and the numbers 
could go up faster but what seems to me to be happening is 
we’re going to close it quickly before that happens and then we 
don’t have to address that problem later on. 
 
Theodore — grade 10 and 11 and 12 — that part’s going to be 
closed in the Theodore School and those children are going to 

be bussed into Yorkton. What that does to a community, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, is it helps kill the community. And I know 
because my children were involved in that when our grade 10, 
11, and 12’s were transferred to Yorkton. They never return to 
these small communities and therefore we lose those kids. 
 
And I guess it’s just a first step in losing them because the 
second step, when they graduate and can’t get a job, is they go 
to Alberta. I guess what we’re doing is part of the training that 
we need for them is to educate them how to live on their own in 
Alberta. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also like to touch a little bit on — and I 
know the budget in one way was directly involved in this 
because there were changes to The Wildlife Act — but the night 
hunting issue, Mr. Speaker, I feel this government has really let 
us down. 
 
They tried to address it by putting a band-aid on it, Mr. Speaker. 
And they’re going to ban spot lighting which out in my area, I 
believe, makes it more dangerous than it ever was before. 
Because now we have out-of-province hunters coming in 
hunting, and at least before with — and I didn’t agree with it — 
but they were using lights to hunt with; now there’re hunting in 
the dark of night. Those hunters have no idea where farms are, 
where towns are, because in many cases they’re out-of-province 
hunters because they can’t do this in Manitoba or Alberta, who 
have dealt with this problem, not like the province of the day. 
 
I have been to meetings, Mr. Speaker, in Runnymede, 
Kamsack, Togo. These people are very upset over this issue. 
And the funny part, Mr. Speaker, is that there was Metis people 
at this meeting that agreed with the rest of the people at the 
meeting that this is a problem. And most of them said, we don’t 
need special laws. Treat us like everyone else out there. 
Sustenance is really a thing of the past where you have to hunt 
at night. They felt that their sustenance hunting could be done 
in the daytime. And I believe, Mr. Speaker, that safety is the big 
issue there. 
 
I’d like to touch on this morning, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to do 
with patronage. And what does patronage have to do with this 
budget? Well I think a lot because patronage has cost the 
taxpayer of this province and is continuing to do it — millions 
upon millions of dollars. 
 
Let’s start for an example, with SaskPower who we take money 
from to balance the budget so I can see the connection there, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, with the budget. Jack Messer — $5.2 
million loss because someone didn’t read a contract. Well I 
don’t think we’ve seen the tip of the iceberg, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, because the Channel Lake smell is getting stronger 
and stronger and stronger. 
 
SaskTel, Mr. Deputy Speaker — and let’s touch on that for a 
minute — $60 million we lost last year, and partly because Mr. 
Don Ching is running SaskTel. Another patronage appointment 
and another buddy of the Premier’s. 
 
And the list goes on. Let’s not stop there, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
STC (Saskatchewan Transportation Company) — Mr. 
Glendinning was in charge. And I believe if you check Mr. 
Glendinning’s past history, he has some very close ties to the 



454 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 1998 

 

Premier and the NDP. 
 
What happened with STC? We computerized STC but the 
computer forgot to send out bills. And in most businesses out 
there, private business would have caught this right away 
because they couldn’t afford to make that mistake. And I 
believe it was what? — 1.4, $1.5 million of bills that didn’t get 
sent out over a period of what? — one to two years. 
 
So we fixed the problem. We fired Mr. Glendinning. But being 
an NDP supporter, we couldn’t let him just sit there, we had to 
find him a job. So we fired him from STC for incompetence but 
then we sent him over to liquor and gaming and let him run 
that. So okay, Mr. Glendinning’s there. 
 
So we brought in Mr. Nystuen to replace Mr. Glendinning. 
Another NDP hack. And what does he do to fix the problem? 
Instead of getting the computers up and running efficiently, 
whoops, he turns the switch. Let’s shut them things down — 
they’re not working. Let’s do it manually. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the problem doesn’t stop there. The 
problem didn’t stop there. Because now we have the SHIN 
(Saskatchewan Health Information Network) program that 
needs to be a computer whiz — for lack of a better word — to 
get this up and running. Our confidentiality of our private 
medical records depend on that. The whole system depends on 
somebody, somewhere, knowing how to get this up and 
running. They’re spending $40 million on it. 
 
So what do we do? We take a person that shut down the 
computers at STC — over a million and a half dollars — and 
bring him in to set up the computers for the SHIN program. The 
problem gets worse. I have never seen in the history of this 
province so many friends of the sitting government in high 
places costing us so many millions and millions of dollars. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would just like to touch on a few of the 
members opposite, and I believe the budget is tied to this 
because it’s a lot of the things that actually affect the budget 
because of things some of the members opposite have done. 
And I’d like to talk first of my friend, the Minister of 
Agriculture, who used to be my neighbour and his family is still 
good supporters of mine. His support on the Wheat Board for 
an example; not listening to farmers out there, what they’re 
saying, and comes out to the Senate hearings and said we must 
pass this Bill quickly. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is people on both sides of the issue 
that do not like this Bill. This government has managed in the 
seven years they’ve been in here to make agriculture one of the 
lowest priorities in this province. And I noticed this morning 
when the member for Saskatoon Sutherland was talking about 
the cost that this government has to run this province, 
mentioned farmers. 
 
I don’t think he gets the picture. Farmers do not cost this 
province; they are of the biggest part of the economy in this 
province — 45 out of every 100 jobs are created by agriculture. 
 
So where is the cost and the drain down on the budget from 
agriculture? I’d say we’re pulling our load; in fact I would say 
we’re pulling more than our load. We’re trying to supply food 

at far less than it costs to grow and we’re actually getting 
nothing for support from this government. 
 
It doesn’t matter . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — What do you want? Government 
money? 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — The member opposite says, do we need 
government money? Well now that’s a fine one. These farmers 
have given up on this government so long ago, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that they wouldn’t even consider money being an 
option. And money will not solve the problem. Hand-outs will 
not solve it. 
 
What we need is support out there, and by sticking up for the 
Wheat Board, keeping the Wheat Board in a position of full and 
total control, is not the support that farmers need right now. 
 
I’d like to also stay with Agriculture for a minute and talk about 
the member from Rosetown, and the record that member has 
done for the province’s farmers. We go back to the GRIP (gross 
revenue insurance program) problem when that member was 
fully responsible. And I think what I’m trying to tie in here, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, is the reason that that member will not be 
re-elected again, that is only one of many of them, what he did 
to farmers. 
 
Let’s go on to his time with Highways. And his idea of fixing 
the highways of this province was to buy a 44 Massey, an 
8-foot cultivator; let’s go out there and rip them up and gravel 
them. That’s how he was going to solve the problem. And I 
believe after the next election we could probably find him a job 
doing that because a 44 Massey will be cheap and so will a 
cultivator. And the shape that some of these highways are in, 
they would be better if we ripped them up and cultivated them 
— they’d be smoother. 
 
But the member from Rosetown’s record does not stop there, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. He went on to take on the Environment 
department and decided, you know what I’m going to do here is 
dig up every fuel tank in this province. I’ll fix the environment; 
I’ll protect the environment. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, he 
caused havoc within this department because we dug up many 
tanks in this province; we closed many service stations in small 
towns — by the way, many towns that don’t have service 
stations any more, all on account of the member for Rosetown. 
 
And I guess what I’m trying to say for the last two is, the 
Minister of Agriculture, and the member for Rosetown, is that I 
don’t believe either of these members will be back after the next 
election. I’d like to touch on my friend, and I say that . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. Why is the member on 
his feet? 
 
Mr. Ward: — With leave, to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Ward: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 



April 3, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 455 

 

introduce to you, and through you, and to my colleagues in the 
House, a group of grade 3 to 6 children that we have from the 
Minto School in North Portal, Saskatchewan, probably one of 
the farthest southern places in Saskatchewan that’s part of my 
constituency. And also with them are their teachers, Alison 
Hirsch, and the chaperon, Lorna Story and Allison Machan. So 
I wish everybody would make them welcome, please. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I would just like to touch on a few of the 
members opposite that I feel that probably will not be here after 
the next election due to the record of, number one, this budget 
and the past budget. 
 
But I’d like to talk about the member for Lloydminster, who 
I’ve become very good friends with, Mr. Deputy Speaker. She’s 
a fine lady. And I guess the old saying, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is, 
I love you, but I’ll miss you, will come true here because we 
became good friends and I’ll hate to see her go. 
 
Another person I’d like to touch on is the member for Carrot 
River Valley, the past member of Highways, minister of 
Highways, and I mean . . . I guess along with this present 
Minister of Highways, is a kiss of death in this province, 
because I don’t believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that probably the 
member for Carrot River Valley will be back or will the present 
member for Weyburn be back, because highways alone will be 
enough to put both of those people to sleep. I would like to 
mention, and as I realize, the cities are going to be harder for us 
to break ground in, but I think it’s possible and I think I can see 
it happening. 
 
I’d like to touch on the member for Regina south-east, and I 
have to be frank about this, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This member 
ran on the idea of keeping the Plains hospital open. And I 
agreed with him. It was a good platform. It was a very good 
platform, except now that member is very silent when the 
government is questioned on the Plains hospital, and I don’t 
think the people of Regina south-east are going to forget. They 
elected him to help keep the Plains open and it’s not happening. 
 
(1145) 
 
Another of my somewhat rural members is the member from 
Swift Current, and I believe he’s going to have a hard time 
coming back because in his area . . . I’ve been to meetings out 
there with the Saskatchewan Party and we’re getting great 
response. Part of that response is one of the reasons is, we 
closed care homes out there; part of that response is because 
high taxes in this province; part of the response is because we 
wrote agriculture off. We don’t care about agriculture, and 
Swift Current is an agricultural community. So I believe that 
member will be long gone after the next election. 
 

I’d hate to miss out on the member for Estevan, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. One of the examples I would say that’s going to hurt 
you, Mr. Member, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is because this 
government has decided we’ll buy coal from the States. We 
won’t promote our coal industry here. I would suggest, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that member should be embarrassed to say that 
he’s from that constituency, looking after Saskatchewan people. 
 
The member for Weyburn-Big Muddy, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
again the Minister of Highways — that’s a kiss of death. If that 
lady had’ve really seen what was coming — and a fine lady she 
is — should have said, I do not want this portfolio because I 
would like to have the chance of being re-elected again. 
 
The Environment minister, Mr. Deputy Speaker — and I have 
touched on night hunting and stuff like that before — I believe 
that will be the demise of him. He’s gone. And the list could go 
on but I don’t want to take up too much time here. But I’d hate 
to keep going all the way around, because I believe, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that all the things that that government is doing over 
there is creating an embarrassment that that government cannot 
live down. I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of what do the people 
opposite do at night now? You don’t dare turn on the radio 
because the news is all bad. You can’t turn the TV on because 
you’re too embarrassed to watch, so that leaves the newspapers. 
 
And let’s talk about the newspapers. Let’s see the headings, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker: “Premier won’t make promises on road 
repair.” That really impressed SARM at their convention, as 
I’m sure most of you know. The next headline: “Deputy 
Premier confession falls short.” Well in a real world and an 
honest and upfront government, what on earth should you have 
to confess? But his confession not only was poorly done but it 
was short, accordingly to the media. The auditor, the Provincial 
Auditor, says we’ve got to get to the bottom of the Crown 
fiasco. And it goes on and on. 
 
And the member opposite from Estevan says, we read them. 
But I would read them quietly and probably with low lights so 
nobody sees you reading them, because they wouldn’t want to 
see how red your face gets when you read these headlines. 
 
Next headline I read, Mr. Deputy Speaker: “Member for Prince 
Albert Northcote won’t quit over bad deal.” So what that’s 
saying is he’s not accepting his responsibility. Then we go on, it 
says: “Cost of chasing Guyana deal worthwhile says the 
Premier.” Well doesn’t that take the cake? 
 
It’s worth chasing because we spent $1.4 million but actually 
only reported . . . the government reported 800,000, but now we 
find out it’s 1.4, but it’s worthwhile chasing. With public funds? 
Well I say the Premier and the members opposite should go out 
and check with the public, because I have not found one 
taxpayer in this province that wanted to see their money spent 
in Guyana. 
 
We go on to other headlines, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and this 
headline is: “Senate hears clashing views on reform of Wheat 
Board.” And this goes back to our Ag minister saying, let’s 
hurry this legislation through. My buddy Ralph Goodale, who is 
probably the most hated man in agriculture this province has 
ever seen, and we have our Agriculture minister siding with 
him. 



456 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 1998 

 

Doesn’t even consider, doesn’t even consider dual marketing, 
which many in this province want. He says the inclusion clause 
doesn’t matter. Well canola for an example, if it had’ve been 
under the Wheat Board, we’d be getting 2.50 or $3. Instead of 
that, we’re getting eight or nine. Flax, if it had’ve been under 
the Wheat Board, we’d be getting 2 or $3. But it’s not. We’re 
getting nine or ten. And the list goes on. 
 
You know that philosophy of the Ag Minister and Mr. Goodale 
really sums up the members opposite to a T. It says, I’ll keep 
mine but let’s share yours. And that’s the theory I believe this 
government works under. 
 
But then there’s actually some good news I’m sure the members 
opposite would like to see. “Saskatchewan Party 4,579 
members get to vote for the leadership convention which starts 
tonight”— that’s a headline, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And you don’t have to be embarrassed about that. What you’re 
doing is actually . . . you’re helping promote the Saskatchewan 
Party at a faster rate then we could have ever dreamt doing it 
ourselves. And we thank you for that. 
 
The next one, Mr. Deputy Speaker: “Sask Party wins over 
public poll reveals.” Actually all week the poll revealed that, I 
believe. I can’t believe it. You just keep doing things that seem 
to keep building us up. 
 
You know, actually when you think about it, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, we’re less than eight months old. Really we’re hardly 
out of diapers and we’re hardly walking and I believe you 
already hear our footsteps. And that’s hard because if we’re just 
barely walking, you shouldn’t even be able to see us, let alone 
hear our footsteps. 
 
Another headline here: “Richer offers rejected.” And that goes 
back to talking about Channel Lake. And it’s very similar to the 
Crown Construction Tendering Agreement. Don’t worry about 
saving money or getting the best deal, do what’s best for our 
buddies. Something like the patronage thing that I went through 
before with the list of Mr. Messer, Don Ching, Mr. 
Glendinning, and oh my God, the list goes on and on and on. It 
doesn’t quit. 
 
But we didn’t take the best two offers on Channel Lake. I 
believe we took one that we could . . . now how should I put 
this? I guess we don’t know till Crown Corps maybe brings it 
out, but I doubt it. Because of the number of members of the 
government that sit on that we may never find out all the things 
that have happened within Channel Lake. But I hope we do, 
because I think if you could ever drain Channel Lake and get to 
the bottom of it, there’s a lot of skeletons there. 
 
“Deputy Premier says taxpayers came out ahead,” and I guess 
we did. Because I believe what the Deputy Premier is doing is 
using the Leader of the Third Party’s calculator. And you all 
know how that works —13,000 Liberal memberships. But he 
punched the wrong button and it was what? — two, three, 
maybe four. I don’t think it was four. I was there once. Sure it 
wasn’t four. It was higher when we were there than it is now by 
far, but I’m sure it was never four. I think he is borrowing some 
of John’s memberships and that’ll do him no favours in 
Saskatchewan either. 

So, Mr. Speaker, if it wasn’t that my voice was going I have a 
lot of other material I’d love to go into. But my throat’s getting 
sore, and you’ll notice from my comments this morning how 
serious I take this, so I thank you for the opportunity for 
commenting on the budget. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It is my duty to warn the Assembly 
that the hon. member is about to exercise his right to close the 
debate and afterwards all members will be precluded from 
speaking to this question. Therefore if any member wishes to 
speak, you must do so now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s 
certainly an honour for me to rise today to close the debate on 
the 1988-89 . . . or ’98-99 provincial budget. Before I do that, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to thank the constituents of 
Saskatoon Mount Royal for allowing me the privilege to 
represent them in the legislature. 
 
And I also want to thank the people across Saskatchewan, 
hundreds and thousands of them, Mr. Speaker, who participated 
in three budget consultation meetings and provided hundreds of 
very worthwhile suggestions and ideas. 
 
And by and large those suggestions and ideas are reflected in 
the budget. The budget reflects the views of those people and 
many others, Mr. Deputy Speaker, who’ve met with me and met 
with my colleagues here in the Legislative Assembly. 
 
I want to say that those colleagues too have played a vital role 
of course in the development of the budget. And I am very 
proud to be a member of a caucus that comes through time and 
again with encouragement and advice, teamwork and support 
that is very vital to this process and to our future as a province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — This is a thoughtful and dedicated group of 
people, and I want them to know how much I appreciate being 
their colleague. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this budget is an achievement of which I 
think we can be proud. And I think it’s an achievement that 
Saskatchewan people can be proud of. It is the fifth consecutive 
balanced budget, and it represents how far we’ve come as a 
province. 
 
As my predecessors in this position, the member for Saskatoon 
Idylwyld and the member for Regina Dewdney know so well, 
we faced some very difficult decisions over the last number of 
years. But balancing the budget was never an end in itself. For 
this government, it always was a means to an end, so that we 
could regain our ability to improve the quality of life for 
Saskatchewan people. And that’s why the tough decisions that 
we made were made. 
 
And we promised the people that when we were able to do so, 
we would return the benefits of their hard work and sacrifice to 
Saskatchewan people. And that is what this budget is about. It is 
a budget about people — their education, their jobs, their 
families, the health services they use, the highways they drive 



April 3, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 457 

 

on, and the communities in which they live. 
 
This budget, Mr. Speaker, invests in people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And it builds on the momentum that 
Saskatchewan people have established towards the future of 
opportunity, security, and strength. And most importantly, it 
invests in our youth — an entire generation of people who had 
nothing to do with the burden of debt strapped to their backs, 
thanks to the Conservatives in the 1980s. 
 
What this budget does, Mr. Speaker, is to give back. And 
remarks I’ve heard from the Conservatives and the Liberals 
over the past few days remind me of a saying: “When arguing 
of the shadow, we forgo the substance.” And what the members 
opposite have done . . . what have they done, other than argue 
about the shadow, about what isn’t there in the budget, instead 
of examining what is there. 
 
They call for increased health spending, in spite of the fact that 
we’re making the largest investment in health care in the history 
of the province. They call for an increase in highway spending, 
in spite of the fact that they gave away millions of dollars in the 
1980s that we could have used today on our highways. And 
they tell us we should spend and spend and spend and spend 
some more. 
 
Then in the next breath, we hear repeated calls for huge tax 
cuts. That’s what they say. In spite of the fact that when those 
members and their Conservative predecessors racked up a $15 
billion debt. They did so in the full knowledge that our children 
would be paying that debt off for years to come. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the shadow of the 1980s still hangs over the 
benches of the Conservative opposition. Their thinking is, you 
cut taxes, increase spending, and run the government in red ink. 
And you continue to do so until the lending institutions or the 
people catch up to you. 
 
(1200) 
 
The Conservative members will argue and argue and argue 
about how to spend money we do not have. And why don’t we 
have it? Because those members across the floor spent it and 
spent more. They mortgaged our children’s future, and that 
shadow will never disappear. It will follow them wherever they 
go. 
 
And as my colleague from Shellbrook-Spiritwood pointed out a 
few days ago, and the member from Saskatoon Sutherland said 
today, Saskatchewan people have spent $5.7 billion on interest 
payments on the Conservative debt since 1993 — more than our 
entire annual budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan deserve better and 
they rightfully expect sound, responsible stewardship of their 
tax dollars. And when they look to the budget, they look for 
substance, not shadows. And this budget provides it. 
 
Half a billion dollars gone from the mortgage they put on our 
children’s future; $58 million back into the pockets of 

Saskatchewan families through tax reduction; $88 million more 
into health services; $20 million more into highways; $29 
million more for children. And on it goes. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, is substance. Is it everything we want? Of 
course not. Like all Saskatchewan people we too would like to 
see taxes and debt come down faster. We too would like to take 
the $725 million we spent on interest payments in this year 
alone and put it back into services for people. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, that isn’t possible all at once and 
Saskatchewan people know that we can’t spend like the 
Conservatives and still keep the books balanced. They know we 
can’t slash taxes to the bone without decimating the services 
they rely on. And that is why less than one in ten Saskatchewan 
people support the new Conservative Party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have not heard a single credible alternative to 
the balanced sensible approach this government is pursuing. 
We’ve not seen any evidence that members opposite understand 
what good financial management means to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The member from Saltcoats and other Conservatives have said 
that the federal tax cut recently gives them a half a cup of 
coffee, and the provincial tax cut gives them the other half. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ve heard people complain their cup is half 
empty sometimes and I’ve heard people complain their cup is 
half full. But this is the first time I’ve heard people complain 
that their cup is full. 
 
Well I have this to say to the Conservatives: wake up and smell 
the coffee. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, our ability to invest in people 
is directly related to how well we manage the province’s 
finances. As our financial situation improves, our ability to 
invest in people will continue to improve. 
 
I want to talk about some of the investments in this budget that I 
think are particularly important because they focus on the new 
generation, a generation that had nothing to do with the 
Conservative debt, and all the generations that will follow. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I and others in my generation were treated very 
well by the society in which we grew up. We enjoyed all the 
benefits of public education, health care, and a caring, 
compassionate society. These benefits were made possible by 
the commitment of our parents and grandparents and by the 
commitment of governments across Canada to the well-being of 
all members of our society. 
 
I and others like me were able to reach for our dreams, to attend 
universities and colleges without mortgaging our own futures 
because of that commitment. And, Mr. Speaker, each of us who 
has benefited from public education has an obligation to give 
back to society, to think not just about what we can get but what 
we can give. And I say and this government says, it’s time to 
give back to the next generation. 
 
By the early 1990s, interest payments on the debt surpassed the 



458 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 1998 

 

entire amount allocated to education for our youth. Interest was 
the second largest annual expenditure in the provincial budget. 
That legacy, that shadow, is an affront to those who worked so 
hard for decades to give us a publicly funded, affordable and 
accessible education system. And worse, it is an attack on the 
ability of our children and grandchildren to pursue their hopes 
and dreams. 
 
Our government says this is wrong. Like others before us, we 
must do everything in our power today to ease the burden on 
our youth and allow them to embrace their future. That is our 
responsibility. That is why I am proud of the major investment 
our budget makes in education, specifically post-secondary 
education, and in training our young people for new 
opportunities. 
 
This year, Mr. Speaker, we are investing $1 billion in educating 
and training students of all ages, second only to our investment 
in health. That includes $23 million for post-secondary capital 
needs; it includes $18l million — 9 million more than last year 
— for operating costs for universities and colleges. And it 
includes $136 million for skills training through SIAST 
(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology), 
JobStart, Future Skills, apprenticeship, and other programs. 
 
University of Regina president, Don Wells, says, “This budget 
is the most positive I’ve seen for a university in 30 years.” 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And, Mr. Speaker, we’re increasing the 
weekly amount of support available through our student aid 
program to students with dependants so that more young adults 
can obtain a post-secondary education. 
 
We’re establishing a bursary program to help minimize 
education-related debt for thousands of Saskatchewan students. 
University of Saskatchewan Students’ Union president, 
Natashia Stinka, called the budget incredibly optimistic and said 
that students were excited about the changes to the student aid 
program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while we’re on the topic of the next generation, I 
think a poll in today’s newspaper raises an interesting point. 
The members opposite propose a very simple solution to all of 
our problems. They say sell the Crowns and use the proceeds to 
give us more today. Spend the money built up over decades. 
They say sell the Crowns; let’s have a party. We’ll just send the 
bill to the next generation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is just like selling the farm to pay your bills. 
This is the Tory Party’s budget plan. Sell the farm, pay some 
bills, and have a party with the proceeds. And who will they sell 
to? Well from past experience, to their rich friends and at fire 
sale prices. Never mind the future and future generations. 
 
Well Saskatchewan people rejected this party-now and pay-later 
approach when the Tories tried it in the 1980s, and I say, Mr. 
Speaker, they’ll reject that approach again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Because the people of Saskatchewan and 

the government believe that our Crown corporations are part of 
our province’s heritage, and we intend to pass on this legacy to 
the next generation. That is what our future is about. 
 
We will be doing all we can to help our youths succeed and 
prosper in the new century. That also means making sure that 
Saskatchewan’s economy continues to grow and produce the 
jobs we want for our youth and our future. 
 
This budget invests in those jobs. For example, the new 
research and development tax credit has been very favourably 
received. Peter McCann, the president of Ag-West Biotech, 
says the tax credit will encourage people to invest more 
resources in ag-biotech and it will be a major attraction for 
people looking to invest in Saskatchewan. 
 
And what better place to invest than in industries that will 
demand the skills and talents of our younger generation. 
 
The same can be said for the new Saskatchewan film 
employment tax credit, another young industry seeking young, 
talented people. Rob King, president of the Saskatchewan 
motion picture industry association, told the Leader-Post that 
the employment tax credit will easily double the amount of 
money spent and the jobs created by film projects in the 
province. And Mark Prasuhn, general manager of SaskFILM, 
added, “We’re all very elated. It’s a great step forward for the 
industry.” 
 
Young people, young exciting industries — that is 
Saskatchewan’s future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Finally, Mr. Speaker, let me touch on this 
year’s major new initiative, our redesign of social assistance. 
Why are we doing it? Because we all know that a strong, 
healthy society depends on the full participation of all its 
members. We also know that the traditional social assistance 
program has many barriers to work that discourage people from 
finding and maintaining employment. 
 
We’re changing that. With new training programs and a 
growing economy, we’ve seen declines in the number of people 
receiving assistance. Because, Mr. Speaker, people want to 
work. But we have to remove those barriers that make it 
difficult if not impossible for many people to get ahead. That’s 
why we’re providing an employment supplement to ensure that 
people are financially better off working than they would be on 
welfare, to help families with child-related costs when they 
work and prevent them from falling back onto welfare due to 
the needs of their children. 
 
This, Mr. Speaker, is unique to Saskatchewan. Like the 
award-winning action plan for children, it is a tribute to the 
innovation and compassion of Saskatchewan people and their 
determination to find a better way of doing things. Many 
parents moving from welfare to work have also faced the loss of 
health benefits for their children. Our redesign of social 
assistance includes a new program of supplementary health 
benefits for lower-income working parents and their children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we know, Saskatchewan had led the charge to 



April 3, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 459 

 

reduce child poverty in Canada by developing a new national 
program to help millions of Canadian children. The National 
Child Benefit is this country’s first new social program in 30 
years. And we can all be proud of our Premier, our Minister of 
Social Services, and the hundreds of government officials and 
staff who have worked so hard to keep this issue on the national 
agenda. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — We can also be proud that Saskatchewan is 
taking the concept even further. 
 
The new Saskatchewan Child Benefit will complement the 
national program by providing a monthly child allowance to 
help eligible families provide for their children’s basic food, 
clothing, and personal needs regardless of their parent’s 
circumstances. 
 
This benefit will reduce barriers to work by providing support 
outside the welfare system; so that people will be able to leave 
welfare for work without jeopardizing their ability to provide 
for their children’s needs. We need, Mr. Speaker, to give poor 
kids a chance to embrace the kind of life that we all want for 
ourselves. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And that is what this budget does. Mr. 
Speaker, it is a budget that looks to the next generation, it is a 
budget that looks to our future. And that is why, Mr. Speaker, I 
will be standing in my place in support of it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The division bells rang from 12:15 p.m. until 12:19 p.m. 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas —10 
 
Krawetz Bjornerud Toth 
Draude Gantefoer Heppner 
Osika McPherson Aldridge 
McLane   
 

Nays — 29 
 

Flavel Van Mulligen MacKinnon 
Shillington Mitchell Tchorzewski 
Johnson Whitmore Goulet 
Lautermilch Kowalsky Crofford 
Calvert Teichrob Koenker 
Trew Renaud Lorje 
Sonntag Scott Cline 
Hamilton Wall Kasperski 
Ward Murray Langford 
Murrell Thomson  
 
The division bells rang from 12:23 p.m. until 12:42 p.m. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 30 
 
Romanow Flavel Van Mulligen 
MacKinnon Shillington Mitchell 
Tchorzewski Johnson Whitmore 
Goulet Lautermilch Kowalsky 
Crofford Calvert Teichrob 
Koenker Trew Renaud 
Lorje Sonntag Scott 
Cline Hamilton Wall 
Kasperski Ward Murray 
Langford Murrell Thomson 
 

Nays — 10 
 

Krawetz Bjornerud Toth 
Draude Gantefoer Heppner 
Osika McPherson Aldridge 
McLane   
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Agriculture and Food 

Vote 1 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Speaker: — I wish all hon. members an enjoyable 
weekend at home with your families or constituents or wherever 
you may be. Have a good weekend. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:46 p.m. 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................439 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................439 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................439 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................439 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................439 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................439 
  Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................439 
  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................439 
  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................439 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................440 
  McPherson.................................................................................................................................................................................440 
  Goohsen .....................................................................................................................................................................................440 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ..........................................................................................................................................................................................440 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................440 
  Goohsen .....................................................................................................................................................................................440 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................440 
  Langford ....................................................................................................................................................................................440 
  Ward ..........................................................................................................................................................................................454 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Can-Oat Milling Opens in Martensville 
  Langford ....................................................................................................................................................................................441 
 Kelvington Students Celebrate Canadian Citizenship 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................441 
 Swift Current Pioneer Co-operative Has Record Year 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................441 
 The Educated Corpse 
  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................441 
 Weekly Newspaper Headlines 
  Ward ..........................................................................................................................................................................................442 
 Peewee C Champions 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................442 
 Prince Albert Bottling Plant 
  Kowalsky ...................................................................................................................................................................................442 
 Save the Plains Public Forums 
  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................442 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Regina Hospital Emergency Services 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................443 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................443 
 Inquiry into Channel Lake 
  Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................444 
  Romanow ...................................................................................................................................................................................444 
 Health Care Services in Melville 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................445 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................445 
 Compensation for Hepatitis C Victims 
  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................446 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................446 
 Grain Transportation 
  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................446 
  Romanow ...................................................................................................................................................................................446 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Kowalsky ...................................................................................................................................................................................447 
 
 
 
 



 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 
  Koenker .....................................................................................................................................................................................447 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................450 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................456 
 Recorded divisions (amendment and motion)............................................................................................................................459 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
General Revenue Fund 
Agriculture and Food — Vote 1 ......................................................................................................................................................459 
 
 


