





























































Hansard: June 11, 1998


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1949 
 June 11, 1998 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have 
a petition to present on behalf of Saskatchewan residents. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reach necessary agreements with other levels of 
governments to fund the twinning of the Trans-Canada 
Highway in Saskatchewan so work can begin in 1998, and 
to set out a time frame for the ultimate completion of the 
project. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, all the signatures from this petition . . . on this 
petition come from the community of Gull Lake. I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present today on behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with aboriginal and Metis leaders and wildlife and 
sportsmen organizations in the province of Saskatchewan 
in an immediate effort to end the destructive and dangerous 
practice of night hunting in the province for everyone 
regardless of their heritage. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from the people of 
Porcupine Plain, Carragana, Chelan, Bjorkdale, and Melfort. I 
so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, as well to present 
petitions. Reading the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with aboriginal and Metis leaders and wildlife and 
sportsmen organizations in the province of Saskatchewan 
in an immediate effort to end the destructive and dangerous 
practice of night hunting in the province for everyone, 
regardless of their heritage. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition I present is signed by individuals from 
the Kelvington, Naicam, Wadena, Rose Valley areas of the 
province. I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present on behalf of concerned sportsmen in 
Saskatchewan. The prayer reads: 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with aboriginal and Metis leaders and wildlife and 
sportsmen organizations in the province of Saskatchewan 
in an immediate effort to end the destructive and dangerous 
practice of night hunting in the province for everyone, 
regardless of their heritage. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The communities involved, Mr. Speaker, are Kelvington, 
Lintlaw, and Yorkton. I so present. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
petitions signed by people from around this province; people 
who are concerned about the severance payment to Jack Messer 
and asking the government to cancel them. I so present. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
people concerned about adequate funding for radiology services 
in Melfort. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action to ensure that the required level of 
service in radiology is maintained in the North Central 
Health District, and the priorities of its board be adjusted 
accordingly. 

 
Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
communities of Melfort, Kinistino, and Smeaton. I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I also have a petition to present 
today regarding night hunting. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with aboriginal and Metis leaders and wildlife and 
sportsmen’s organizations in the province of Saskatchewan 
in an immediate effort to end the destructive and dangerous 
practice of night hunting in the province for everyone, 
regardless of their heritage. 
 

People that have signed this petition are from Kelvington, Rose 
Valley, Melfort, and St. Brieux. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition to 
present to the Assembly this afternoon as well dealing with the 
issue of night hunting and the destructive and dangerous 
practice of night hunting. It is of a concern to a great deal of 
people. This petition comes from the Kelvington area, and I’m 
pleased to present on their behalf. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to rise 
again today on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan to present 
a petition. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 



1950 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 1998 

continued. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the petitions on this . . . or the signatures on this 
petition are all from the community of Bethune. I so present. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
petitions on behalf of citizens gravely concerned over the 
closure of the Plains hospital. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Those who’ve signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
communities of Coderre and the city of Moose Jaw. I so 
present. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I join my colleagues in 
presenting a petition on behalf of citizens concerned about the 
loss of the Plains Health Centre. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the signatures are all from the good citizens of Moose Jaw. 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
bring forward petitions from people in Saskatchewan that are 
concerned about the terrible condition of the highways. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately start work on rebuilding of our secondary 
highway system to provide for safe driving on what are 
becoming known as pothole roads; to enter into 
negotiations with SARM and SUMA for a longer-term 
plan of rural road restitution reflecting future need, and to 
provide safety for all drivers as the new trucking regulation 
changes safety factors on these roads. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed these petitions are 
from Stalwart, Imperial, and Liberty area of the province. I so 
present. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was just getting 
over the shock of hearing one of my petitions being read by the 
opposition. I’m happy today, Mr. Speaker, to present petitions 
on behalf of the people of south-west Saskatchewan. And their 
prayer for relief continues to be of course a plea with this 

government through you to double-lane the No. 1 Highway. 
 
I won’t read the prayer today because they’ve heard it every day 
of this session. They are today though from the community of 
Morse, and I pay tribute to all of those that have sent these 
petitions in. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk:  According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) are hereby read 
and received. 
 

Of citizens humbly praying: for agreements between 
governments to fund the twinning of the Trans-Canada 
Highway; praying to save the Plains Health Centre; to 
work with aboriginal and Metis leaders in an effort to end 
the practice of night hunting; praying to cancel any 
severance payments to Jack Messer and to call an 
independent inquiry surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco; 
to immediately halt all investment in foreign countries by 
Saskatchewan Crown corporations; to have the Worker’s 
Compensation Board Act amended to reinstate pensions 
for disenfranchised widows and widowers in 
Saskatchewan; to reallocate Highway 40 at the entrance of 
North Battleford; to reduce the high cost of power rates in 
the North; for the survival of the Carrot River Hospital; 
and to ensure radiology is maintained in the North Central 
Health District. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker and colleagues in the legislature, today I would 
like to introduce to you members of three generations of the 
family of a distinguished premier of the province of 
Saskatchewan, the late Tommy Douglas. 
 
Seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, and I might ask them to 
rise and be recognized as I introduce them are Shirley Douglas, 
Tommy’s daughter; Tom Douglas and Rachel Sutherland, two 
of Tommy’s grandchildren; and Trevor Langford, Tommy’s 
great-grandson. At the last moment, one of Shirley’s . . . the 
other son, Keifer Sutherland, was not able to make it because of 
a commitment in the movie industry at Seattle. These are three 
generations of the family of Tommy Douglas and I would 
welcome them to the legislature. And I’ll say a few more words 
with the permission of the House in a moment. Welcome to the 
Douglas family. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, these members of 
Tommy’s family join us today and I want to thank all members 
of the Assembly — Saskatchewan Party, the Liberals, and 
independents — for showing the non-partisan spirit of 
Saskatchewan in welcoming this very distinguished family and 
exhibiting the class that they have in doing so today. 
 
These members of Tommy’s family join us in the spirit of 
generosity and public spirit that characterized T.C. himself 
during his many years of service to the people of this province 
— as premier for 17 years, a goal which some of us aspire to, as 



June 11, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1951 

a founding father of medicare, as a MLA (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly), and Member of Parliament, and as the 
first leader of the federal New Democratic Party. 
 
The Governments of Saskatchewan and Canada honoured 
Tommy Douglas for these great years of duty and service to the 
province and the nation. Mr. Speaker, they did so with the 
highest honours. Tommy Douglas was invested as a companion 
of the Order of Canada and as a member of the Saskatchewan 
Order of Merit. 
 
And a few moments from now, precisely at 3:30 p.m. when 
we’ll be adjourning, outside this chamber, Shirley Douglas and 
these other family members will present to the people of 
Saskatchewan the medals of Tommy Douglas — the medals 
that accompanied these great honours and these great 
accomplishments. They will then be put on permanent display 
in the Athabasca Gallery of the legislature, accompanied by an 
oil sketch of Tommy, being presented by Eleanor McKinnon 
who was Tommy’s long-time private secretary. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I should just add that this demonstration of public 
spirit and kindness is nothing new or out of the ordinary for 
Shirley. She is truly her father’s daughter. Of course I’m sure 
that hon. members who enjoy the movies and know theatre, will 
recognize her from her long, successful, and distinguished 
career as a national and, I would say, international actress. But 
Shirley Douglas also has maintained a commitment to other 
issues in society such as human rights and social causes which 
she learned from her dad, and many causes and activities 
ranging from Artists Against Racism, the Canadian Health 
Coalition, and others. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve already had the chance to speak with our 
special guests today. I know in talking to her that Shirley feels a 
very strong sense of home-coming. Again I say to Shirley, Tom, 
Rachel, and Trevor, welcome home to the province of 
Saskatchewan, and thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, on behalf of the Saskatchewan Party caucus, I’d like to 
join with the Premier in welcoming the Douglas family on their 
return to Saskatchewan. I know Saskatchewan is a great 
province, and I hope that you enjoy your stay. And I ask all 
members to again join in welcoming them back to 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to, on 
behalf of the Liberal caucus, the third party in the legislature, 
also add our words, our sincere words of welcome to the 
Assembly. And thank you for coming to visit with us. Thank 
you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have one 
other introduction to make and that is of another former 
premier, very distinguished premier of long standing, Premier 
Allan Blakeney, accompanied by his wife, Anne Blakeney. If 

they’d please stand and receive a welcome of the House, 
coming back to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Al Blakeney served as premier for 
this province for not 17 years as Tommy did, but for 11 years. I 
might add that’s another goal to which I aspire as well. 
 
I want to say that it is quite an honour however on this special 
day for me personally, having met Tommy and gotten to know 
him a little bit and having worked so closely with Al Blakeney, 
it’s a particular honour for me to be occupying the chair that 
people who are truly giants of this province and this country: 
Blakeney, Douglas, others, Thatcher, Devine, Lloyd — it is 
really quite a moment for me. And to see Al Blakeney so fit and 
well and the Douglas family commemorating Tommy Douglas 
is a special, special honour. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, 
thank you members. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m particularly 
pleased on this very special day in this Assembly to welcome a 
group of school students who are joining us here from Massey 
School. 
 
I think we must have been put on the tour. This is I think the 
third group from Massey this week, but it’s a real pleasure. 
These are grade 4 students, 23 of them, and they’re seated in the 
west gallery. If you’d join with me in welcoming them, I’d 
appreciate it. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To you 
and through you to the other members of the Assembly, if you 
will recall last week we had a group of students from Schell 
School in Holdfast with us and they’re back again today; they 
liked it so much last week they came back. However it’s a 
slightly different group, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Seated in the east gallery, we have a group of grade 7 and 8 
students from Holdfast along with some teachers and chaperons 
and I’d ask that they stand when I recognize them. With the 
group today we have the teacher, Linda Folk. With them we 
also have Jessica Fox. We have Ron Harms with us again today. 
Ron was here last week as well with the group as a chaperon. 
We have Jim Thorson and we also have Bernie McWilliams. I’d 
ask you all to give them a nice warm welcome. I’m looking 
forward to meeting with them later. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Renaud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you to the Assembly I would like to introduce in the west 
gallery 14 grade 8 students from the Arborfield School. Their 
teacher, Mr. Brown, and parents Mrs. Mutimer and Mrs. Gray 
and Mrs. Warnock are with them. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, Arborfield is in the north-east part of 
Saskatchewan and if you go in that area you will see these little 
huts in the alfalfa fields. And there are huts everywhere and 



1952 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 1998 

people wonder what they are. Well that’s the centre of leafcutter 
bees for the province of Saskatchewan and alfalfa seed 
production. Right now the people of Arborfield are certainly 
fighting for their rail line and hopefully they will be very 
successful. 
 
Please join with me in welcoming our guests from Arborfield to 
the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Ward: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As we get near the 
mid-point of this session, I’d like to take this opportunity to 
introduce the members’ secretaries from our caucus office that 
has been helping us. 
 
And I see Ms. Jaime McCormick and Kendra Hahn is seated in 
your gallery, Mr. Speaker. And also with them is their mentor 
and manager, Ms. Gail Fehr from our caucus office. So I’d like 
everyone to bid them welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Comment on Legislative Session 
 

Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
evening turned into what can only be described as a very sad 
end to this legislative session. We saw the Tories resort to the 
lowest form of debate by screaming, yelling, and launching 
personal attacks. And I was just as disturbed to see the Premier 
goaded into this form of debate. 
 
Actions last night were particularly strange because I recall my 
former colleagues from Melfort and Canora-Pelly, who talked 
about bringing debate in this House to a higher level. I guess 
this just underlines who is influencing the actions of that caucus 
and oh, how proud they must be. 
 
The most troubling part of last evening was the fact that people 
actually witnessed what was going on and some left the 
galleries disgusted by what they saw and heard from their 
politicians. And I would not be surprised if there are political 
science students who are now rethinking their future careers. 
 
As I sat here and listened it reminded me of the 1980s and how 
the atmosphere in this legislature was poisoned by that kind of 
debate. Mr. Speaker, I’m surprised that some of the members 
who spoke last evening are willing to show their faces here 
today. They should be ashamed for their behaviour because 
they do us all a disservice. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Economic Boost for Swift Current Area 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I once again rise to 
inform the House of good news for the economy of Swift 
Current and area, again. 
 
Earlier today the Minister of Energy and Mines announced that 
the June sale of Crown petroleum and natural gas rights realized 

17.45 million in revenue. Promising drilling results, in a 
relatively unexplored area near Swift Current, drove industry 
interest in utilizing a new type of disposition called exploration 
licences and thereby creating the major part of the bonus-bid 
revenue. 
 
Seventeen exploration licences, all located approximately 30 
kilometres south of Swift Current, were sold for 13.38 million. 
Another 117 standard leases sold throughout the province 
brought in an additional 4.07 million. 
 
The interest in the Swift Current area not only brings immediate 
revenue to the province but also assures drilling in the near 
future. The June sale marks the first time that the new 
exploration licence was offered, replacing the older exploration 
and drilling reservation permits. The greatly simplified process 
allows companies to proceed more quickly to the production 
phase. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is terrific news for the Swift Current area and 
this great province. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Waving the White Flag 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s not often that the member from Thunder Creek and I agree 
on any issue, but I think it’s safe to say we would both like to 
thank the Leader-Post for printing today’s correction on the 
editorial page. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we don’t want anyone confusing us with the 
Liberals because recently the Liberals have been showing their 
true colours on a daily basis. It’s not red; it’s white, as in 
waving the white flag. 
 
A few days ago Jim Melenchuk conceded in the Saskatoon 
Eastview by-election. Just today the member from Shaunavon 
confirmed that his leader is going down to defeat. And then he 
conceded, in the fight to save the Plains, that that’s also going 
down to defeat. 
 
And then, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Speaker, it’s getting hard to 
keep up with all the areas where the Liberals are giving up, so 
in order to keep track we would like to present them with an 
easy-to-wave white flag. Feel free to wave it whenever you feel 
like giving up on another battle. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

TREEmendous Foundation Plants Millionth Tree 
 
Mr. Ward: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The TREEmendous 
Foundation has planted its millionth tree. TREEmendous is a 
non-profit organization which plants trees for environmental 
purposes. Trees are given to projects of an environmental nature 
across Saskatchewan. 
 
The program began only seven years ago in Prince Albert but 
has expanded greatly since then. The trees are now grown in 



June 11, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1953 

SaskPower’s Shand greenhouse in Estevan and shipped to 13 
distribution points across Saskatchewan. 
 
The millionth tree was planted in Estevan in Torgeson Park last 
week — this week — by the Rotary Club. There were several 
celebrations across the province to commemorate this 
tremendous environmental achievement. And the celebrations 
in Estevan were sponsored by SaskPower, the city of Estevan, 
and the Rotary Club. I would like to acknowledge the people at 
TREEmendous and the Shand greenhouses for their dedication 
to this very important cause which affects all of us. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Liberal’s Policy on Medicare 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, all session I let the Premier 
know where the Liberal caucus stands on medicare. I warned 
the NDP (New Democratic Party) members of losing their 
ability to care or to listen. Mr. Speaker, I’ve advised this House 
before, and, for the benefit of all those present here today, I’ll 
advise once more of the fact that my caucus colleagues and our 
leader spent last fall consulting with Saskatchewan residents 
and our supporters to develop policy. 
 
And as a result, on November 23, 1997 resolutions, which 
originated from those consultations, were passed by the Liberal 
convention. One states that we: 
 

Uphold the principles of the Canada Health Act and 
support a publicly funded, publicly administered, universal 
medicare system, and oppose those who seek to undermine 
it with a two-tiered health system. 
 

Mr. Speaker, instead of wrongly implying we don’t support it, 
NDP members should be glad Liberals solidly support 
medicare. After all it wasn’t the Liberals that closed 53 
hospitals, cut 968 acute care beds, 461 long-term care beds, laid 
off over 500 nurses, and leave 6,600 people to languish on 
waiting-lists in the province. 
 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite should simply be glad 
that the Liberal opposition truly supports medicare. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Tisdale Student’s Business Venture 
 
Mr. Renaud: — Mr. Speaker, Kelly Lupien is a grade 12 
student in my home town of Tisdale. Kelly took advantage of 
an entrepreneurship program offered at her school. She now 
operates her own business with the help of the youth internship 
program. Kelly’s business — Ancient Secrets Mehndi Art By 
Kelly — is a result of her involvement in an entrepreneur class 
in high school. Kelly went ahead with the final phase of the 
class and developed a business plan. Kelly’s research indicates 
that a tattoo parlour would have a potential in north-eastern 
Saskatchewan. So with the help of the youth internship 
program, Kelly started her own business. Mr. Speaker, I want to 
wish good luck to Kelly in her new venture. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Saskatchewan Party Apology 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’ve 
been asked by the NDP caucus to apologize to the NDP for 
referring to the NDPs as reds. Frankly, I’m surprised anyone 
took offence at this comment. On many occasions I’ve heard 
the NDP refer to themselves, and the area around Yorkton, as 
red square. Well, we know, Mr. Speaker, it’s not red square 
anymore, it’s now green square represented by the 
Saskatchewan Party. 
 
But I’ve heard the New Democrats use this term many time 
themselves and that’s why I’m surprised anyone took offence at 
this comment. But if I’ve offended anyone over there, I 
apologize. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Records Set by Young Hafford Athlete 
 
Mr. Jess: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It wasn’t long ago that I 
stood in this House and told the Assembly of the athletic talents 
of a young man by the name of Scott Linnell from Hafford. 
Today, I’m going to tell you about his sister, Tracy. 
 
Tracy Linnell is a grade 10 student from Hafford Central 
School. On June 6 and 7, Tracy went, as part of her school’s 
team, to the provincial track and field competitions in Prince 
Albert. Tracy must have springs in her legs because her jump of 
11.3 metres not only set new records and earned her a gold 
medal in the junior girls’ category, but it also beat any jump 
made by girls competing in the senior category. 
 
I know Tracy’s parents, Howard and Mary Linnell, are proud of 
the athletic accomplishments of Tracy. And I would like to 
congratulate her and wish her well in the future. We expect to 
hear more great things from all three family members, as there 
are in fact three athletes in the family. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Indian Summer Games 
 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I just 
would like to take a moment to recognize the achievement of 
one of the reserves in my constituency. On July 5-9, the 
Cowessess first nations will be hosting the Saskatchewan Indian 
Summer Games. Every one in this Assembly knows what it 
takes — the effort, the work, the voluntarism that is needed to 
host such an event. 
 
And I would like to extend my congratulations to Chief 
Terrance Pelletier and the Cowesses first nation for their 
worthwhile efforts and wish them well as they host the 
Saskatchewan Indian Summer Games in July. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Record of Government 
 

Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I see in today’s paper where the 



1954 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 1998 

Premier is going to be “studying the entrails” of this session. 
That’s an interesting choice of words. I agree there’s been a few 
ministers who’ve been bloodied and beaten on the floor this 
session and the rest of the NDP back-benchers are circling the 
carcasses like jackals, waiting for the cabinet shuffle. 
 
Mr. Premier, this session has been an absolute disaster for the 
NDP. You have no plan to deal with it. No plan for health care, 
no plan for lower taxes, no plan for highways, no plan for 
agriculture, and no plan for fixing the Crowns. That’s the NDP 
record, that’s the NDP way, but it’s not the Saskatchewan way. 
 
Mr. Premier, why have you completely lost touch with the 
Saskatchewan people? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member 
opposite says that we have lost our way. I think he is the one 
who is lost. 
 
In this session we introduced our fifth-in-a-row balanced 
budget, something which the Conservatives didn’t achieve at 
all. In this session we introduced a tax cut of 2 per cent on 
personal income tax compared to 1.5 in Alberta and on the 
heels of the 2 per cent cut in PST (provincial sales tax) last 
year. In this session we spent $1.72 billion in health care — a 5 
per cent increase in health care — back-filling every penny that 
the federal government has taken away from health care. 
 
In this session we’ve increased spending for highways by 13 
per cent. In this session we introduced the National Child 
Benefit plan and the “building independence . . . ” program 
which speaks to the issue of poverty and kids in poverty and 
working families, which is a trail-blazing program . . . which is 
the first national social program in Canada in over 30 years. 
 
Lost our way? I don’t think so. You people have lost your way. 
You lost your way when you, in the dead of the night, left your 
party, stabbed your leader in the back, and formed this little 
collection called Saskatchewan Party when you’re really the old 
Tory Party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Health Care System 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Premier says he’s very proud of his record. And let’s just take a 
look at that record starting with health care: 52 rural hospitals 
closed; the Plains hospital closed; bed closures; doctors leaving; 
nursing shortages; record waiting-lists; patients suffering; 
families suffering. That’s the NDP record, Mr. Speaker, that’s 
the NDP way. And it’s not the Saskatchewan way. 
 
Mr. Premier, what are you doing to address the total chaos in 
your health system? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the only chaos that 
exists is in the Saskatchewan Party. And when he says that I’m 
proud of our record, I am indeed proud of our record. Because 

one thing I do not have to do, Mr. Speaker, is defend a record of 
the Conservative Party in Saskatchewan. I do not have to 
defend a $15 billion debt that those people ran up to the people 
in the province of Saskatchewan. I do not have to defend tax 
increases. I do not have to defend a variety of deals that these 
people made in the dead of night with any entrepreneur that 
came in with an envelope and said, here’s the deal. And these 
boys were suckered in to signing the deal. 
 
No, I don’t have that record to defend. The record that I have to 
defend is more people working in the province of Saskatchewan 
today than ever in our history; the highest budget for health care 
than ever in our history; people returning back to the province 
of Saskatchewan after 60,000 left under the Conservatives. 
 
That is our record. I’ll stand on our record any day. And I’d bet 
you the people of Eastview support our record over yours any 
day too. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Performance of Crown Corporations 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Premier, let’s look at your NDP record in Crown corporations: 
NST, 16 million gone; Guyana, 2 million gone; Channel Lake, 
5 million gone; Jack Messer, 300,000 gone; SaskPower rates 
way up; SaskEnergy rates way up; SaskTel rates way up; SGI 
(Saskatchewan Government Insurance) rates way up. 
 
Ministers are not being held accountable in any measure at all. 
Patronage, mismanagement, and incompetence — that’s the 
NDP record. That’s the NDP way. It’s not the Saskatchewan 
way. 
 
Mr. Premier, what are you going to do to fix the family of 
Crown corporations? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — I’m going to tell the hon. member 
from the Saskatchewan Tory Party what we’re not going to do. 
 
We’re not going to privatize the Crown corporations as you 
people are going to do. We’re not going to privatize them as 
your leader, Elwin Hermanson, says — that if the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan, in his words, had 10 minutes to 
think about it, they would privatize the Crown corporations and 
give away our heritage. That is not what we’re going to do. I’ll 
tell you instead what we are going to do . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Now I had no difficulty being 
able to hear the question being put, and I’m having much 
difficulty being able to hear the response being put because of 
the constant commentary by some of the members of the 
opposition benches. Now I ask for the cooperation of the whole 
House to enable the answer to be heard. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m afraid that 
they’re afraid of hearing the truth, these great democratics — 
these accountable, open people who want to listen. I’ll tell you 
that’s what I’m not going to do, but I’ll tell you what I am going 
to continue doing. 



June 11, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1955 

I’m going to continue to provide the services and the cost and 
the rates for the people of the province of Saskatchewan on our 
Crown corporations at the lowest level in this country in — the 
lowest in this country in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I’m going to continue to look at divesting ourselves from the 
investments that you entered into. You talk about some of the 
losses which were recorded. Why didn’t you get up and give us 
credit for the over $100 million profit that we made on 
By-Provincial, one of your other schemes that you got into. 
That’s what we’re not going to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Drought Assistance 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, in case 
you haven’t noticed, Saskatchewan is smack dab in the middle 
of a drought. And now we hear today the federal Liberal 
Agriculture minister saying from Ottawa that he will not 
provide one red cent in drought assistance to Saskatchewan 
farmers. Nothing. Not a dime; zippo for Saskatchewan farmers. 
And it would appear that the NDP is planning on matching their 
funding directly. 
 
Mr. Premier, you’ve attacked farmers and farm families. You 
ripped up GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) contracts. 
You’re gouging cattle ranchers. Mr. Premier, that’s the NDP 
record, that’s the NDP way; that isn’t the Saskatchewan way. 
Mr. Premier, when are you going to stop attacking farmers and 
cattle ranchers in this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the 
problem that we have in Saskatchewan is that we’re the only 
people in this House that can do anything about it. We’ve got a 
federal apologist Liberal Party. We’ve got a Tory Party with no 
connections in Ottawa so all they can do is sit here and chirp. 
 
But I’ll tell what we’re doing. We started planning several years 
and now we have a crop insurance program that is 33 per cent 
cheaper than it was two years ago. We have put money into the 
NISA (Net Income Stabilization Account) program and there’s 
$1.2 billion in it — three times the maximum drought payment 
in 1988. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what we’re going to do is, if this doesn’t 
cover the problem in Saskatchewan, we then have to go and 
grab the federal — and we’re talking to them already — the 
federal government saying, what more can we do. 
 
I thank him for his question but I think you’d better get off your 
. . . get up on your hind feet and start talking to Ottawa instead 
of chirping in the wilderness. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Maintenance of Highways 
 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Premier. But first I must commend the 
Premier, Mr. Speaker, he reminds me of the Eveready Bunny 
this session: he takes a lickin’ and he just keeps on tickin’. 
 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Premier, Saskatchewan highways are falling 
apart. A 10-pound chunk of road being hurled through the 
window of an oncoming car, potholes that outnumber the 
gophers, highways magically transformed into cattle trails; even 
the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court has passed judgement 
on Saskatchewan highways — they’re terrible. 
 
Mr. Premier, the NDP has absolutely failed the people of 
Saskatchewan when it comes to building and maintaining safe 
roads. Mr. Premier, that’s the NDP record and that’s the NDP 
way. It’s not the Saskatchewan way. 
 
Mr. Premier, how many more people have to get maimed or 
killed on Saskatchewan roads before your government finally 
starts to do something about it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Speaker, we have a 10-year plan 
that we have put forward — as of last year, $2.5 billion into 
highway spending — in which we’ve been increasing the 
budget last year and this year. 
 
But what was the plan of the opposition across there? They had 
a 10-year plan. Their 10-year plan was running deficits, as I 
said yesterday, in which we’re spending $2 million a day — 
which is the biggest pothole that we have to fix as a 
government. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s not the Saskatchewan way. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — That isn’t the Saskatchewan way. The 
Saskatchewan way, as I said, we’re putting more money in, we 
are working with the communities, we are working through area 
transportation planning, and we’re meeting the challenges today 
and into the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Tax Rates and Out-Migration 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 
the Premier. Mr. Premier, financial planners across the country 
are flocking to Saskatchewan to promote their newest idea for 
avoiding high taxes, and it’s called: move to Alberta income 
expansion plan. And it’s taking Saskatchewan by storm. 
 
Mr. Premier, since the NDP took office in 19 . . . (inaudible) . . . 
what have we seen? Income taxes, through the roof. Sales tax, 
up. Capital taxes, up. Surtaxes, up. Property taxes, soaring. 
 
Mr. Premier, your government has added more than a billion in 
new taxes in just seven short years, the largest tax increase in 
the history of Saskatchewan. Mr. Premier, that’s the NDP way 
and that’s the NDP record, but it’s the Saskatchewan way. 
 
Mr. Premier, what are you going to do to dig this province out 
from the mountain of taxes you’ve put us under? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, the reason that we’re 
collecting more taxes in this province today is because we have 
more economic activity in this province today than we had 
under those people over there. And I want to contrast the 



1956 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 1998 

rhetoric of that member, Mr. Speaker, with the facts. 
 
Fact: our population is growing. 
 
Fact: we’ve seen five straight years of economic growth, we’ve 
made significant progress in terms of economic diversification. 
 
Fact: there are more people working in Saskatchewan today 
than ever before in the history of our province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Certainly more people than were working under their 
administration when 15,000 people per year, Mr. Speaker, were 
leaving the province — 15,000 people every year. We’ve 
created a positive environment here in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. And it’s been recognized by the people, it’s 
recognized by the investment dealers, it’s recognized by the 
credit rating agencies which have improved our credit rating 
back to the straight A’s. A long way from where they were 
under their administration, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hospital Bed Closures 
 

Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Health stated 
recently that reducing the number of acute care beds in Regina 
below the current 675 would be inappropriate. In spite of that, 
79 more beds will be closed during the summer months. 
 
In Saskatoon there’ll be no more bookings for elective surgery 
this summer, and the Saskatoon Health Board confirmed today 
that 70 hospital beds will be closed down in that city for the 
summer. 
 
Mr. Premier, hospitals in our two biggest centres are in the grip 
of a bed crisis already. How can you allow these summertime 
bed closures to occur? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the member full-well 
knows that summertime bed closures have been going on for 
years, not only in the province of Saskatchewan but in every 
province across Canada, occasioned by a number of reasons. 
 
If they’re elective surgery, which is what you’re talking about, 
people have vacation plans, the medical people have vacation 
plans, and the hospital administrators take that into account. So 
please don’t try to put the elective category and the tradition 
into some sort of a crisis, which it is not. 
 
I remind the hon. member opposite of two facts. No. 1, 
according to Maclean’s magazine, Saskatchewan has more beds 
per capita than any other province in Canada. And no. 2, we 
have achieved this and all of our successes in health care in 
spite of the fact that you and your Liberals have cut $7 billion 
from health care across the piece in Canada, to your shame . . . 
and to your attack on national medicare. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, a total of 149 beds will be shut 
down in Regina and Saskatoon this summer. There’ll also be a 

slowdown in a number of the surgeries performed. But the 
Liberal opposition has now learned that the Moose Jaw Union 
Hospital will be shutting down all — and I repeat, all — of its 
operating rooms for a 10-day period this summer from August 7 
to August 15. 
 
Mr. Premier, nurses at the Union Hospital in Moose Jaw are 
expressing concerns about the timing of this closure because 
patients are generally transferred to Regina or Saskatoon if an 
operation can’t be performed in Moose Jaw. 
 
Mr. Premier, if no surgeries will be performed in Moose Jaw 
over this 10-day period and there’s a huge reduction in our 
major centres at the same time, where are patients supposed to 
go? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the Minister of 
Health it is my understanding that during that 10-day period in 
the Moose Jaw hospital, major renovations are taking place to 
improve regional care facilities in this province, Mr. Speaker. I 
can’t believe the member from Thunder Creek would get up 
and oppose that major renovation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while I have my place today, there’s been a great 
deal of debate during this session and I want to share with 
members of this House an assessment of health care reform in 
Saskatchewan which I received from a man who we recently 
honoured in this House, Dr. Orville Hjertaas — one of the true 
pioneers of medicare in our province. 
 
Some time ago Dr. Hjertaas wrote to me and he said the 
following, quote: 
 

The dream of an affordable, efficient, compassionate, 
consumer-driven medicare plan is more real today than it 
was in 1962. Millie and I sincerely hope that in the trials 
and struggles of your term, you will find the strength and 
the wisdom to steer a course in keeping with our dreams. 
 

Mr. Speaker, that’s what this government is doing, steering a 
course in keeping with the dreams of people like Tommy 
Douglas and Orville Hjertaas. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, the minister missed the point. 
Where are the people supposed to go when they require their 
renovations, when they require the surgeries? That’s the point. 
 
The Liberal opposition has revealed that more than 6,600 
people occupy waiting-lists in this province. And the people 
requiring surgery in Saskatoon are waiting more than a year for 
an operation. That, coupled with the operating room 
slow-downs in Regina and Saskatoon and the summertime 
closure of 149 beds, is nothing more than a recipe for disaster. 
 
Mr. Premier, what action will you be taking to ensure services 
are not reduced in Regina and Saskatoon during this period that 
operating rooms are closed in Moose Jaw? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



June 11, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1957 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I have every confidence in 
the medical staff and the administration of the Moose 
Jaw-Thunder Creek District Health Board as I have confidence 
in the medical staffs of our health boards across the province. 
Obviously the shut-down time for renovation will be accounted 
for, Mr. Speaker. That will not be a concern. 
 
But again, Mr. Speaker, while I have my feet. Given the history 
of this day and what we will do later this afternoon, I thought it 
might be interesting to share with the House another quote 
today, quote: 
 

The Liberal Party had better be warned right now that they 
have never been able to bribe the people of Saskatchewan 
in the past and they are certainly not going to be able to 
intimidate them in the future. 
 

Now listen to this, Mr. Speaker, “Ottawa’s arrogant attitude and 
bad manners have done more to weaken the bonds of 
Confederation than anything else that has happened in the last 
quarter of a century.” The author of that quote, the Hon. T.C. 
Douglas, 1952. Nothing changes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Canadian Union of Public Employees’ 
Hospital Workers 

 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, how do people get operations in 
Moose Jaw? Mr. Speaker, yesterday 130 health care workers in 
northern Saskatchewan walked off the job. The Liberal 
opposition has learned that 12,000 health care workers who 
belong to CUPE (Canadian Union of Public Employees) are 
preparing for a strike vote on June 24. 
 
Mr. Premier, what contingency plan are you working on in the 
event thousands of health care workers go on strike? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, this government — every 
member of it — is a firm believer in the collective bargaining 
process. That’s what’s happening, Mr. Speaker. It’s the 
collective bargaining process with CUPE and SAHO 
(Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations) in the 
North, and CUPE across . . . SGEU (Saskatchewan Government 
Employees’ Union) and SAHO in the North and CUPE across 
the province, Mr. Speaker. If I may say, neither of the 
opposition parties support collective bargaining and we’re well 
aware of that. 
 
Contingency, Mr. Speaker. The member speaks of contingency, 
which speaks of the future. I want to assure that member, 
yesterday in this House, Mr. Speaker, during the debate in this 
House a line was drawn — a clear line for the people of 
Saskatchewan. On that side of the line those who believe in 
privatized medicine — it was clearly drawn yesterday, Mr. 
Speaker — on this side of the House those who stand firm for 
the principles of medicare. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, this government refuses to 
admit that our health care system is in chaos. We have a bed 
crisis. We have more than 6,000 people on waiting-lists. We 

witnessed 130 health care workers walk off the job in northern 
Saskatchewan yesterday; another 12,000 may strike in the near 
future. Mr. Premier, if this doesn’t fit your definition of a health 
care system in crisis what does? What steps are you going to 
take in the coming months to repair the damage that you’ve 
done to our health system? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — The member asks me to give him my 
definition of what is in crisis. The Liberal Party of Canada and 
Saskatchewan is my definition of something in crisis. It is in 
crisis because nationally the federal government, I say to its 
shame, has withdrawn from a commitment to national 
medicare. Rather than 50 cent dollars to medicare, which was 
the case in 1967-68 . . . that’s how medicare got started 
nationally after we in this province funded it 100 per cent for 
five, six years. Today’s share is 13 cents and going down . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Just listen, 13 cents and going down 
— 13 cents and going . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, Mr. 
Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Now I will ask for the cooperation of 
the members of the House to provide the answer to be heard 
uninterrupted. 
 

Drought Assistance 
 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
questions are for the Premier. 
 
Mr. Premier, as you know, yesterday in the House we raised the 
concern of farm families with regard to the impending drought 
here in Saskatchewan. We asked the Minister of Agriculture a 
very straightforward question that if your government would 
respond if this drought persists, by recalling the legislature later 
this summer if necessary. 
 
Mr. Premier, if this province-wide drought does persist, will 
you support farm families, ranch families, by recalling the 
legislature to deal with what will be a crisis in agriculture in this 
province that a drought will cause. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I 
answered this question yesterday and I appreciate his concern. 
This doesn’t get solved by calling a fall session of the 
legislature unfortunately, as the obvious lack of planning 
capabilities of that party suggests. 
 
This is solved by having a good crop insurance program that we 
do have, that is 33 per cent cheaper than it was two years ago. 
This is solved by having NISA contributions up to $1.2 billion 
that gives the farmers an additional service of funds available to 
them. 
 
What we have said and what we are doing . . . I’ve written a 
letter to the federal people two months ago. We continue to talk 
to them through their bureaucracy. We’re meeting in July at the 
federal-provincial meeting and I have given notice that that will 
be top on the priority list if it hasn’t rained by then. 
 
Mr. Member, I think your problem is that you’ve got no one to 
talk to. We’re going to carry the ball on this side and I don’t 



1958 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 1998 

think anything that you do would help that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Employment Supplement Program 
 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
one question that remains in the time today will be for the 
Minister of Social Services. 
 
Let me begin by congratulating the department on the 
professional manner in which the personnel at the call centre are 
responding to inquiries, especially those regarding the 
Saskatchewan employment supplement. 
 
This is however an issue that I think deserves clarification, 
given the number of calls that I’ve had to my office, Mr. 
Minister. According to the minister, Mr. Speaker, the 
employment supplement is designed to be friendly and 
time-sensitive. But there are concerns about the definition of 
employment income with regards to maternity and paternity 
benefits. 
 
Now understandably one does not want to encourage people to 
be unemployed by providing a supplement, but people on 
maternity leave, Mr. Minister, will return to work in five or six 
months. 
 
My question this afternoon to the minister is: will you explain 
please, sir, why Employment Insurance benefits such as 
maternity and paternity benefits are regarded as regular EI 
(Employment Insurance) benefits, therefore penalizing many 
needy new moms and dads. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the member for her 
timely question. And I’m not sure I can give her a full and 
complete answer, but I commit that I will further look into this 
matter and get her and all members a complete answer on this. 
 
The employment supplement program is intended to 
supplement earned income or income from other sources, 
maintenance support primarily, to ensure that no one should fall 
into the welfare trap, and to ensure that everyone who is in 
welfare and making some effort to get over the welfare wall 
will be assisted to do that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will provide for that member and all members a 
clear description of any income that may be coming in through 
EI, and I thank her for raising it. 
 
Just again while I have the floor, Mr. Speaker, I want to report 
to the House that the numbers of phone calls being received by 
our call centre for the employment supplement program and for 
information on the Child Benefit have reached record numbers. 
We’re taking more than 900, 1,000, 1,100 calls a day, Mr. 
Speaker. This program is well suited to the needs and homes of 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, I seek leave to 
introduce guests. 
 

Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
We are deeply honoured today to be joined by some 
distinguished visitors from Germany, some parliamentarians 
from the Länder or states. 
 
I think before introducing them I just want to say very briefly, 
Mr. Speaker, that we share many ties with Germany. I think the 
most important of them are the large number of German settlers 
which came to Saskatchewan, who brought with them a very 
rich culture and a particular talent in engineering and industry. 
And I think all members will want to join with me. 
 
I’m going to ask the members to stand as I call their names. 
This is a little dangerous because they may not recognize their 
names when I pronounce them. I’ll ask them to listen closely. 
 
Mr. Klaus Leroff, head of the delegation from the state of 
Saxonia; Mr. Karl August Geimer from the state of Rhineland; 
Ms. Rite Henke from the state of Saxonia; Mr. Volker Hoff 
from the state of Hessen; Mr. Joerg Jaeger from the state of 
Bremen; Mr. Bernard Nitschmann from the state of 
Brandenburg; Mr. Dirk Pinnow from the state of Saxonia; Mr. 
Hans Richter from the state of Saxonia. 
 
Ms. Dorothee Stapelfeld from the state of Hamburg; Mr. Heinz 
Van Schewick from the state of North-Rhine Westfalia; Mr. 
Hubert Vogt from the state of Berlin; Mr. Juergen Weber from 
the Schleswig-Holstein; Ms. Cornelia Wiedemeyer from the 
state of Bremen; Ms. Christina Zitzmann from the state of 
Thuringia, this is one of the new states from the east; and 
finally, the Canadian coordinator, Mr. Adriaan De Hoog, the 
Canadian coordinator. 
 
I’d ask all members to join me in welcoming these 
distinguished visitors. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
Assembly, some friends and constituents of mine that are seated 
in your gallery, from Weyburn, that are here for the celebration 
that we have today. 
 
Seated in your gallery is Doug and Mayvis Goranson, Helen 
Davidson, Al and Betty Yeaman, and I also just want to extend 
a warm welcome also to the Douglas family. Being the MLA 
for Weyburn-Big Muddy is truly an honour to follow in the 
footsteps of such a fine person as Tommy Douglas. 
 
I want to also just say very quickly, as one of our major road 
projects this year, is a road to Avonlea that we’re spending 
millions of dollars in upgrading. I join a very warm welcome to 
my friends from Weyburn. 



June 11, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1959 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Leave to introduce a guest please? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce a friend, a 
staunch supporter of the great party in Saskatchewan, a farmer 
from Aneroid, a compassionate, caring, individual and a former 
well-respected MLA. Members of the House, I’d like you to 
give a warm welcome to Allan Oliver. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to also recognize the 
German delegation. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, on behalf of the Saskatchewan Party caucus I too 
would like to welcome the German delegation here to the 
Legislative Assembly and to the city of Regina and to the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I know that there’s a function planned this evening, which I will 
be attending and we’ll have hopefully the opportunity to share 
comments with one another. I also noted that one gentleman 
there had indicated he was from Eston, and my colleague is also 
from Eston so we’ll have to have some . . . 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was proud last fall 
to be part of the delegation that . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted to the hon. member from 
Arm River as well? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to have 
leave to introduce . . . As part of the delegation from Canada, I 
went to Germany last fall. I too would like to welcome the 
delegation here and look forward to talking to them tonight. 
 
The exchange that we had last fall in Germany, I truly agree 
that . . . I’m not sure whether there’s as many faces there that 
we met, Mr. Speaker. It’s been a little while, but I look forward 
to meeting and talking with you this evening. 
 
So welcome to Saskatchewan, welcome to Canada, and 
welcome to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1430) 
 
The Speaker: — Leave to the hon. member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Mr. Speaker, and thank you for anticipating what 
I was going to be asking. I would like to join with my colleague 

across the way and obviously also with the Speaker in 
welcoming our special guests from Germany. I too was 
privileged to be part of the Partnership of Parliament, a 
Partnership of Parliament delegation to Germany last year and I 
would like to say, Damen und Herrn, willkommen an Regina. 
 
Hon. members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Chair: — Is leave also granted to the hon. member for 
Humboldt? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too would 
like to add to the welcome that has been extended from all 
members of the Assembly to you, our guests from Germany. 
 
And I am wanting to say that I am very privileged and honoured 
that you will be coming into the Humboldt constituency. And I 
will have the privilege of accompanying you on the bus out to 
Humboldt. And the visit to the farm that you will be 
undertaking is a visit to the farm that my husband and I and our 
partners own. And we are looking very forward to having you. 
So welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Executive Council 

Vote 10 
 
The Chair: — I would ask the Premier to reintroduce his 
officials please, in case we have new people watching. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I have my deputy 
minister, Dr. Greg Marchildon, Bonita Heidt, Jim Nicol, and 
my chief of staff Judy Samuelson. 
 
Subvote (EX01) 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Premier, and to 
your officials, welcome. Mr. Chairman, this is our first chance 
to address the Premier, and since he’s only going to be here a 
short time, what I plan on doing is making a statement for the 
Premier to think about rather than to ask him numerous 
questions. 
 
Mr. Chairman, prior to the beginning of the legislative session 
the Liberal opposition did some old-fashioned politics. We 
didn’t do any focus group testing or any big polling. What we 
did was go out and talk to the people of Saskatchewan. We 
asked them about their biggest concern — what were their 
biggest concerns; were they happy with the direction that this 
province was going. 
 
Mr. Chairman, what the people of Saskatchewan told us was 
they were fearful. They were fearful that health care was headed 



1960 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 1998 

in the wrong direction. Saskatchewan is the cradle of medicare 
in this country. What the people of this province feared was that 
it was also becoming medicare’s grave. 
 
Having travelled all over this country, the one thing that makes 
me proud to be from Saskatchewan, Mr. Chairman, is that in 
this province, people really do care for one another. When 
generations before us broke virgin grass on the prairies, and 
sowed the seeds of future prosperity, they also sowed the seeds 
of our compassion. 
 
Just as our parents and our grandparents depended on this land 
for their survival, they depended on their neighbour, they 
depended on one another. When you needed help you knew you 
could depend on your neighbour. When an accident occurred on 
the farm, you knew your neighbour would help you get to the 
doctor or bring the doctor to you. If you didn’t have enough 
horses to do the ploughing or finish harvest, you knew you 
could rely on your neighbour to help you in that effort. 
 
That is the history of Saskatchewan — compassion and 
cooperation. That’s the Saskatchewan way. Sadly, as the 
century turns to a close, we see those basic tenets, the 
underlying beliefs of our province, eroding — not in the hearts 
of the people, but the corridors of government power. Almost 
20 years of combined Conservative and NDP rule it seems the 
people are losing faith that governments still care about them. 
 
However, we in the Liberal opposition wanted to let the people 
of Saskatchewan know that one party has not broken faith with 
them. That is why, when the spring session began, the Liberal 
opposition explained that its goal was to be the voice of the 
people and address their number one concern — health care. 
 
And this session is ending exactly the way it started — with the 
Liberal opposition assuming its role as defender of health care 
and demonstrating how this NDP government has abandoned its 
health care principles. From day one we raised health care 
concerns of people from right across Saskatchewan and we 
have been rewarded with their confidence and support for this 
very important fight. 
 
When the NDP started this process it calls health reform, cracks 
developed in our health care system. But those cracks have now 
become gaping holes. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the Liberal opposition began this session by 
joining forces with the Save the Plains Committee and 
announcing a series of public meetings across southern 
Saskatchewan. From this campaign we saw the best and the 
worst that politics had to offer. 
 
Thousands of people attended these meetings and thousands 
more sent us letters of support. The first phase of this campaign 
may have come to a close but we will continue to fight to keep 
that hospital open. 
 
Unfortunately during that time, the NDP demonstrated that it 
will not stand for anyone questioning its authority. Darlene 
Sterling, who co-chaired the Save the Plains effort, suffered an 
attack like I have never witnessed. It demonstrated to what 
depths governments can sink. 
 

The need to save the Plains has been underlined by the bed 
crisis which is gripping Saskatchewan. It has been all too often 
that people requiring care have been turned away, and in a 
province which is supposed to be the home of medicare, that is 
a pity. Accessibility, Mr. Chairman, has also been a major 
concern which has been registered by the people of 
Saskatchewan, of rural Saskatchewan. 
 
But the member from Regina South suggests that they have to 
be dumb not to find the General Hospital. Once they’ve found 
it, however, where do they park? 
 
And let’s not forget this project to consolidate services in 
Regina is already $25 million over budget — $25 million over 
budget — and this process isn’t even close to completion. What 
is the final price tag going to be? 
 
If anything, we have proved that the decision to close the Plains 
does not make sense in health care or in financial terms. 
 
But what have the New Democrat MLAs from Regina and 
southern Saskatchewan had to say about the pending closure of 
the Plains? Absolutely nothing. The member from Regina South 
campaigned in the last election to keep the Plains open, but 
what do we hear from him? Nothing. Perhaps this member has 
been dealt the same treatment as the member from Estevan, 
who suggested that once he had an opinion on the Plains, but 
had it brainwashed out of him. 
 
But what about the rest of the NDP members? Why do they 
refuse to speak out on behalf of those that they are supposed to 
represent? And I say suppose, because they’re certainly not 
speaking out on behalf of their constituents. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the present government has a much different 
philosophy about health care than previous NDP governments. 
When waiting-lists approached the 2,000 mark under former 
Premier Allan Blakeney, the minister of Health was called on 
the carpet and given an alternative. He was told to get the 
waiting-list down to an acceptable level or a new minister 
would be found. 
 
Today more than 6,600 people occupy waiting-lists in the 
province. However this doesn’t seem to concern the Premier. 
People are waiting more than one year for surgery in this 
province, but that does not seem to concern the Premier. 
 
Just this week we raised the fact that cancer patients in 
Saskatoon are being forced to wait an unacceptable length of 
time for treatment and surgery. And of course this situation 
threatens to get even worse because two of six oncologists at 
the Saskatoon Cancer Centre are retiring. 
 
The Premier suggests that patients be booted out of hospital 
even faster than they already are. We saw the consequences of 
this ill-thought-out plan when an 81-year-old Regina women 
was forced out of hospital only four days after surgery to 
remove blood clots from her leg. Only hours after being 
released from hospital she suffered a stroke and sadly, only 
days ago she passed away. Of course the only remedy for the 
current bed crisis is the injection of new beds into the system. 
 
The Minister of Health announced a year ago that a study would 



June 11, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1961 

be done to determine the effects of bed closures under the first 
phase of health care reform. But before this study has even been 
completed, the NDP have launched into a new round of cuts in 
the Living Sky and Battlefords Health Districts. 
 
It makes you wonder what happened to a promise made by the 
minister that any further cuts would in his words — in his 
words, Mr. Chairman — be inappropriate. What responsible 
government begins a round of bed closures before it has 
completed a study on the effects of the first round of cuts. 
 
Mr. Chairman, finances are obviously at the crux of this 
problem. As we pointed out this week, 10 health districts are 
anticipating deficits this fiscal year, and that can only mean one 
thing, and it’s frightening — even more cuts may be in store. Of 
course this government seems more concerned with finding 
scapegoats than they are in addressing the real issue here. 
 
When we provided this House with proof that a Yorkton man 
died because no critical care bed was available for him in 
Regina, how did the NDP respond? Well the government didn’t 
admit that perhaps they may have gone too far. This 
government didn’t acknowledge that perhaps there is a bed 
crisis. Instead the NDP lashed out at a physician and suggested 
that he should be subjected to an investigation. But that, Mr. 
Chairman, seems to be par for the course where this NDP 
government is concerned. 
 
And how do the NDP plan on addressing the fact that 675 acute 
care beds in Regina is not enough? They plan on cutting another 
79 beds for the summer months, which will undoubtedly drive 
the current bed crisis to a new level. 
 
Two-tier medicine may also have been the enemy of past NDP 
governments, but not this one. The present government is 
allowing two-tier medicine to enter this province as never 
before — not by design but through neglect. Because the 
present level of health care simply does not address health care 
concerns of many people, we hear on a daily basis how 
residents of this province are taking their health care needs 
outside of this province to other provinces, to other countries. 
Those who can afford to simply aren’t willing to put their health 
at risk. 
 
(1445) 
 
But what about those who cannot afford to seek out-of-province 
care? How is it fair that they are left to make do with a 
substandard level of health care; some of them waiting for 
surgery, becoming addicted to Demerol, morphine, codeine to 
ease their pain and their suffering. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the facts do indeed speak for themselves, and 
Saskatchewan people are looking to this government for 
answers and not excuses. They are tired of excuses. They are 
tired of the Premier pointing his finger at other places. They are 
tired of this government lashing out at those who dare to 
question them. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the Premier stands in this House and arrogantly 
winds his finger at those who dare question his government. His 
government stands in the House and trumpets the findings of a 
recent Maclean’s survey. A glossy magazine is little solace 

when you have cancer and you’re waiting for an operation 
because there are too few cancer specialists. A glossy magazine 
is little comfort when a spouse or parent dies because there 
were no beds. 
 
They wave articles in the air when they support the government. 
But anyone, anyone dare print anything that questions the 
Premier or his administration, he cries foul. He questions the 
integrity of the reporters, insinuating that the reporters have 
their stories dictated to them by Conrad Black. Maybe in the 
Premier’s world he tells everyone else what to say, but the rest 
of us don’t operate in such a world, Mr. Chairman. 
 
You’re a leader, Mr. Premier, so why don’t you lead. Stop 
blaming everyone else for your problems. You’re the one who 
has to make the choices for your government. You’re willing to 
accept praise when things are going well, but when things are 
going bad you blame others. 
 
What we hear the Premier telling us from time to time — when 
people are in trouble — is sorry for the wait to see a cancer 
specialist, sir, but did you see the great story about my 
government in Maclean’s magazine? 
 
It’s going to be 20 extra minutes driving time to get you to the 
General instead of the Plains hospital, so while you’re in the 
ambulance, we have a copy of Maclean’s for you telling you 
how the NDP is bringing health care closer to home. 
 
That’s your way of dealing with the wait. Give the people a 
copy of Maclean’s to read. Waiting for a cancer specialist? 
Here, read Maclean’s. Waiting to ride to the hospital in an 
ambulance? Here, read Maclean’s magazine. 
 
The only reason Saskatchewan may have more hospital beds is 
because your government is including Howard Johnson Hotel 
rooms. 
 
Mr. Chairman, let’s hope that the Premier is now prepared to 
provide the people of Saskatchewan with some answers. 
Because while medicare may have been born in this province, it 
certainly will die here if left in the hands of the NDP 
government. 
 
Mr. Premier, do you not care any more? You used to be a man 
of compassion — a young lawyer who was willing to fight the 
system. You were a young lawyer eager to go to Regina and 
change the system. Well, it’s not the system that’s changed, Mr. 
Premier, it’s you who has changed. 
 
If I can just read briefly some excerpts from Hansard, August 
22, 1991, Mr. Chairman, and the Premier may recall and may 
recognize these comments. 
 

And finally, what about the health-care system. Much can 
be said about this, and much will be in the days ahead as I 
bring my remarks to a close — a health-care system that 
we see today where doctors and nurses and other 
care-givers are worried about intolerable working 
conditions, and difficulties of stress which manifest 
themselves today with the nurses coming to this 
Legislative Building to protest what’s happening. 
 



1962 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 1998 

What in the world’s gone wrong with medicare and health 
care — 197 beds, 197 people, 113 beds in Saskatoon, 
about 200 in Moose Jaw, Yorkton, and Regina, I think in 
round terms, closed down. What in the world has gone 
wrong? 
 

And I find myself standing here and asking the same questions 
on this side of the House that the member in the House asked in 
1991. I quote, continue to quote: 
 

I mean, but what in the world has caused all of this bed 
closures, and professionals leaving, and communities on 
the edge? I’ll tell you what’s caused it. What’s caused it is 
a government that has more interest in the well-being of 
Cargill than in the well-being of Royal University Hospital 
in Saskatoon or City Hospital in Saskatoon. 

 
Well, we could change Cargill for Guyana and for New 
Zealand. But everything still fits, nothing has changed. I carry 
on just to quote a few more words: 
 

Where in the world were these people, where in the world 
was the Minister of Health when he was making these 
planning decisions? Where in the world was this 
government? 
 
I do not understand how this can happen except for a 
government that either doesn’t care about the sanctity of 
the health care system, or a government which doesn’t 
understand the importance of health care and the tradition 
of this province. 

 
Well I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker (and I’m still quoting), I 
don’t believe the people of this province have ever, ever 
trusted Conservatives. I won’t say all Conservatives. They 
will have never trusted this Conservative government with 
health care. Putting this government in charge of the health 
care system in Saskatchewan’s a bit like putting Colonel 
Sanders in charge of the chicken coop. It’s downright 
dangerous to the health of medicare . . . downright 
dangerous. 

 
And I find myself standing here virtually repeating and wanting 
to say the very same things that the Premier said when he was 
in opposition. Mr. Chairman, what has changed? Where has that 
compassion and the feeling for the people of Saskatchewan 
gone? 
 
Mr. Chairman, instead of promising HBO (Home Box Office) 
to everyone in New Zealand, why not fix the roads of the 
people who paid for your schooling, Mr. Premier? Instead of 
doing power deals with an unstable South American country, 
why not lower the taxes for those that subsidize your 
government’s boondoggles. 
 
You jet around the country promoting the Saskatchewan 
miracle. Well your miracle came with a price. It’s the suffering 
of the people in the North because their roads or schools are 
third-world quality at best. Is that something to go around 
bragging about? 
 
Do you brag to other premiers that you have children in this 
province living in conditions of poverty that would even shock 

the late Mother Teresa? Do you brag about the extremely high 
suicide rates of first nations youth? Do you brag about the low 
high school completion rate? Do you brag about your 
government’s inaction to combat substance abuse in the North? 
Do you brag that you and your Deputy Premier are elected 
representatives in two of Canada’s highest crime-ridden 
ridings? Are you happy with those accomplishments, sir? 
 
Are you happy that you’ve said take it or leave it to the innocent 
victims of hepatitis C? Are you proud that your government 
was able to reward your former provincial campaign manager 
with a fat, taxpayer-funded severance of almost $300,000? Mr. 
Premier, it sounds like you have a lot to be happy about. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I’d like to ask the Premier if he has in fact lost 
his moral compos. I’d ask a question but it will just be turned 
around and blamed on others. I’d ask for reasons, but I’d get 
excuses. And I know if I ask for compassion I’ll get silence. 
 
So I’ll simply say to the Premier, you used to care. You used to 
care a lot. Why have you stopped caring? The words that I 
spoke were that of a caring, young lawyer who came to this 
legislature to make a difference, to change things. Why has that 
changed? I don’t understand that. 
 
And I don’t expect that you may find it necessary to stand up 
and give us a political response, but I would really like you to 
think about what I’ve stated, what I’ve raised and answer the 
people with actions rather than words. Mr. Chairman, Mr. 
Premier, you know that actions speak a lot louder than words. 
The people will be watching and will be hoping. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, it is not my intention 
to get into a lengthy dissertation or rebuttal to the Leader of the 
Third Party, but I think it deserves some brief response and I’ll 
try to be very, very brief on this. 
 
First of all, the question about Plains hospital has been well 
debated in this legislature and I will give credit to the Liberal 
Party for having raised the issue and the profile of that. And the 
Saskatchewan Party as well. 
 
I will simply repeat our position that at the end of the day there 
will be no bed loss. There will be 250,000 more square feet 
added to the overall system and an MRI (magnetic resonance 
imaging), the best of technology. And the people of Regina and 
southern Saskatchewan can expect, I think, even better health 
care than they have now. 
 
Maclean's comes up frequently in your comments. I refer to 
Maclean's because in a political forum such as this we’re all 
guilty of it to some extent. I refer to Maclean's because I’m 
trying to point to an objective source which would be some 
evidence that we might neutrally agree upon. 
 
I know one thing, that if the Maclean’s magazine report said 
that we did not have in Saskatchewan the highest per bed capita 
count of any province . . . I know if Maclean’s had said we 
were third or fourth or fifth, you’d use it against us. You’d say 
there it is, proven by Maclean’s. 
 



June 11, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1963 

So all I’m trying to do is to say with respect to Maclean’s, look 
that is an indication of what outside observers say. May I make 
one point about my favourite other people, other than 
politicians, and that is some of the journalists — not the 
journalists but the Conrad Black press. I’ll tell you why I say it. 
 
You know what that Maclean’s story that we referred to has? 
The headline in the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix. You saw it, front 
page, the headline is, “It’s your health”. Big, bold type. And 
then down below is the subtitle, “People in Saskatchewan more 
sick than elsewhere.” Then if you read the story, it’s a very 
simple answer to that. We have more beds in Saskatchewan 
than any other province in Canada and therefore they’re used 
more often and therefore the conclusion is we’re more sick. 
 
Logically one could argue — I don’t — perhaps no beds, no 
sickness which would be a ludicrous position to adopt. Now 
don’t tell me . . . I shouldn’t say this in any aggressive sense. 
No one can tell me that that isn’t Conrad Black fighting the 
government of the NDP with that kind of a headline, just like 
Tommy Douglas was fought tooth and nail by the Sifton press. 
That’s the reason I refer to Conrad Black and not the 
journalists, who I think are trying to do their job well. 
 
Last point I want to make, and I’ll take my place, is the question 
about compassion. I don’t believe there’s anybody in this room 
who does not have compassion. I do not accuse that of you; I do 
not accuse that of the Leader of the Saskatchewan Party or 
anybody. We’re all compassionate. It’s one of the 
characteristics of Saskatchewan people. You can accuse me of 
not having any compassion, that’s your judgement call. But I 
believe we’re all compassionate. 
 
But I want to make this one point as I take my chair in response 
to your comments. The system in health care is changing and 
has changed and will continue to change. In 1962 — this is not 
a harangue — when medicare was introduced, thousands of 
good Saskatchewan people came forward to fight medicare 
because they felt that it was the beginning of the end of a 
system that they knew, they admired, and they wanted to 
preserve and they wanted to protect. Thus, Keep Our Doctors 
because they said the doctors would flee. 
 
Today the parallel is we are changing medicare in the light of 
technology, new science. The bed usage is being downed 
everywhere just by virtue of the fact that you can get in and get 
out of hospital, not on dollars, but through technology. We’re 
changing it into wellness and prevention and other 
circumstances. And we’re ahead of the provinces in doing so, 
and Maclean’s notes that we’re leading the other provinces. It is 
changing and again history repeats itself. 
 
Some of the same voices come out and say, you know you’re 
destroying the system that I know and I’m familiar with, just 
like they did in 1962. And I guarantee you that the changes that 
we’ve implemented, if we were out of government today at 5 
o’clock, you wouldn’t undo, the Saskatchewan Party wouldn’t 
undo. You simply wouldn’t undo it because it is the direction to 
go. 
 
(1500) 
 
Have we made mistakes. Yes, we’ve made mistakes. Will we 

make mistakes in this complex matrix of reorganizing health 
care in the future? Yes. That’s inevitable too. 
 
But is it fundamentally in its structures compared to other 
provinces as good if not the best health care system in 
Saskatchewan. Here’s where you and I disagree. I say, I’ll point 
to Maclean’s. If you want to take the glossy and throw it out, 
the picture, I’ll point to academics in the health area, Michael 
Rachlis and others who have written saying this is the model to 
follow. 
 
The system has changed. All I can say to you people, if you 
want to protect the principles of medicare as the member from 
Thunder Creek said in his member’s statement today, we 
welcome the support of that. Well, tell us where it should be 
improved, where we could refine it, where we could finesse it. 
 
But don’t be back like they were in 1962 saying no change, no 
change, no change, no change. Because that’s a prescription for 
eventually no medicare, no medicare, no medicare, no 
medicare. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. 
Premier. Mr. Premier, I’d like to ask a number of questions 
today if I might in the area of education. We had a chance to 
begin discussions yesterday on a general sense regarding the 
position in the province of Saskatchewan, and I’d like to begin 
with the kindergarten to grade 12 system, Mr. Premier. 
 
Mr. Premier, last fall in the month of November, your cabinet 
was presented with a document, and I know that you were part 
of the group that received that document. A document from the 
Saskatchewan School Trustees Association, the Saskatchewan 
Teachers’ Federation, the Saskatchewan Association of School 
Business Officials, and the League of Educational 
Administrators, Directors and Superintendents. 
 
In that document, Mr. Premier, all the players in the field of 
education — the four groups that I’ve just identified to you, Mr. 
Premier — indicated to your government that there was a need 
to seriously address education as a whole in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Your government has stated, your government has stated many 
a time that education is a priority; that you believe that we have 
a quality education system, and that . . . I think one of your 
quotations from a few years ago, Mr. Premier, stated that we 
simply must find the money for education. 
 
Mr. Premier, the gist of that document was to present the 
position on behalf of not only those educators, but the students 
and the parents who are sending their children to schools in 
Saskatchewan. You’re very well aware that the traditional 60/40 
split as is referred to of the funding of education where 60 per 
cent of funding traditionally has been from government and 40 
per cent has been from the local taxpayer. We haven’t quite 
been at that level back when it was really called the 60/40. 
 
But what has happened over the last 10 to 15 years, Mr. 
Premier, is that that formula has changed and reversed itself 
where today in fact the statistics that I have been told that are 



1964 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 1998 

coming from the Minister of Education are that it is 40/60; that 
indeed government is funding only 40 per cent and the local 
taxpayers having to pick up 60. 
 
Mr. Premier, in that document groups . . . those stakeholders in 
education were lobbying you and cabinet to address this serious 
problem. Not only for the fact that we need to ensure that 
quality education is delivered in schools, that we need to have 
the supplies, the materials, the teachers, the staff that’s 
necessary to deliver quality education. 
 
Because what we see happening, Mr. Premier — and these are 
statistics that I’m sure your departmental officials have shown 
you when you received that document — since 1991, if we look 
at the grant allotment to school divisions in 1991, if we just 
took that as a base and we look at what happened since 1991, 
the cumulative loss to school divisions in the province of 
Saskatchewan is over $300 million. That’s what has been taken 
or downloaded from school divisions. 
 
Now what is the result, Mr. Premier? You know that taxation 
has changed. We have now mill rates increasing to pick up that 
difference. 
 
So what the group was doing, Mr. Premier, is they were 
lobbying the Minister of Education, yourself, the entire cabinet 
to look at the entire funding of education, and to say what is the 
plan of this government to reverse that funding. To look at how 
we can begin to change a 60/40 formula that has now become 
40/60, or for that matter maybe even 38/62 this year, where 
only 38 per cent comes from government. There is that 
responsibility of the province to be able to assume a greater 
amount of funding. 
 
So, Mr. Premier, I wonder what happened with that document. I 
know that the groups at that time felt that the reception that they 
had from your cabinet, from yourself, was very, very positive, 
and indeed they were looking forward to a plan. A plan that 
may not have begun with this year’s budget, but a plan that 
would begin shortly to address the concerns of educators, to 
address the concerns of students in schools to ensure that there 
is sufficient monies there, but most importantly to address the 
concerns of taxpayers to be able to change that formula around. 
 
To my knowledge nothing has happened and your government 
has not put forward a plan. Mr. Premier, I’m wondering if your 
government has a plan in place to attempt to reverse the 40/60 
formula to a traditional 60/40. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, the answer to the 
member is as follows. We want to raise the provincial share of 
funding approximating to 60 per cent. We think the submissions 
made carry a lot of weight. And that is where our direction is 
heading. 
 
We have made albeit very modest steps in this budget. Budget 
operating expense is up by 5.2; foundation operating grant is up 
by 5.7; foundation operation grants and grants in lieu increased 
by 6.2; capital budget is up by 43 per cent. So there is a modest 
step only. 
 
And what we told the folks then is what I will tell the member 
opposite. We take that paper and we are going to try to 

implement it, as finances permit, as quickly as we can. 
 
I will simply close by saying, not in an argumentative sense but 
in a reality sense, this is a lot of money, and as the members 
will know by my estimates, they stand in competition on 
highways, they stand in competition for more money to health 
care. You name the various competing demands. 
 
And so what we’re trying to do is to move education, which is a 
priority, up to a greater level of provincial funding. And what’s 
happened to that document is it is being actively worked on by 
officials right now and put into the planning mill for the budget 
coming up and the successive budgets. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Premier. Mr. 
Premier, I know you’ve stated in this House that to reverse the 
funding procedure would take, I believe millions — tens of 
millions of dollars. And you’ve indicated that in questions that I 
asked of the Minister of Education that you fielded during the 
session. 
 
But I guess what trustees and what school boards are looking 
for is a plan of action, a plan of actions from your government 
to say, while we realize that we are in competition for the 
dollar, for the tax dollar, we want to see whether or not there’s a 
plan in place by your government to move us in that direction. 
And while you say your officials are studying it, I commend 
you for that and indicate that that is important. 
 
But what taxpayers and what school boards are looking for is 
that there has to be a commitment from your government that 
says yes, we are going to move in that direction. While we 
cannot find $90 million to reverse that immediately and end up 
in a 60/40 split, but we’re going to begin that process. 
 
Mr. Minister, you did make . . . or Mr. Premier, I’m sorry, you 
did make comments about the changes to the funding of the K 
to 12 system this year. And while we see that there has been 
larger amount of monies allocated to the school boards, we also 
are very aware that this year, a tremendous amount of increase 
in terms of school division costs. And while there was a hope 
that indeed school divisions would have to have . . . would have 
a catch-up and would be able to rely on the so-called new 
monies, in fact the reality is there isn’t any new money because 
all of the new monies have been eaten up by all of the new 
expenses. 
 
So we’re looking in a situation where school boards again have 
been forced to increase mill rates at a time when your 
government, your Minister of Education, has indicated that 
school division funding has become a priority again of this 
government and the amounts of increase. 
 
How do you tell school boards that, no, you’re still going to 
have to continue to foot the largest portion of the bill in a year 
that you’re saying is a very positive year for your government. 
It’s one that school divisions can’t quite understand how they 
are left holding that entire increase of costs and not getting the 
help that your government is supposed to be assisting with. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Well our answer has to be the answer 
which is the truth, and that is that our increase is there but it 
does not cover the costs. I admit that. And as for a plan of 



June 11, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1965 

action, I have indicated to the SSTA (Saskatchewan School 
Trustees Association) in public speeches and in private 
meetings that our objective is to reach the 60 per cent as the 
funding is available. You can’t detail it much more than that. 
 
When we sit down to prepare a budget for example in 
November, December of this year and January of 1999, we’ll 
have to take a look to see what the economy looks like. The 
members on your side are raising issues about whether or not 
the agricultural economy is going to hold up, the forest fire 
situation, and the like. You can’t write out a five-year plan. 
 
All you can say to the stakeholders of the people in education is 
this is our objective. And that is our objective. I’ve said it to 
them in speeches publicly, I’ve said it in the meetings, I’ve used 
the document as a base of demonstrating it, and I’m repeating it 
here in this House. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Premier. Mr. Premier, 
another very significant change in delivery of K to 12 education 
occurred last fall when after the Minister of Education 
attempted to have a negotiated provincial contact involving all 
of the partners in education, she deemed that the agreement 
drawn up between herself and the Saskatchewan School 
Trustees Association that had been in place for a number of 
years that she indicated would work because she would make it 
work, was, for lack of better words, deemed expendable. And 
with one stroke of the pen the protocol agreement was 
cancelled. 
 
My question is short and simple. Mr. Premier, were you 
supportive of the cancellation of the protocol agreement, and 
how do you think that that type of cancellation has affected 
your relationship personally with the Saskatchewan School 
Trustees Association and your relationship collectively with 
that body. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, the decision taken by 
the minister was taken by the cabinet and the government and 
supported by the caucus. So obviously I’m a part of that 
decision. 
 
The next aspect of the question is why was it done. It was 
because we were basically at an impasse, an impasse in the 
negotiations. And under the circumstances of four-four — four 
teachers, four trustees and the fifth person, nobody could break 
the impasse. We felt we had to act in order to break the 
impasse. And it was broken, and I think in a way which is 
positive. 
 
How are our relationships? From my point of view they’re still 
good. We’re working, we’re talking, we’re dealing with them. I 
think that’s the way they feel as well. They didn’t like it, I know 
that. And they’ve told us, and you’ve repeated it. 
 
But that is the reason why we did it, and that’s why I as the 
government and the caucus supported it. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Premier, the point that I want to make 
here on behalf of I think taxpayers in this province is very clear. 
Taxpayers in this province are paying, well obviously 100 per 
cent of the cost of education. Because either they’re paying it at 
the local level or they’re paying it through other grants that the 

province then funds by conditional grants. Sixty per cent on 
average is paid by the local taxpayer. 
 
And the protocol agreement is just a little different than you 
alluded to. The combination of the nine people is a group of 
people that deal with the negotiations before they actually are at 
the table with the teachers’ federation. The group of nine, as 
was referred to, is four government people, four trustees, and 
one ninth member who acted as a mediator, who acted as a 
person who could take that committee to a negotiation table and 
carry out the mandate. 
 
Now the Minister of Education — I know you’ve heard her, Mr. 
Premier — said it was impossible to reach a mandate. That 
mandate was not impossible to reach with the teachers’ 
federation; that mandate was impossible to reach within that 
committee, a committee of four and four. And she’s indicated in 
this House that they had . . . I believe she’s used the number, 
nine meetings; they could not arrive at a mandate to take to the 
teachers’ federation. 
 
(1515) 
 
It wasn’t as if there was a problem negotiating the contract with 
the teachers, because they hadn’t even got to the table yet, Mr. 
Premier. They were talking about a meeting between the 
members of the team, the nine members who were trying to 
develop a mandate. She’s indicated that there was a reason . . . 
that that was the reason to cancel it. 
 
Now, Mr. Premier, I think you know full well that collective 
bargaining obviously is the correct way to achieve an 
agreement, but what we are talking about here is the failure 
within government committee to decide on a mandate. What 
has occurred, Mr. Premier, is now the government’s majority 
rules on the committee. And as a result, we have five people 
who have decided, on behalf of the committee of nine, that this 
is the position that will be taken. 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. My apologies. Why is the member 
on his feet? 
 
Mr. Wall: — With leave to introduce guests please. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Through you I would 
like to introduce to the rest of Legislative Assembly 51 students 
from Swift Current, from Oman School, one of the nicest 
schools in Swift Current; beautiful surroundings. And I know 
that they’re going to enjoy their visit here. I’m glad that they 
were able to come here while the House was still in session. 
 
The teachers are Dallas Kolb, Sherri Andrjewski, and Patti 
Gatzke. They are accompanied by chaperons Garry Ritchie, 
Wendy McConnell, Ila Wilms, Fernand Alie, Lorie Dyck, and 
Amy Donelly. I’m sure that they will enjoy their stay in Regina 
and I’ll look forward to meeting them afterwards. Thank you, 
Mr. Chairman. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



1966 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 1998 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Executive Council 

Vote 10 
 

Subvote (EX01) 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Premier. Mr. Premier, my 
question is, after the introductory remarks that I made regarding 
that question, is one that indicates how do the trustees feel that 
they are going to be represented in a situation where you have 
removed them not from being a majority player, but from being 
an equal player with four of your government-appointed 
members to try to arrive at a mandate, at a plan to take forward 
in negotiations. You have changed that, and now the trustees 
are in a situation where they didn’t sign the last collective 
agreement. 
 
I think we have a very serious problem on our hands. We have a 
damaged relationship and it’s because the Minister of Education 
said, I’ll make this deal work, but now since it’s run into some 
difficulties, I’m going to cancel it, and as result, we’ll just go 
ahead and do what we want. 
 
I think we have a problem and I’d ask you to comment on that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Well we have a problem, but I don’t 
think it’s an insurmountable problem, and it’s a problem 
occasioned by the fact that there was an impasse. We cannot 
have an impasse, unless you want to have a strike or some other 
industrial action. If you want to try to have the solutions worked 
out, then this was the only option available. 
 
It’s a problem, but is it insurmountable? The answer is no. We 
are going to talk to the SSTA about ways of developing an 
effective relationship for bargaining for the future. Maybe 
interest based bargaining is something we need to explore — I 
don’t know. 
 
But there are a variety of models which can be worked at, and I 
think with goodwill on both sides, we can find an appropriate 
model to repair any damage which may have been occasioned 
by this decision which, I repeat again, was done by virtue of the 
fact that there was an impasse. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Premier, one final question. Do you 
believe that everything was done that was possible by the 
committee members before a recommendation was made to 
your cabinet, that your cabinet supported, to cancel the protocol 
agreement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I say to the Leader of 
the Opposition, I supported the protocol agreement. Actually 
when the idea first floated by, maybe you did, as president of 
SSTA. And it was a radical departure from the way things 
proceeded. I supported it. I thought it had a lot of merit. 
 
It ran into a big stumbling roadblock this time around. I don’t 
blame anybody except that it did. 
 
And you ask me, am I satisfied everything was attempted to try 
to achieve the agreement under the protocol. The answer was 

yes. But the government was being absolutely pressured by two 
sides of which we could find no middle ground. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Premier, I 
understand that our time remaining here this afternoon, prior to 
the recess, is fairly short. And I also understand that you may be 
unavailable for further questioning after 5 o’clock and that’s 
fine if you have prior commitments. We wanted to just touch on 
a couple of very, very important concerns in agriculture before 
we wind up the questioning in this particular section. 
 
Mr. Premier, as you know that there is a number of concerns 
that agriculture producers have in Saskatchewan today, not the 
least of which deal with things like grain transportation, grain 
marketing, the condition of our highways, many, many things 
like that; certainly the frost and whether the re-seeding benefits 
are adequate to deal with all of those concerns in the production 
cycle that we have entered into. 
 
However, probably the most immediate concern for farm 
families and ranchers across this province is the persistent 
drought that we are likely facing this summer. 
 
Mr. Premier, the federal Agriculture minister I understand . . . 
Vanclief has said just recently, perhaps as recently as this 
morning, that there will not be any disaster assistance for 
farmers in Saskatchewan or anywhere else for that matter, 
unfortunately, and we are . . . and I’m sure you are too very 
concerned about that situation. 
 
Mr. Premier, this is a very dire situation for farm families across 
this province. We find ourselves in a circumstance where many 
farm families don’t feel that the safety nets in place currently 
are going to be adequate at all. Crop insurance, NISA, all of 
those types of programs that are still remaining. We have, 
generally speaking, unilaterally disarmed ourselves in an 
international trade war. 
 
Many, many concerns, but the immediate concern that we want 
to ask you, Mr. Premier, is if this drought continues to persist in 
Saskatchewan . . . We will know in a very, very short period of 
time. I don’t think we’re talking months or waiting until harvest 
is complete. I think we are talking days, weeks, and we’ll have 
a pretty good idea what’s going to happen. If the crop in many 
areas isn’t out of the ground by this time of the year it’s very 
unlikely that you’re going to see much yield potential from any 
crop this year. 
 
If the drought persists, Mr. Premier, and we see no help from 
the federal government forthcoming, will you call an 
emergency session of the legislature later this summer to deal 
with what will be a unparalleled crisis in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I have to support what 
the Minister of Agriculture said in question period. I do not 
believe that an emergency session of the legislature, apart from 
providing for a talking forum that’s beneficial enough, really 
provides any on-the-ground relief to the farming community. 
 
And for sure, I will tell you one thing: I would not in any 
bargaining or negotiations with the federal government at all 
give away any card or chip that I might have which says that if 
this does take place that the federal government has a major, 



June 11, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1967 

major obligation here with respect to disaster relief. And to 
indicate a positive question to your . . . answer to your question, 
for any other reason, let alone just that, I would not do today. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Premier, at a time when farm families are 
asking for your help, asking for this legislature to debate the 
question that this drought persists at a time when farm families 
will be in their most difficult period of time, what we can offer 
to them is the opportunity to have this legislature reconvene to 
have a unanimous, unanimous resolution go forward to the 
federal government calling on them for an immediate drought 
assistance program — that is something that is concrete, that is 
something that at least that we can offer farm families in 
Saskatchewan all across this province today. 
 
This will be the same type of disaster on the magnitude of 1988, 
the drought of that year. It’ll be on the same kind of magnitude 
as the ice storms in Quebec. It’ll be in the same type of 
magnitude of the disastrous floods in southern Manitoba. 
 
Mr. Premier, surely, surely you believe that this is something 
that would call for immediate action, and surely the least we 
can do to support farm families is recall the legislature, pass the 
unanimous motion calling on the federal government to do 
something to help in terms of a disaster-relief program. At the 
very least, at the very least we have an obligation or a 
responsibility to provide farm families with that level of 
support. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Well I have a slightly different 
perspective on this from the member opposite. Our duty is to 
provide action for the farmers who might be so affected by the 
drought situation. That’s what we’re working on right now. I 
don’t deny the impact or import of a resolution. If all else fails 
and if a resolution is given added weight, that’s something I 
could consider. 
 
But for the moment what our game plan is, which I think you 
would endorse, and I hope you would, is to make sure that we 
have a situation where the federal government knows fully — 
now, as it does now — that we are looking to it to provide the 
disaster assistance in case that crop insurance, NISA, and other 
support programs don’t work, or in the case that the situation is 
as bad as it might be in the next couple weeks or three weeks. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Well I’m sure, Mr. Premier, and Mr. Chair, that 
the farm families of this province will be obviously 
disappointed in that answer. 
 
At a time of need, at a time of crisis, at a time when farm 
families are down, what does your government offer them? 
Absolutely nothing, absolutely nothing for the farm families of 
this province. Not even the simple gesture — not even the 
simple gesture — of recalling the legislature to try and help. 
 
What role do you have in this, Mr. Premier? Your good old 
friend Jean Chrétien was out here the other day. You had 
opportunity to raise this issue and many other issues for farm 
families. You never said a thing, never said a thing with respect 
to this, Mr. Premier, never offered any hope whatsoever. That’s 
something that your government, the people of this province, 
the farm families of this province, have learned to expect from 
you and your government with respect to agriculture — 

nothing. 
 
Nothing from the federal government in terms of support, 
nothing from the provincial government in terms of support. 
I’m sure the farm families of this province will realize that and 
remember that for a long, long period of time, sir. Absolutely 
not a thing. 
 
At a time of need, at a time of unquestionable need, at the very 
least what we could do is stand before the people of this 
province and say we are going to be here to support you. What 
do you say? You say no. We will not do even that most basic 
simple thing for the farm families. 
 
If you’re not going to offer up some help in terms of concrete 
programs, at least . . . the very least you can offer up is some 
support in terms of words and support in terms of commitment, 
in terms of promise to the farm families, in terms of hope for 
the farm families across this province. 
 
No. What do we have? The Agriculture minister standing up 
and saying, I hope our programs will be adequate. You standing 
up and saying, I hope our programs will be adequate. And at a 
time when farmers know that they are inadequate, that’s what 
we have to offer from the Premier of Saskatchewan, absolutely 
nothing. What a disappointment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the 
disappointment is the member from Kindersley and the 
Saskatchewan Party. What is his solution? Words. He wants in 
the legislature to politic with family farms. He pretends that 
he’s pretending to protect the family farmers. 
 
He doesn’t want that. He wants to get in here and he wants to 
get his words. That’s all he wants. Words to politic, words to try 
to associate us with the federal government, try to indicate a 
political action and political statement, but nothing by way of 
concrete support to the farmers of Saskatchewan. 
 
This is the same member who talked about the rail-line 
abandonment problem. And the rail-line abandonment problem 
— he didn’t even have the courage to attend and support the 
farmers when they’re out there on the rail branch-line operation. 
Wasn’t even there. Hasn’t shown his face. Was not even there. 
 
Not only is he not there, he was part of the gall-darn 
government back in 1982 to 1991 which set up a series of 
programs which absolutely drove the farmers of Saskatchewan 
over the brink. 
 
This Conservative Party is the same old bankrupt Conservative 
Party which has absolutely no ideas whatsoever for the farmers 
of Saskatchewan except convene the session and call for words. 
Shameful. You have nothing. You have no new ideas. You’ve 
learned nothing and you are nothing. That’s why you’re called 
the Saskatchewan Party so-called. But you really are the same 
old bankrupt Tories who want to bankrupt farm families in farm 
communities. 
 
It’s a shameful display on your part. A political display on your 
part which ought not to have been permitted in this House 
except for the freedom of speech, something which I think the 
farmers of Saskatchewan will know, definitely will know. 



1968 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 1998 

That’s your solution. 
 
We’re fighting for programs to aid and you’re fighting for 
speeches in this legislature — a shameful embarrassment 
display. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move the committee rise, report progress, and 
ask for leave to sit again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
(1530) 

MOTIONS 
 

House Recess 
 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, I ask leave: 
 

That the Assembly recess until 5 o’clock to attend the tea. 
 

Leave granted. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Speaker: — And I will ask the Sergeant-at-Arms to 
arrange that the bell will ring at 4:55 to summons members to 
return to House activities at 5 o’clock. This House now stands 
recessed until 5 p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 5 p.m. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Executive Council 

Vote 10 
 
Subvote (EX01) 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Deputy Premier, 
the officials once again. 
 
Where we left off before the break this afternoon was a 
discussion about agriculture, a discussion about a view that 
many farm families are very, very concerned about the despair 
and the concern that there is in agriculture circles right now. 
 
As you know, Mr. Deputy Premier, agriculture is facing some 
very, very large challenges. We have a potential for an 
international trade war looming; we have farm families very 
concerned about that; I know your administration’s concerned 
about that. The federal government claims to be concerned 
about that; we’ve seen very little in terms of any concrete action 
with respect to it, but they are ultimately — at least they say 
they are concerned about it — we have seen very little to put 
that kind of concern into action. 
 
There is concern certainly across Saskatchewan with respect to 
the fact that we’ve had significant numbers of acres of farm 
land that’s requiring re-seeding. Many of the areas that we have 
been in contact with and talked to farmers across this province 

are saying that the re-seeding benefits from the crop insurance 
program are woefully inadequate to deal with a very, very 
serious situation. 
 
Many farmers are telling us that the problem is compounded by 
the fact that they’re re-seeding into powder-dry conditions, 
ultimately with the hope that there is going to be a harvest for 
them. We don’t see that at this point. There’s large tracts of 
land all across Saskatchewan that the seed hasn’t germinated 
properly. 
 
And what seed has germinated properly in many, many areas 
has been impacted extremely severely by a widespread frost all 
across Saskatchewan. There’s virtually no area of the province 
that’s been untouched by either drought, frost, grasshoppers, all 
kinds of concerns in agriculture. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Premier, it is, we believe, incumbent upon this 
administration to act. As to act . . . To determine first of all 
what can be done on behalf of agriculture producers, what can 
be done to help this situation. Because as we know, if 
agriculture’s impacted, the entire province is impacted. 
 
We are seeing lay-offs in a number of the equipment 
manufacturers in Saskatchewan. Flexi-coil has gone through a 
lay-off. Bourgault has gone through a lay-off. Leon has gone 
through a lay-off. Numerous companies associated with the 
equipment manufacturers’ association here in Saskatchewan has 
resulted in lay-offs. We see a tremendous concern developing 
across Saskatchewan with respect to this, Mr. Deputy Premier. 
 
That is why we feel it incumbent upon this administration to 
act. That’s why we feel it incumbent upon this administration to 
make some decisions. That’s why we feel it’s incumbent upon 
this administration to represent Saskatchewan’s interests at the 
federal table. That is why we feel it’s incumbent upon this 
administration to do what they can to support the farm families 
and ranch families across this province. 
 
There’s an immediate need in terms of pasture land, there’s an 
immediate need in terms of reseeding benefits, there’s an 
immediate need in terms of a disaster plan. All of those things 
seem to be elusive at this point for farm families. 
 
We’ve had concern come into our office from all across 
Saskatchewan that in a time of need, at a time of need, there 
seems to be no action from this administration. No action 
whatsoever. And they’re very, very concerned about what is 
going to happen in their situation. 
 
And they are disturbed to say the least; disturbed to say the 
least, that the response from the administration here in 
Saskatchewan is a do-nothing attitude. The response that they 
are receiving from the federal Minister of Agriculture and the 
minister responsible for the Canadian Wheat Board, Mr. 
Goodale, here in Saskatchewan is again a do-nothing attitude. 
 
Saskatchewan . . . when we consider a disaster in 
Saskatchewan, we consider agriculture as a potential for a 
disaster year after year after year. But drought is the most . . . 
drought is to a farm family or a ranch family possibly the most 
helpless feeling that you can experience. And you being a farm 
boy from the Shaunavon area, you would know very well how 



June 11, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1969 

farmers and ranchers feel under those conditions. 
 
It is the most helpless, helpless feeling that you can possibly 
have as a farmer — to watch your crop deteriorate or watch 
your crop not even come out of the ground because there isn’t 
sufficient moisture. 
 
Every spring, every spring here in Saskatchewan, farmers 
embark upon the largest megaproject in Canada. The largest 
investment into the economy in Canada is registered right here 
in Saskatchewan. The input costs that we see today are 
tremendous. Farm families know that $50 an acre isn’t even 
anything in terms of the kind of production costs, direct cash 
production costs that we would see in agriculture today. 
 
When you register up all of the costs we’re in the $150 an acre 
range and that’s a modest, a modest cropping cost. You can get 
into 3 and 4 and $500 an acre types of things. I’ve talked to 
farm producers in my area that are growing things like kabuli 
beans that are talking 350, $400 cash costs — cash costs. And 
their crop after spending 350 or $400 in cash costs up front is 
not even out of the ground today. 
 
And they’re saying to themselves, where is this administration? 
Where is this administration when we need the most? Where is 
the assistance? Where is the hope? Where is the concern from 
an administration that seems completely of the view that the 
federal government and the farm safety net programs are there 
and they’re going to have to deal with it the best they can? 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Premier, it isn’t good enough. That’s why, 
that’s why farmers and ranchers all across this province are 
saying to us as an opposition, what is the administration 
thinking? What are they prepared to do? Are they even willing 
to discuss the issue let alone put forward any concrete plan? 
That’s what they’re saying to us as an opposition. That’s what 
they’re saying to, I’m sure, to you as a farm boy from 
Shaunavon. You know what it’s like under the circumstances. 
You know what it was like in 1988; you know what it was like 
in the years previous to that in your area of the province when 
there was drought impacting so severely on the farm operations. 
 
You know what that was like; the farm families know what it 
was like. The farm families are experiencing exactly the same 
kind of concern and despair that they faced in years gone by 
when we’ve had droughts of a similar magnitude. That’s why 
we have called on you to at least, the very least we can do, is 
reconvene this legislature, reconvene the legislature so we can 
at least unanimously agree as a legislative body that there is a 
need, there is some measure of hope that we can give these farm 
families that the government of Saskatchewan is not going to 
leave them out high and dry. 
 
We don’t see that from you at this point though, we don’t see 
you at this point. The Minister of Agriculture is saying, let’s 
wait until after harvest to assess what we have to do. Well I 
would say to the Minister of Agriculture, Mr. Chair, and Mr. 
Deputy Premier, that it isn’t going to take till harvest time. It 
isn’t going to take much more than a couple more weeks to 
know how bad a situation we have. 
 
The crop that’s in the ground today, if it isn’t germinated and 
isn’t up by now, it isn’t going to amount to anything. Any 

agriculture representative, anybody that knows anything about 
agriculture, any farmer will tell you on June — what are we at 
today — June . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — 11th. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — At June 11 if the crop isn’t out of the ground, the 
yield potential drops off absolutely dramatically. If you look at 
the University of Saskatchewan, the soil scientists in University 
of Saskatchewan will tell you that every day that goes by after 
May 15, yield potential drops off day by day by day by day. 
 
And what are you prepared to do about it? What are you 
prepared to do about it? That’s what the farm families are 
saying. 
 
Can we at least not make an agreement between yourselves as 
government, the official opposition, and we had hoped that the 
Liberals would join in for a call for an all-party resolution going 
to Ottawa saying that we have to do something to help. 
 
After all, a disaster of this magnitude is no different than a 
disaster in Quebec, when it comes to a disaster of the ice storms 
that they experienced there in that region. Canadians all over, 
people all over Canada were prepared to respond under those 
circumstances. Canada responded. Saskatchewan responded. 
Western Canada responded. Individuals all over this country 
responded to the call and the need when there was that need in 
Quebec. 
 
When there was a similar need in Manitoba, when the flooding 
was taking place in Manitoba, there was a need. People from all 
over Canada responded. People from all over this province 
responded, and the government responded. The government 
responded by putting forward help, both in terms of cash and 
resources, to help the impending disaster, the very real disaster 
that there was in Manitoba at that particular time. 
 
If we can respond in other areas of the country to disaster, we 
should at the very least be able to respond to our own people, to 
our own people. We have to respond. We can’t sit back idly and 
say it’s somebody else’s responsibility. Every back-bench MLA 
sitting over there that represents any farm families in this 
province knows in their heart of hearts if we want to sit back 
and leave people hanging out on their own, we’ve got a huge 
disaster on our hands. 
 
Mr. Deputy Premier, what we are asking you, and your 
administration here this afternoon is, will you respond? Will 
you respect . . . will you stand up for the farm families of this 
province, reconvene the legislature sometime this summer when 
we can assess what kind of drought problem we really have in 
Saskatchewan? Will you do that for the farm families? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I want to thank the member 
opposite for expressing his concern about agriculture in 
Saskatchewan because of course that is a big piece of our 
economy. And I know the member from Kindersley is involved 
in farming, and as I understand it, has a seed cleaning plant and 
sells seed so he’s well aware of the problems that are associated 
with not being able to deliver a crop to the elevator. Obviously 



1970 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 1998 

we are as concerned as he is about problems in that area of the 
province where the rain has not fallen. 
 
Having said that, I want to make it clear to him that at every 
level, both at the political level and staff level, from our 
government to the federal government, there are discussions 
going on; the amount of rainfall is being monitored; areas of our 
concern are being looked at very carefully. But I think one thing 
is clear: that farmers in conjunction and in partnership with the 
government, both at the provincial level and at the federal level, 
have taken steps to protect themselves. That is fundamentally 
different than where we were at in previous decades when 
drought came. 
 
Let me say as well that it is still early in the year and we are 
very hopeful, as I know the members opposite are, that the rains 
will fall and the crops will rebound and that we will have an 
average or above average crop. That’s our hope, and I know 
that other members of the Assembly wish that as well. 
 
(1715) 
 
But what is different is the fact that farmers along with the 
partnership of provincial and federal government have 
accumulated over a billion in the NISA fund, a billion dollars. 
Now we believe that this is a crucial part of the formula for 
those times when you hit difficult spots like we are in today or 
may be in by the time that harvest comes. 
 
And what is in place today in changes that have been made to 
the NISA program — and I’ll send this across to the member 
opposite — but I just want to quote from the briefing document 
that says: a major complaint of the NISA had been that 
producers can’t make withdrawals during the year in which the 
shortfall occurs. That they had to wait and prove that there was 
a shortfall. 
 
As a result of that, if a producer has a declining income during a 
particular year, that individual cannot obtain the funds in order 
to complete the tasks and the duties of the crop year. In order to 
allow NISA withdrawals in a period when an income shortfall 
occurs, interim withdrawals will be implemented this year. This 
is a major change and announcement that will start and has 
started June 1 this year. 
 
So I want to say to the members opposite that when your 
farmers come to you and say, is there money available, because 
of planning, and I give credit to the federal government and the 
provincial government for this, we are now able as farmers to 
go and make withdrawals from our fund. 
 
This is an important issue whereby members of the farming 
community will now be able to withdraw a hundred million or 
two hundred million starting today to be able to complete the 
task of spraying, to complete the task of harvest and collection 
of the grains when harvest comes, or to back-fill if crop 
insurance isn’t enough to cover off the expense and living 
expenses they have. 
 
Now a billion dollars, even in today’s terms, is a lot of money. 
That’s a lot more than we had in programs, the ad hoc programs 
in the 1980s. 
 

And so I say to members opposite, I believe fundamentally that 
the needs of farm families are crucially important. I couldn’t 
agree more with you. But we are in a much better position as a 
society today than we were in the 1980s or the 1930s for sure, 
when the drought came and we were up against the wall. 
 
Farmers, by planning their economic future, have put money 
into NISA; it’s been matched by other taxpayers through the 
federal and provincial government. That fund is now, I 
understand the Minister of Agriculture says, for the province of 
Saskatchewan about $1.2 billion in this fund that they can now 
go to and withdraw it. That’s a huge change from where we 
were at in previous years. 
 
So I say to the member opposite, make sure that you get the 
information, and when farmers phone in about what to do about 
the problem, that you’re able to explain changes to NISA that 
will, I think, go a long way. 
 
Now I want to say as well that we are working with the federal 
government on the issue of the cattle and cattle problems, and 
you know what the issue is of not having enough grass in order 
to feed your cattle. We’re working on changes and nuances 
within the crop insurance program which will allow green feed 
and changes that will be helpful to farmers in that area as well. 
 
So any suggestions the members opposite have in a positive, 
constructive way, we can do that, receive them today. Or if the 
House winds up in the next day or two, or tonight, we would be 
very interested in phone calls or letters that would be helpful in 
a constructive way. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — We are offering you solutions. We are offering 
farm families across this province a voice, and that’s what the 
Saskatchewan Party has been on their behalf, to register their 
concerns with you. You don’t seem to understand that — that 
farm families want more from your administration than just 
saying that we’ll look at it and that NISA is going to take care 
of all their needs. 
 
Many farm families view NISA as a . . . almost similar to a 
company-sponsored pension plan — similar to that is what a lot 
of farmers view it as — as an opportunity to put a little bit of 
money away in a nest egg. That when they retire they can turn 
over their farming operation to a son or daughter, a different 
type of a retirement savings type of plan for a farming 
operation. That’s what many of them view NISA as, and not as 
a disaster program; not as something that they can rely on. 
 
The rules have been adjusted in the last little while under the 
pressure of the Saskatchewan Party and we realize that that will 
help alleviate some concern. But there are many producers 
across Saskatchewan that don’t have virtually anything in NISA 
to speak of. There may be collectively a billion and a half 
dollars. Take that down to an average farm family and what 
does that give you here in Saskatchewan? It’s not a whole lot 
when it comes right down to it, Mr. Deputy Premier. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party believes that when the Prime Minister 
was in town here the last few days, the Premier of this province 
had opportunity to raise these issues with him. He should have 
been and the Minister of Agriculture should have been 
hammering home on behalf of farm families — the concern that 



June 11, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1971 

there is in farm circles about what’s going to happen to the 
income levels of the farm community here in Saskatchewan, 
and ultimately what will happen to the future of this province if 
we see the kind of significant impact that a major, major 
drought will have on the economy of Saskatchewan. 
 
The disappointment is there. The despair is there. The worry is 
there. And now at the end of this session, at the end of this 
session all that this government has to offer them is the Premier 
of Saskatchewan standing up and berating the farmers of this 
province, the ranchers of this province, saying to them that 
they’re going to have to do with what’s there. 
 
That’s what you’re saying to the farm families. There is nothing 
from the federal administration, it would appear apparent, and 
you people are going to match them dollar for dollar. Nothing 
from them, nothing from you. The farm families across this 
province understand that now. 
 
I think it’s clear that this administration doesn’t even want to 
reconvene if the drought situation is such that there should be a 
resolution from this Assembly to the federal government. You 
are not going to respond. Unfortunately for the farm families of 
this province, they’re going to just have to do for themselves, 
fend for themselves. 
 
Well there is one party — one party and only one party in this 
province that will stand up for farm families. The Saskatchewan 
Party will be there. We will be there all of the time. We will be 
there to voice the concerns of the farm families of this province. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Deputy Premier, and to the Premier of 
this province, the disgust has been registered; the 
disappointment has been registered; the concern has been 
registered; the worry has been registered all throughout 
Saskatchewan from farm families to your administration. 
 
The swan song, the swan song of this legislative session from 
the Premier of Saskatchewan has been a trumpet . . . to trumpet 
the days gone by, to trumpet the days gone by. To talk about 
previous administrations, to talk about the federal government, 
to talk about anything but hope for the farm families across this 
province. No hope; no chance; nothing from this administration. 
That’s what the dying days of this Assembly has resulted in for 
the farm families. 
 
And I say to you on behalf of farmers all across Saskatchewan 
that at the end of the day, when all is said and done, the despair 
has been registered, the disappointment has been registered, and 
they will register to you their vote. And it won’t be for this 
administration, it’ll be for the Saskatchewan Party. The 
Saskatchewan Party, the one that stands up for their interests, 
the Saskatchewan Party that will speak out for Saskatchewan 
farmers and ranchers all across Saskatchewan. That will be how 
this session is remembered. 
 
A Premier standing up and berating the farm families, the 
Saskatchewan Party standing up for them in the next election 
campaign, and you people and your administration — the NDP 
administration — in all its glory and splendour, getting thrashed 
in the next election campaign. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Subvote (EX01) agreed to. 
 
Subvotes (EX02), (EX07), (EX04), (EX03), (EX08) agreed to. 
 
Subvote (EX05) — nil vote. 
 
Subvote (EX06) — Statutory. 
 
Vote 10 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Chief Electoral Officer 

Vote 34 
 

Subvote (CE01) — Statutory. 
 

Motions for Supply 
 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’d like to make the 
following motion: 
 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain expenses of the public 
service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1998, the sum 
of $114,491,000 be granted out of the General Revenue 
Fund. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Chair. I have a second 
motion: 
 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain expenses for the public 
service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1999, the sum 
of $3,205,476,000 be granted out of the General Revenue 
Fund. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The committee reported progress. 

(1730) 
 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 
 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the resolutions be 
now read the first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the resolutions read a first and second 
time. 
 

APPROPRIATION BILL 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. By leave of the 
Assembly, I move: 
 

That Bill No. 64, An Act for granting to Her Majesty 
certain sums of Money for the Public Service for the Fiscal 
Years ending respectively on March 31, 1998 and on 
March 31, 1999, be now introduced and read for the first 
time. 
 



1972 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 1998 

Leave granted. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill read a first time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly and 
under rule 55(2) I move that the Bill be now read a second and 
third time. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 
second and third time and passed under its title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 25 — The Pipelines Act, 1998 
 

The Chair: — I would ask the minister to introduce his 
officials please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Chairman. To my right is Bruce Wilson, the executive director 
of petroleum and natural gas division. Right behind me is 
Myron Sereda, and Myron is the director of engineering 
services branch. And to his right is Gerald Tegart, the Crown 
solicitor with the Department of Justice. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, I 
think that it is probably appropriate that the most onerous Bill 
that this legislature has seen this session would be the last one 
to be dealt with here, and that it has stayed on the order paper 
this long. 
 
The questions that I will ask of the minister, Mr. Chairman, of 
course will deal along the lines of why it is so onerous and why 
it should be not put into effect, although I suspect at the end of 
the day that the government will out-vote us. Perhaps if we 
present our case properly, people in the future will see the need 
to correct the things that are done wrong. 
 
As folks will note, Mr. Chairman, this government follows 
along the lines of a truly socialist government as is shown in 
this Bill, because what they fundamentally believe in is that the 
state owns and controls all of the property of the province. 
Whereas of course in North America we have all lived by the 
standard that property should fall into the hands of individuals 
and that property rights should be honoured and respected. 
 
We’ve always recognized that for the public good, governments 
do need to have the right to put facilities for the public good 
onto private property, or through private property, whichever 
term you prefer. This Bill goes far beyond that though. 
 
This Bill provides the opportunity for private entrepreneurs to 
make profit by the use of expropriatory powers. And that goes 
too far. Because it was never intended that in a free society we 
should allow that to happen. 
 
The second onerous part of this Bill is the fact that it fails to 
deal with the fundamental problems that we are having with 
pollution within our society and within our countryside. We 
haven’t got a handle on dealing with the broken pipelines that 
spill out the pollutants, we don’t have a handle on the way that 

installations are put into place. We’ve made it far too easy. 
 
I have an example, Mr. Deputy Chair, that I want to offer to the 
minister, an example of what his powers amount to. These are 
tremendous powers. Because a few weeks back we dealt with 
the Energy and Mines department, and we dealt with it in 
committee. And I delivered to the minister a message from a 
farmer who had a pipeline that had been leaking for about two 
months. 
 
This past Monday, a full crew of people were there. They 
repaired that pipeline and they are going to dig up the effluent 
that is in the dirt and replace it with clean dirt. It could happen 
once the minister decided to exercise his power. 
 
So he has the power. The structure is there. But the will to use it 
has not been there. And that is what is such a great tragedy in 
this province. We have learned so many things from other 
experiences throughout the world about what happens to people 
when pollution is allowed to get out of control, and yet with the 
powers to control it this minister fails to recognize his 
responsibility and to put into the hands of his people in the 
fields that desire to clean the mess up before it gets too bad. 
 
We know there are going to be mistakes. We know there will be 
errors. And we know that there will be accidents. But there’s no 
excuse for oil and salt water spills to be left for two months 
without being cleaned up and taken care of. 
 
And so those are the two fundamental things that we see wrong 
with this Bill, Mr. Chairman. And we want to say that the other 
day when we talked to the minister about the problems in the 
oilfields, we referred him to a document which I have referred 
to as the Louisiana report. 
 
The minister stated at that time that the comparisons that I made 
between the Saskatchewan and Alberta oil basins to the 
Louisiana oil basin didn’t really matter because we ain’t in 
Louisiana, were his words. 
 
Well I’d like to say that I tabled for him a copy of this report. I 
hope he studied it and took note of it. But today, Mr. Chairman, 
I want to bring the minister a little closer to home. Because 
today I want to present to this Assembly to be tabled, another 
document, another report, one from Alberta, a lot closer to 
home. 
 
Now I know this ain’t Alberta, Mr. Minister. But this report 
cost 250,000-plus dollars. It was done by the Alberta Beef 
Commission. And I’m going to ask that the pages take this 
document, photocopy it, give copies to the government 
member, and table one copy for the Assembly so other people 
can get it. It is printed on both sides of the paper, as you can 
see. 
 
This is a very lengthy, comprehensive document. It says it is an 
impact on the petroleum industry, on the cattle production, 
critical review of science and other literature. This was edited 
by R.W. Coppock, K.U. Weyer, L.P. Penney, M.M. Schuler, 
and F.E. Geddes. These men will be recognized, Mr. Chairman, 
as the top scientists in Alberta who have drawn this information 
from the top scientists around the world. 
 



June 11, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1973 

This is reality. In here if you read these documents and take just 
a little time, you will find stories that you could call horror 
stories, but they are stories that will tell you exactly what 
happened to Perry Anton’s cattle. And they will tell you exactly 
what happened to his neighbour’s cattle four miles north of him. 
 
Because the evidence is here. The evidence being that these 
animals die from the effluent that they drink, even though the 
scientists can’t connect through studies of the dead bodies’ 
tissues, the industry’s poisons that have killed them. 
 
The animals that have drank these effluents lie dead on the spot. 
And this study shows how we make that link. 
 
And that’s closer to home, Mr. Minister. I suggest you read it. 
 
Now there’s $250,000 worth of material there Minister, so you 
saved yourself a good chunk of money. And you will say well 
that document was from Louisiana and this ain’t Louisiana. 
This document is from Alberta and this ain’t Alberta. 
 
Well this document, Mr. Minister, is the one that was done in 
south-west Saskatchewan and it also cost $250,000, except that 
the oil company or gas company that commissioned it didn’t 
even have the decency to pay the bill after they had agreed to 
have the study done and had agreed that they would pay the bill 
for the study. 
 
This study is the organic, inorganic, and isotopic chemicals and 
water and gas and ice in three dugouts under ice-covered and 
related toxicity of water near the Freeflight compressor station 
known as the North-east at 27-16-24 W of the third meridian. 
 
It was done by WD Consultants Inc. Once again, Mr. Minister, 
this is a group of people out of Calgary, Alberta. These are 
known to be and are understood to be the most highly respected 
scientists in western Canada who once again drew their 
information from the best scientists all around the world. 
 
This document isn’t as long because it dealt with the pollution 
problems not of an entire province, but the pollution problems 
that occurred on one ranch — Perry Anton’s ranch. This is 
reality. This is Saskatchewan. This happened here. 
 
I will give this to the pages and ask them to photocopy it and 
table it. And I do ask that you bring these copies back because it 
did cost me $300 to have them photocopied. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chairman, the minister has stated that he 
needs to have this Bill in order to do his work. But he has stated 
of course that the amount of monies that come in from the 
industry are important, and they are, but they’re no more 
important than the people that have to live within the industry 
and around the industry. 
 
And so I present for you, Mr. Minister, some more reports. And 
this of course being volume two of the same report that was 
done by WD Consultants. Once again they have gone to the 
point of doing a study in south-west Saskatchewan related 
specifically to the Anton ranch, and it of course goes into more 
detail on the very same problems. 
 
And I file this with the Assembly and ask them that they send 

copies to the minister, table copies, and return the originals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister will want to answer to us how he’s 
going to handle these problems. I think he will want to answer 
to us how he justifies giving a Bill to private industry with the 
right to expropriate. 
 
(1745) 
 
Yes, it’s important. It’s important that we have the gases from 
the United States pumped into the south-east corner of 
Saskatchewan in order to facilitate that flooding program for the 
recovery of the oils that are in the ground in those structures. 
But remember this. Those companies that are doing this, they 
might give you big political contributions and that might be 
important. But the reality is that they are doing it for profit, not 
for the public good. 
 
There is absolutely no way that this government can connect the 
public good to those kind of pipelines. Those kind of pipelines 
are designed for the profitability of the big companies from 
around the world that come into this province to make money. 
And yes, they may sell some of that oil and gas to your 
province. And yes, that oil and gas might be for the public good 
after you’ve bought it if you’re distributing it to the homes. 
 
But the reality is that most of it is not coming to Saskatchewan 
people. Most of it is being exported. The pipeline that’s going 
to run from Burstall, out of the big plants there, is going to go 
through Saskatchewan to the United States. None of that gas is 
for Saskatchewan people. 
 
And your government hasn’t even realized that one of the 
things they should be doing is taxing that gas as it goes through 
our province. Taxing it to pay for the problems of the pollution 
that will happen over the years ahead. Think about it, Minister. 
 
I want, Mr. Chairman, also to table for the minister’s 
information a couple of letters and other things that should be 
done here. I put in a question — and I’m very happy with the 
government; I want to pay them a compliment here. I put in 
several questions in this session and the government was good 
enough to answer all of them. Most of them the answers were 
quite good and we appreciated them. Some of them helped me 
to get some of my constituents’ problems resolved. 
 
One of those questions though was about the numbers of 
arbitration cases that have gone to the Surface Rights Board. 
And we discovered, of course, after we distributed the 
information, that they are grossly in error. 
 
And I want to offer to this minister, so that he can give this 
information to the Minister of Justice who is in charge of that 
particular branch, and to the Minister of the Environment 
because also his department is involved in these things; I want 
to give you documented evidence from one individual farmer 
who himself has submitted up to 5,000 applications to the 
Arbitration Board in an attempt to get some justice for his farm 
where oil companies and gas companies have trespassed on his 
land. And every one of his claims have been made over the year 
on a daily basis, on a monthly basis, in an attempt to try to get 
some justice. 
 



1974 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 1998 

Believe me, Mr. Chairman, this is serious, serious stuff when 
the government says there are a matter of only a few spills in 
the province, when in fact we have one individual that can give 
us records showing that there are actually thousands of them. 
 
These documents here, Mr. Chairman, are the documents and 
photocopies of the actual claims that this individual has sent in. 
 
He has documented them for us and documented them so that 
there’d be a paper trail. In our society everybody wants to have 
a paper trail. So here it is, Mr. Minister, a paper trail showing 
that your department is not registering the amounts of claims 
properly, that the Minister of Justice’s departments are not 
registering claims properly, and that we need to tighten up the 
way that we report and the way that we are accountable to the 
people of Saskatchewan on this very critical and important 
issue. 
 
All of these pages, Mr. Chairman, are from one farmer who has 
shown clearly that the questions were not answered properly or 
fairly. And so I offer them to this Assembly saying to you that 
in 1997 this government claims that there were only 74 
applications to the Surface Rights Arbitration Board, when in 
fact these documents show that there were in fact thousands. 
Mr. Minister, I hope that you will take that into consideration. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I also want to offer to the minister another 
document that will help him in the exercise of the 
administration of this Bill, which I am sure that he is 
determined to pass. But if he passes it, at least he should have 
the information necessary so that he can do a good job of taking 
care of our environment. 
 
If we can’t save the farmers from expropriation, maybe we can 
at least save the next generation from dying from cancers and 
all kinds of related diseases that go along with these pollutants. 
 
I heard on the radio the other day, just in passing, Mr. 
Chairman, a man from the United States, a doctor, who was on 
one of our radio stations here by telephone telling us about a 
new disease that he has just discovered and documented. It is a 
new disease . . . and I can’t remember the name of it. It was a 
mile a half long anyway. 
 
The reality of it being though, Mr. Chairman, that this is a 
sleeping disorder or a fatigue disorder, and he says that it is 
caused by our water and our air, but mostly our water, because 
of the fine metals that are getting into our water systems, 
including our waters throughout North America. And thousands 
of cases are now showing up. 
 
I want the minister to have, also for his purpose and because all 
of these problems are related through these four departments — 
the Department of Agriculture, Energy and Mines, Minister of 
Justice, and the Minister of the Environment — all four of you 
fellows sit down together with your officials and read through 
this. 
 
I offer to this Assembly to be tabled, a document from an 
individual that I won’t name and whose name I have whited out 
on this copy because if people were to find out that he had 
given this to us he will lose his job without question. 
 

This document is a chronology of the events that happened on 
the Perry Anton ranch over the last six years. This is the most 
clearly, concisely put together document that I’ve seen in 
relationship to this problem. And the reality is that most people 
just don’t think it’s as bad as it was because they don’t 
understand it because it is so complicated and so big a problem. 
 
But really, this man went to the trouble . . . he happens to be a 
professional writer, and he wasn’t allowed to publish his work 
and I find that a great tragedy. 
 
So I will file this with the Assembly so that the ministers can 
study it because it is a short form . . . in a chronology of the 
events that surrounded the destruction of one man’s ranch. 
 
While I’m here on my feet I may as well continue to send things 
over to the minister, Mr. Chairman, with relationship to this 
Bill. I have here letters, photocopies of letters, from individuals 
who have asked for meetings with the ministers, who have been 
refused meetings, who have been ignored, who have been 
pushed aside, people on the land whose concerns should have 
been listened to. 
 
And I want to file them with the Assembly and I want to have 
copies sent over to the minister so that he can reply to these 
people because maybe now he will have second thoughts and 
decide to sit down and realistically discuss the kinds of issues 
that we have out in Saskatchewan, out in our fields and in our 
pastures. Because along with the drought, we also have 
pollutants that aren’t going away. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I have at this point one more document that I 
want to share with the Assembly or with the minister. This is 
representative of a lot of letters. I didn’t bring them all but I 
brought this one because it’s representative of one very 
important one and I will just very quickly quote from it. This is 
from the Rural Municipality of Britannia, No. 502. It’s dated 
April 28, 1998. It says: 
 

Please be advised that the following resolution was passed 
at council April 23, 1998 special meeting, Motion No. 
154/98: 
 
That the RM of Britannia concur with the idea that the 
pipelines should be placed under the jurisdiction of the 
surface rights Act and therefore letters requesting this 
change be forwarded to local MLAs, SARM, and the 
Premier (and the Premier’s name is in that spot as well, 
Mr. Chairman.) The motion is carried and the council 
looks forward to your attention to the above matter. 
 

I’m not going to table this letter just now because I’ll want to 
refer to it once more before this debate is complete, so I will 
table it a little later. 
 
I intend, Mr. Chairman, to give this minister an opportunity to 
at least offer a compromise in this very onerous Bill — a 
compromise that won’t take care of the wrong-headed attitude 
that this government has to expropriating private property, but 
will do something to provide a vehicle that will allow people 
the opportunity to resolve their problems in a more humane 
way. 
 



June 11, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1975 

I took the trouble . . . I took the trouble of phoning some of the 
bigger oil players around the city that I know of and know. I 
asked them what they thought about the concept of placing the 
expropriatory issues into the hands of the Surface Rights Board. 
Their reply was to me that industry wants to have harmony. 
They want to have the right to expropriate; that makes them 
money. They’re naturally going to oppose anyone that tries to 
take that away from them. But at the same time they would like 
to have more harmony. And the harmony they said would come 
by placing this under that jurisdiction. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, from the oil industry itself — the people that 
I have spoken to, Mr. Minister — they have said they want to 
do the changes that will bring harmony, the kind of changes that 
I’m proposing today in this amendment which would be 
included under clause 32, and which we will get to as we get to 
that point. 
 
I want you to strongly consider, members of this Assembly, to 
at least give people the opportunity to have their day in court, a 
place where people like those that fought the Condie power line 
could go and sit down with the board of arbitration, comprised 
of their peers — other farmers that sit on that board — that 
would have the power to decide how much compensation 
should be for crops, for damages, and for the disruption to their 
lives. 
 
Instead of having to go to court and dig in their pockets for 10 
or 20 or $50,000, they can simply get in their car and drive into 
the city and go to that board, and tell them their problems, and 
that board has the power to say, you have to make changes to 
the way this line is going because it’s too risky for the 
environment, or you’ll have to dig it deeper because it’s too 
shallow, or you’ll have to go around the farmer’s trees because 
it’s too risky to have it in the middle of his yard where his 
children are playing. 
 
Those are the kinds of things this board has the power to do . . . 
if you in government mandated to do that. There are problems 
with that board, I’ll grant you that, but the principle is right and 
the vehicle is there. And that is what I’m saying to this 
Assembly and to the people of this province is what we can at 
least cure at this stage, is to give people at least a chance to 
have a day in court, so that we can have better harmony 
between agriculture, the environment, and industry. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Chairman, I want to allow the minister to 
respond. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Chairman. I have listened with interest to the comments made 
by the member, and I want today to say to the House and to the 
members of the House that we do take his comments seriously. 
 
With respect to the documents that he has put on the Table this 
afternoon, I want to say that we are aware of some of the 
information. We have, the department has, studied some of the 
documents and is aware of the contents with respect to them. 
 
I don’t intend to speak long, Mr. Chairman. I only want to say 
that we as a department try and introduce legislation that will 
create harmony between landowners and the people who are 
developing our oil and gas sector here in Saskatchewan. And I 

think that’s the key to success. We don’t do everything right. 
No one would suggest that we think we do. We make our 
errors. But what we try to do is create legislation that will allow 
fairness. 
 
(1800) 
 
I want to say that this particular Bill with respect to 
expropriation makes no changes. The process is the same. And I 
also want to tell the House that the vast majority of 
development takes place without the need for expropriation, 
because for the most part industry and the farming community 
are able to negotiate reasonable terms that are satisfactory to 
both. And I mean that’s the balance that they try and achieve. 
So it’s not that expropriation is an everyday thing. That just 
doesn’t happen that regularly. 
 
I think the member opposite will have the same concerns that I 
have with respect to the development of this industry. We all 
understand there’s going to be pipelines to carry this gas, 
because without pipelines, there’s no production; without 
production, there’s no royalties, no taxation, and no jobs. So 
what we’re attempting to do is to find a balance. 
 
I think this legislation is fair. It’s been a matter of large degree 
of consultation and I think that we have created a piece of 
legislation that will serve the people of Saskatchewan well. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 31 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 32 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Mr. Chairman, on advice of our Law Clerk 
here who does exemplary work, I have proposed an amendment 
to this clause and under his guidance have decided to interject it 
at this point in the Bill. We believe that it will accomplish the 
necessary, the necessary end of bringing harmony between 
industry and property owners. 
 
And so I move clause 32 of the printed Bill, amended clause 32 
of the printed Bill by adding immediately after subclause (6) 
thereafter the following: 
 

“(7) Notwithstanding the repeal of The Pipe Lines Act and 
anything in this Act to the contrary, all matters dealing 
with expropriation shall be resolved by the authority of 
The Board of Arbitration under The Surface Rights 
Acquisition and Compensation Act” 
 

And I so move. 
 
Amendment negatived. 
 
The division bells rang from 6:05 p.m. until 6:07 p.m. 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 9 
 
Krawetz Bjornerud Toth 
D’Autremont Draude Heppner 



1976 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 1998 

Osika Aldridge Goohsen 
 

Nays — 19 
 
Van Mulligen MacKinnon Lingenfelter 
Shillington Tchorzewski Goulet 
Lautermilch Upshall Kowalsky 
Trew Renaud Lorje 
Sonntag Nilson Cline 
Kasperski Ward Langford 
Thomson   
 
Clause 32 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 33 to 35 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
The Chair: — That ends the business of the committee, and 
before we adjourn, I would like to say a few thank yous, if I am 
permitted to do that. 
 
It takes more than just one or two people, as everybody knows, 
to make a session run. And I want to say a special thanks now 
to the Premier, and the cabinet ministers, and all the MLAs for 
their cooperation and their patience with the Chair to keep the 
committee going but we have got through it. We need that 
cooperation to keep going. 
 
The staff in our caucus office, I want to also say thank you for 
the good job that they’ve done through all of this. The pages, I 
think everyone will join with me in thanking them for spoiling 
the members of the Legislative Assembly because they’ve done 
a wonderful job of looking after us. 
 
I also want to say a special thanks to the Hansard and the 
Broadcast Services people for making it possible for many 
communities throughout Saskatchewan to be able to view these 
proceedings and watch how the proceedings work and watch 
the behaviour of the members in action. So a special thanks to 
them too. 
 
Also I guess really to our spouses for their patience and 
cooperation with us away from home so much and for us being 
here for so long, and I guess they have a little tough time at 
home, maybe tougher than us sometimes, so . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well I think some of them are anyway. 
 
And to me I guess a special thanks to the Clerks at the Table 
here today, to Greg and to Meta and also to Gwenn, who I guess 
is on her way back from England now. They sit here all the time 
and make the chairman look pretty good. We are good at our 
job but they make us look that much better, so thank you to the 
Clerks. 
 
To the staff in the Speaker’s office and also to the Clerk’s office 
behind us, they do a lot of work behind the scenes that nobody 
sees too. 
 
And to the end I guess a special thanks to Mr. Speaker and to 
the member from Regina Coronation Park, the Deputy Chair of 
Committees, for all the help they have given me throughout this 
session and the encouragement to keep this committee running. 

And to I guess everyone here and to everyone watching tonight, 
God bless and have a good summer. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — I move we rise, report progress, and 
ask for leave to sit again. 
 
(1815) 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 25 — The Pipelines Act, 1998 
 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill 
be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

ROYAL ASSENT 
 
At 6:18 p.m. His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber, took his seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 
to the following Bills: 
 
Bill No. 38 - The Highway Traffic Amendment Act, 1998 
Bill No. 39 - The Vehicle Administration Amendment Act, 

1998 
Bill No. 15 - The Gas Inspection Amendment Act, 1998 
Bill No. 4 - The Saskatchewan Evidence Amendment Act, 

1998 
Bill No. 22 - The Electronic Filing of Information Act 
Bill No. 2 - The Correctional Services Amendment Act, 

1998 
Bill No. 31 - The Enforcement of Judgments Conventions 

Act/Loi sur les conventions sur l’exécution de 
jugements 

Bill No. 27 - The Public Service Act, 1998 
Bill No. 7 - The Pastures Act 
Bill No. 33 - The Provincial Court Act, 1998 
Bill No. 56 - The Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment 

Act, 1998 
Bill No. 50 - The Urban Municipality Amendment Act, 1998 
Bill No. 51 - The Rural Municipality Amendment Act, 1998 
Bill No. 52 - The Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 

1998 
Bill No. 32 - The Wildlife Amendment Act, 1998 
Bill No. 11 - The Trustee Amendment Act, 1998 
Bill No. 12 - The University of Saskatchewan Foundation 

Repeal Act 
Bill No. 41 - The Teachers’ Dental Plan Amendment Act, 

1998 
Bill No. 42 - The Teachers’ Life Insurance (Government 

Contributory) Amendment Act, 1998 
Bill No. 53 - The Teachers Superannuation and Disability 

Benefits Amendment Act, 1998 
Bill No. 11 - The Trustee Amendment Act, 1998 
Bill No. 301 - The Conference of Mennonites of 

Saskatchewan Act 
Bill No. 302 - The Fondation Fransaskoise Act, 1998/Loi de 

1998 sur la Fondation Fransaskoise 
Bill No. 49 - The Saskatchewan Assistance Amendment Act, 

1998 



June 11, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1977 

Bill No. 43 - The Queen’s Bench Revision Act/Loi portant 
révision de la Loi sur la Cour du Banc de la 
Reine 

Bill No. 47 - The Saskatchewan Insurance Amendment Act, 
1998 

Bill No. 46 - The Credit Union Act, 1998 
Bill No. 48 - The Income Tax Amendment Act, 1998 
Bill No. 44 - The Municipal Employees’ Pension 

Amendment Act, 1998 
Bill No. 10 - The Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation 

Amendment Act, 1998 
Bill No. 45 - The Automobile Accident Insurance 

Amendment Act, 1998 
Bill No. 40 - The SaskTel Pension Implementation Act 
Bill No. 55 - The Power Corporation Amendment Act, 1998 
Bill No. 54 - The Crown Corporations Amendment Act, 

1998 
Bill No. 59 - The Jury Act, 1998/ Loi de 1998 sur le jury 
Bill No. 60 - The Wildlife Act, 1998/ Loi de 1998 sur la 

faune 
Bill No. 61 - The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation 

Amendment Act, 1998 (No. 2)/Loi n° 2 de 
1998 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la 
réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et des 
jeux de hasard 

Bill No. 62 - The Highway Traffic Amendment Act, 1998 
(No. 2)/Loi n° 2 de 1998 modifiant le Code de 
la route de 1996 

Bill No. 58 - The Adoption Act, 1998/Loi de 1998 sur 
l’adoption 

Bill No. 29 - The Workers’ Compensation Amendment Act, 
1998 

Bill No. 63 - The Film Employment Tax Credit Act 
Bill No. 35 - The On-farm Quality Assurance Programs Act 
Bill No. 37 - The Noxious Weeds Amendment Act, 1998 
Bill No. 36 - The Vital Statistics Amendment Act, 1998/Loi 

de 1998 modifiant la Loi sur les services de 
l’état civil 

Bill No. 57 - The Education Amendment Act, 1998/Loi de 
1998 modifiant la Loi sur l’éducation 

Bill No. 26 - The Oil and Gas Conservation Amendment 
Act, 1998 

Bill No. 25 - The Pipelines Act, 1998 
 
His Honour: — In Her Majesty's name, I assent to these Bills. 
 
Bill No. 64 — The Appropriation Act, 1998 (No. 3) 
 
His Honour: — In Her Majesty's name, I thank the Legislative 
Assembly, accept their benevolence, and assent to this Bill. 
 
His Honour retired from the Chamber at 6:24 p.m. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave of the 
Assembly to move a motion dealing with the adjournment of 
the session. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

House Adjournment 
 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before I 
move this motion I would like to thank some people involved in 
making this House work. I know the Deputy Speaker’s already 
done that but I think there are some names that we should read 
into the record and formally recognize their contributions. 
 
Of course first of all I want to thank all of the hon. members. 
Although we do not always agree on issues, we all share a 
commitment to representing our constituents. I’d also like to 
thank Mr. Speaker for his impartial and fair decisions and for 
keeping this House running with as much decorum as possible. 
 
I’d like to thank your staff, Margaret Kleisinger, Linda Spence, 
and Rhonda Romanuk. There are also a number of people who 
make this Legislative Assembly run very well. Starting with the 
Clerk of the Assembly, Gwenn Ronyk, assisted very capably by 
Greg Putz and Margaret Woods. Monique Lovatt, secretary to 
the Clerk; Pam Scott, secretary to the Clerks at the Table. 
 
And of course without having to even draw his sabre once, the 
very capable Patrick Shaw, Sergeant-at-Arms and security staff. 
 
As well we have five very capable young people, the pages of 
the Assembly, and since they cannot repeat as pages, we have a 
set of new pages every year. This year we are fortunate to have 
Barton Draper, Pamela Kovacs, Cara Renkas, Angela Smalley, 
and Jason Trost. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to thank the Hansard staff — 
Susan Hope, who has recently left us, Judy Brennan, Donelda 
Klein, and the staff who record all of the words spoken in this 
Assembly. 
 
The Journals staff, Rose Zerr, Clerk Assistant; Marilyn Kotylak, 
Assistant Clerk; Marilyn Borowski, director of financial 
services; as well as Linda Kaminski and the people in personnel 
and administration services. 
 
Visitor Services under director Lorraine deMontigny, who did 
an excellent job in providing the public with tours of the 
beautiful building. Bob Cosman, the Legislative Counsel and 
Law Clerk. 
 
I’d also like to thank the staff of all the caucus offices, the 
ministers’ offices, the constituency offices, the House business 
office, Executive Council, and anybody else that I might have 
missed. Without all of these support staff, the Assembly simply 
would not operate. 
 
Just to finish off, Mr. Speaker, we’d also like to thank Marian 
Powell and all of the Legislative Library staff for the work they 
do for us, and the cafeteria staff who feed us, the staff of SPMC 
(Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation) who keep 
the grounds looking so beautiful. 
 
And finally, for those of us who don’t want to rely on the press 
for reports of what happens, we can watch ourselves directly, 
thanks to Mr. Gary Ward and his staff who beam out our signal 
on cable TV to most communities in the province. 
 
In closing, I wish all members well as we go back to our 
constituencies and the work that is awaiting us. 
 



1978 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 1998 

As such it’s my pleasure to move, seconded by the member 
from Prince Albert Carlton: 
 

That when this Assembly adjourns at the end of this sitting 
day, it shall stand adjourned to the date and time set by Mr. 
Speaker upon the request of the government, and that Mr. 
Speaker shall give each member seven clear days notice if 
possible of such a date time. 
 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I would like to add to the words of the Government 
House Leader. I know that she’s indicated a lot of people and 
has identified a number of names of people that we want to 
thank. 
 
On behalf of my colleagues, I too would like to extend our 
appreciation to, first of all, our caucus staff, the people in our 
staff. We owe them a lot of gratitude and a lot of thanks for the 
hard work that they do. 
 
Our constituency offices basically exist and continue, and 
continue to function even though we’re not there. And for many 
of us in the Saskatchewan Party caucus, we are a long way from 
home and we know that those people do a tremendous job and 
I’d like to express my appreciation to all of them. 
 
Quickly I’m going to indicate that we want to extend our 
appreciation to Gwenn and Greg and Meta, sitting here in the 
legislature. To Patrick and to Pam; and the pages, Barton and 
Jason, Angela and Pamela and Cara. I want to thank you for 
providing us with just an excellent, excellent service during the 
course of this year. 
 
As indicated, the people in Hansard continue to put out a very 
fine quality that is respected. I note the comments made by our 
visitors from the United States when they had the opportunity to 
review the documents that we have in Hansard. 
 
Gary and Kerry and Ihor up in broadcast services. The chance 
now for people in Saskatchewan . . . many, many locations are 
now receiving the broadcast from the legislature. And we owe 
them our gratitude for providing that excellent work. 
 
Visitor Services, Legislative Clerk, of course and the Counsel 
do a tremendous job for us and I know a lot of tours as we’ve 
had the opportunity in this House to introduce a tremendous 
number of people. And Visitor Services does an excellent job. 
 
I want to just globally thank the staffs in the departments, in 
financial services, in library, in cafeteria, personnel 
administration, cleaning, security — tremendous number of 
individuals who work hard in this building not only during 
session all year long but especially during session in able to 
meet the needs of all the people here in this building, and we 
owe them a sense of gratitude. 
 
Finally to the Deputy Speaker for his work during the session 
and to you, Mr. Speaker, we want to extend our appreciation to 
you for your fairness during this session; to the people in your 
office. Thank you very much for all the work that you have 
done. And a final thank you of course is to all the colleagues 
here in the legislature to 50, I guess 57 members here in the 
legislative — thank you very much for the session. 

We know that of course during the session we have the 
occurrences where we disagree, where we vehemently disagree. 
But that’s here on the floor of this House and I know that 
immediately after the session does wrap up and we again leave 
this building we are again in a position of being able to talk one 
to one on matters that concern us. 
 
I also want to extend, as the Deputy Chair did, a special thank 
you to our families for indeed 65 days being away from families 
for those members that are a considerable distant away. Many I 
know drive long distances and we do not have the opportunity 
to visit with families very often. So I say to them, thank you. 
And on behalf of the caucus, a great summer. Thank you very 
much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1830) 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to add my 
sincere gratitude again to all the people that the Government 
House Leader has mentioned. I will not repeat all the names. 
They know I’m sure that our feelings have been expressed, and 
we would like to echo those feelings. 
 
I want to thank all of my colleagues here in this Legislative 
Assembly, to the government for working on behalf of the 
people of Saskatchewan, and to the other party as well. We may 
not agree and we don’t always agree, but I respect them for 
their commitments to their constituents throughout this great 
province of ours. 
 
There are probably some people that we may have overlooked 
and I hope they will not be offended. I know that there are 
people who work very, very hard to ensure that we meet our 
responsibilities that we have been sent here to persevere and we 
can’t forget those. The families have been mentioned, and it’s 
true, there’s a great hardship I believe for some who may not be 
able to spend as much time as they should with their families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to again reiterate what my colleagues have 
said, to thank our caucus staff. We may be small in numbers but 
thanks to them and their many, many long hours of additional 
work that they put in to assist us in meeting the responsibilities 
to our constituents. 
 
I want to finally, Mr. Speaker, and again to yourself and to the 
Deputy Speaker and all the Chairs of committees, I want to say 
thanks. But most of all, I want to say thank you to the people of 
this great province of ours who support us in this great 
democratic process and who continue to encourage us and guide 
us in a lot of instances to ensure that we don’t stray off the track 
that’s intended . . . the purposes for which we have been sent 
here. 
 
And I respect each and every member for working on behalf of 
their constituents, to the best of their abilities, to the best of 
their conscience, and that we continue to do so. And to 
everybody, I hope that we don’t lose complete touch throughout 
the summer months. I know that from time to time we may 
cross paths. Hopefully I won’t cross paths with some of my 
former colleagues as I travel back and forth and around the 
province. But I want to wish everybody a safe, happy, happy 



June 11, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1979 

summer, and to you and your families, and look forward to 
seeing you throughout the coming months. Mr. Speaker, thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just a very 
short comment. I would like to echo all that has been said in 
thanking the staff and the people around the Assembly. But 
there’s one special person who will no longer be a part of our 
Assembly that I would like to thank and that’s Mary Ann Cline, 
our lady in the Hansard this evening. 
 
Mary Ann was part of the Environment tour when the 
Environment committee toured the province, and ever since that 
date, Mr. Speaker, Mary Ann, once a session at least, has sent 
me a cinnamon bun, and I would like to thank her for that. 
 
Mary Ann and her family will be moving to Alberta this 
summer. I wish you luck and success and prosperity and thank 
you for everything you’ve done here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Will the hon. members provide leave to the 
Speaker to make brief remarks? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
The Speaker: — I appreciate that. Here we go, here we go. My 
goodness, that does make you want to hurry, doesn’t it. 
 
Hon. members, I would like to join with you in acknowledging, 
and with thanks, the many who have served us over this sitting 
of the legislature — this the third session of the twenty-third 
legislature. 
 
And if I may join with those of you who have already 
acknowledged the efforts of Marian Powell and the staff of the 
Legislative Library; and Trent Brears, the new manager and his 
staff at the Dome Cafeteria; and Marilyn Borowski and Linda 
Kaminski and the staff at financial services and administrative 
services that support our constituency offices in many ways 
while we are here; Lorraine deMontigny and the staff at Visitor 
Services who always do a wonderful job, and who even come to 
sit into the galleries to watch the conclusion of the session. 
 
To Bob Cosman and Allison, of the Legislative Law Clerk’s 
office; the Sergeant-at-Arms, Pat Shaw, and his very capable 
security staff who conduct themselves not only with efficiency 
but also with dignity. To Gary Ward, Ihor, and Kerry at the 
broadcasting services, and who have been working under the — 
what many of the members of the Communication Committee 
will recognize — have been as challenging circumstances at 
times. They’ll be pleased to hear that these matters will be 
attended to. 
 
I also want to recognize and acknowledge the efforts of Rose 
Zerr and Marilyn in journals, who are getting our proceedings 
into print and onto the Internet so efficiently. 
 
Also I do want to recognize the yeomen service of the troops 
over at Hansard, under the new leadership now of Judy 

Brennan and Donelda Klein. As hon. members will recognize, 
during this session they moved to the Walter Scott Building, 
and they have in fact done double duty for much of this session 
with the extensive meetings of the Crown Corporations 
Committee. It was in fact the reality during this session that 
before the House began each day, the folks at Hansard had in 
effect already produced a set of Hansard by that time. And I 
want to acknowledge the yeomen duty. They have worked with 
good cheer and they really in many ways are the unsung heroes 
of the legislative session. 
 
From my office, I want to thank Margaret and Linda and 
Rhonda for their daily assistance to me and also facilitating the 
access of all hon. members to the Speaker. 
 
In this room serving us, I want to acknowledge personally some 
who have capably assisted us, and if I may acknowledge them 
in the same way on this final day as I did on the first day, by 
asking our pages to stand as I introduce them, and ask you to 
express your appreciation to them individually, to our very, 
very capable pages: Barton Draper. . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Pamela Kovatz. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Cara Renkas. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Angela Smalley. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — and Jason Trost. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — And along with you I wish them all well in 
their careers and their studies wherever they may take them 
from this point forward. 
 
I also want to acknowledge the superb services from the Table 
in the persons of Gwenn Ronyk, our Clerk; our Deputy Clerk, 
Greg Putz, and the Assistant Clerk, Meta Woods, and their staff 
in their offices. They have consistently provided sound and 
reliable procedural advice. 
 
And hon. members I do want to assure you that the sound 
decisions of the Chair all flowed from the Clerk’s Table and 
that the debatable decisions are solely in the purview of the 
Speaker. 
 
It’s been a privilege for me to serve this House along with the 
very, very capable support and the services of the Deputy 
Speaker, and the Deputy Chair of Committee. Hon. members 
this is a team of presiding officers who pride ourselves, I should 
say as presiding officers in serving you well. And I thank them 
for their efforts. 
 
And finally hon. members I want to say, most of all, thank you 



1980 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 1998 

to you. Your efforts have been a combination of reason and 
passion, always with respect for the institution and you’ve 
conducted yourselves with both determination and dignity. 
You’ve served your constituents well in this third session of the 
twenty-third legislature and for your efforts I thank you. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, I move the Assembly 
do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — This House now stands adjourned until the 
call of the Chair. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 6:41 p.m. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1949 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1949 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1949 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1949 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1949 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1949 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1949 
  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1949 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1949 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1950 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1950 
  McPherson...............................................................................................................................................................................1950 
  Goohsen ...................................................................................................................................................................................1950 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................1950 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Romanow .................................................................................................................................................................................1950 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1951 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1951 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1951 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1951 
  Renaud .....................................................................................................................................................................................1951 
  Ward ........................................................................................................................................................................................1952 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1965 
  Shillington................................................................................................................................................................................1958 
  Bradley.....................................................................................................................................................................................1958 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1959 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1959 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1959 
  Lorje.........................................................................................................................................................................................1959 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1959 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Comment on Legislative Session 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1952 
 Economic Boost for Swift Current Area 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1952 
 Waving the White Flag 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1952 
 TREEmendous Foundation Plants Millionth Tree 
  Ward ........................................................................................................................................................................................1952 
 Liberal’s Policy on Medicare 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1953 
 Tisdale Student’s Business Venture 
  Renaud .....................................................................................................................................................................................1953 
 Saskatchewan Party Apology 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1953 
 Records Set by Young Hafford Athlete 
  Jess ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1953 
 Saskatchewan Indian Summer Games 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1953 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Record of Government 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1953 
  Romanow .................................................................................................................................................................................1954 
 Health Care System 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1954 
  Romanow .................................................................................................................................................................................1954 
 Performance of Crown Corporations 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1954 
  Romanow .................................................................................................................................................................................1954 
 



  

 Drought Assistance 
  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1955 
  Upshall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1955 
 Maintenance of Highways 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1955 
  Bradley.....................................................................................................................................................................................1955 
 Tax Rates and Out-Migration 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1955 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1955 
 Hospital Bed Closures 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1956 
  Romanow .................................................................................................................................................................................1956 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1956 
 Canadian Union of Public Employees’ Hospital Workers 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1957 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1957 
  Romanow .................................................................................................................................................................................1957 
 Drought Assistance 
  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1957 
  Upshall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1957 
 Employment Supplement Program 
  Haverstock...............................................................................................................................................................................1958 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1958 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund 
 Executive Council — Vote 10 
  Romanow .................................................................................................................................................................................1959 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1959 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1963 
  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1966 
  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1968 
  Lingenfelter .............................................................................................................................................................................1969 
 General Revenue Fund 
 Chief Electoral Officer — Vote 34 ............................................................................................................................................1971 
 Motions for Supply 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1971 
MOTIONS 
 House Recess 
  MacKinnon..............................................................................................................................................................................1968 
FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1971 
APPROPRIATION BILL 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1971 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 Bill No. 25 — The Pipelines Act, 1998 
  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................1972 
  Goohsen ...................................................................................................................................................................................1972 
 Recorded Division.......................................................................................................................................................................1975 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 25 — The Pipelines Act, 1998 
  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................1976 
ROYAL ASSENT ...........................................................................................................................................................................1976 
MOTIONS 
 House Adjournment 
  MacKinnon..............................................................................................................................................................................1977 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1978 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1978 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1979 
  Speaker ....................................................................................................................................................................................1979 
 


