





























































Hansard: April 24, 1998


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 761 
 April 24, 1998 
 
The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, I have petitions to present 
this morning on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

These petitions come from the Gainsborough, Carievale, 
Carnduff areas of the province, Mr. Speaker. I so present. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As well to present 
petitions, and reading the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And the petition I am presenting is signed by individuals from 
the Gainsborough area. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake’s fiasco. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The community involved, Mr. Speaker, are people from Hudson 
Bay. I so present. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
a petition and I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And these are signed by the people from Midale, Carlyle, 

Arcola, and all around Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I petition today: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Everyone that has signed this petition is from Spalding. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present a petition on 
behalf of people of Saskatchewan concerned about the closure 
of the Plains hospital. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the signatures on the petition are from Carlyle, Coronach, 
and Big Beaver. I so present. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This morning I also 
have petitions from upset and disturbed people concerned about 
crumbling health care under the NDP (New Democratic Party). 
Your petitioners come from Pilot Butte, Zehner, and Regina. 
And they are asking that the Plains Health Centre remain open. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
petitions on behalf of citizens concerned about the closure of 
the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Those who have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
community of Weyburn and they represent some of the over 
1,500 people who have now attended our public forums on the 
issue of the Plains . . . 

 
The Chair: — Order. I’m sure that the hon. member will 
want to avoid entering into debate while presenting petitions. 
Continuing with presentation of petitions. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have 



762 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 1998 

been reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby 
read and received. 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly on the 
following matters: twinning of the Trans-Canada Highway; 
saving the Plains Health Centre; and putting a moratorium 
on the closure of the Plains Health Centre. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
my pleasure to introduce to you and through you to the 
members of the Legislative Assembly, a group of 19 English as 
a second language students that are here with representatives 
from the Regina Open Door Society who are seated in your 
gallery. They’re accompanied by Roshnie Thaver and Michele 
Bryce of the Regina Open Door Society, Mr. Speaker. And 
they’re here this morning for a tour of the legislature and for a 
meeting with . . . I’ll be meeting with them at 11 o’clock for a 
time in our caucus office. 
 
I’d like to ask you and ask the members to join me in 
welcoming these students to the legislature today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, there 
are a couple of people in the House today I’d like to introduce 
to the gallery. My husband is in the east gallery. Welcome to 
the House. And in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, I notice a young 
gentleman from the Leroy area, Aaron Schroeder. He’s 
normally with the SADD (Students Against Drinking and 
Driving) group and I’m not sure if that’s who he’s with today, 
but whoever he’s with must be good people because if you’re 
with Aaron you’re good people. 
 
So welcome, everyone. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I too want to welcome 
Aaron Schroeder and that fine, fine group of people that he’s 
with this morning. 
 
Mr. Speaker, seated in your gallery today we are privileged as 
members to have in our presence the Saskatchewan Council on 
Children, Mr. Speaker. I’ve taken the liberty, Mr. Speaker, of 
providing to each member this morning a one-page descriptor 
just to remind members of the make-up and the important role 
that the Council on Children plays in our province. 
 
I would like, Mr. Speaker, with your indulgence, to introduce 
them, each who are with us. There are some members of the 
council who cannot be with us. They are here in Regina for two 
days in their annual quarterly meetings. I would ask members of 
the council, as I read their name, if they would perhaps just 
stand and we can greet the entire council at the close. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with us this morning are John Barton from 
Saskatoon, who is Co-Chair; Kathy Dammann from Griffin, 
Saskatchewan, Co-Chair; Kim Beaudin from Saskatoon; 
Rosemary Bolaria from Saskatoon; Marlene Bugler from 
Cando; Carol Glazer from Saskatoon; Cheryl Hand from 

Saskatoon; Greg Hatch from La Loche. Dr. Deborah Hay from 
Saskatoon; Daina Hodgson from Moose Jaw; Jan Rowlinson 
from Moose Jaw; Aaron Schroeder from Muenster; Christine 
Watson from Regina; and Bonnie Durnford, who is with the 
Department of Social Services. Dr. Joe Kluger from the 
Department of Health; Rosanne Glass from the Department of 
Education; and joining the council this morning, someone who 
needs no introduction in this House, our child advocate, Dr. 
Deborah Parker-Loewen. 
 
I would invite all members to welcome the children’s council 
and thank them for the work they do. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, sitting in your gallery 
is a good friend of mine, and I’m sure many people of the 
Assembly, Richard Jack. Richard and his son are here today. 
Richard, if you would just stand up. Mr. Jack is chaplain at the 
Unitarian church here in Regina; is also vice-president of the 
Regina multi-faith forum, and there is a Regina faith fair that he 
is working hard on now that will occur on May 3 at the 
University of Regina. 
 
And so it’s with great pleasure that I introduce Richard. But 
even more importantly, one of the youngest constituents, his 
son Arthur, is with us as well today. So join with me in 
welcoming them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to add the 
voice of the Liberal caucus in welcoming — I’m sorry, I didn’t 
mean to do that — in welcoming all the good people that have 
come to spend this morning with us. 
 
In particular, Mr. Speaker, in your gallery, I would like the 
House to welcome a new staff member to the Liberal caucus. 
Ted Olynyk has recently joined us from our B.C. (British 
Columbia) Liberal cousins to take on the role as director of 
communications. And Ted will be working with Kelly Gleeson, 
the caucus press secretary, in delivering our message to the 
voters of Saskatchewan. 
 
Just as matter of interest, Ted was instrumental in the Liberals’ 
uncovering the bingogate scandal and is all too familiar with the 
NDP’s famous botched Pakistani power deal called hydrogate. I 
ask the House to please make him welcome. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce to 
you and through you to the members of the Assembly, two very 
important people from my constituency of Swift Current. 
 
And of course I’m referring to the former member from Swift 
Current who is also probably one of the very popular ministers 
in the last term. So I’d like to introduce to you, John Penner, 
and of course the more attractive part of that couple and the one 
who is the driving force, Jo Penner. Welcome to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



April 24, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 763 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
just like to take the opportunity also to welcome all of the 
members of the council for children and a special hello to Debra 
Parker-Loewen. 
 
And also to Aaron Schroeder, who is from out my way. Aaron 
certainly has done a great deal of work with youth in the abbacy 
of St. Peter’s at Muenster and in the Humboldt area. And he 
needs to be commended highly for his work. 
 
I am indeed grateful to all of you for the work that you’re doing 
to benefit the children of our province, because after all, they 
are the leaders of tomorrow. So thank you again. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to join with my 
colleague from Swift Current in welcoming the former minister 
of CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) and 
his wonderful wife Jo to the Assembly today. 
 
But I just want to say a special thank you to him for talking us 
into keeping our shares in the upgrader. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — As you will know, Mr. Speaker, we 
were being encouraged to sell our shares for 25 million. He 
convinced us to keep them and we sold them for 310 million, 
for a profit of $285 million. 
 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, oftentimes those who make those 
decisions aren’t appreciated enough, and I want to say to John, 
and through you to your staff of that day, thank you very, very 
much on behalf of the taxpayers. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Community Marketing Initiative 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, last night I had the pleasure of 
attending a meeting in my constituency held by the Community 
Marketing Initiative, a producer group based in Naicam and 
Spalding. This group was formed last year to investigate the 
possibility of building a grain terminal in the area. 
 
Last night CMI announced that it would be the first to form a 
joint venture with the Alberta and Manitoba wheat pools. This 
new 20,000 tonne inland grain terminal will be located between 
Spalding and Naicam. Fifty per cent of the $10.6 million project 
will be owned by CMI and the other half will be owned by the 
Manitoba and Alberta Wheat Pool. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this new terminal is good news for the area 
farmers, local businesses, and the community. Depending on 
how fast the investment can be raised, construction should 
begin this fall or in the spring of ’99. It is a testament of what 
the people of this province can accomplish and I congratulate 
all those in CMI who made it possible. Of course, anyone who 
wants to become involved need only contact anyone in Naicam 
when the prospectus is ready. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Regina Women of Distinction 
 
Ms. Murray: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last night the 
member from Regina Wascana Plains, the Minister of 
Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training, the Deputy 
Premier, and I were among the more than 700 people who 
gathered to honour Regina’s 1998 Women of Distinction, the 
16th time this event has been sponsored by the YWCA. 
 
This awards banquet shows no signs of running out of steam. 
Last night’s crowd was a record breaker; proof that we have just 
begun to tap the surface of women whose achievements deserve 
to be recognized. And as always, the proceeds go to supporting 
the Isabel Johnson Shelter in Regina — a worthy and 
regrettably necessary cause. 
 
Nine women were named Women of Distinction, but of course 
all of the nominees were equally deserving and should be 
congratulated as well. I only have time to mention the names of 
the winners, but their community knows the importance and the 
distinction of their work. 
 
In Arts and Culture, the winner was Christa Donaldson; the 
Business, Labour and the Professions Award went to Linda 
Hutchinson; the Community and Humanitarian Service Award 
winner was Gloria Barnett; Contribution to a Rural Community, 
Laura Vance; winner of the Health and Wellness Award was 
Marlene Smadu; Science and Technology went to Dr. Lynn 
Kirkpatrick; Sport and Recreation, Marlene Hoffman; the 
Young Woman of Distinction was Captain Maryse Carmichael; 
and the Lifetime Achievement Award was appropriately given 
to former Weyburn mayor, Isabelle Butters. 
 
My congratulations to all the Women of Distinction. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Compensation for Hepatitis C Victims 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
issue of compensating victims of hepatitis C has made headlines 
in Ottawa this week. And the comments being made by federal 
NDP leader Alexa McDonough are just as interesting. She says 
her party supports the Krever report. She says there should not 
be first- or second-class victims of hepatitis C. She says the 
only fair thing to do is compensate all victims. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Alexa McDonough is absolutely right. As the 
Liberal opposition has been saying for months and months, all 
victims of hepatitis C should be compensated just as the Krever 
report suggests — the report which also notes that it is a federal 
and a provincial responsibility. 
 
Mr. Premier, you refuse to acknowledge what is right . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Now the hon. member 
will recognize that when bringing remarks to the House, it is 
appropriate only to direct them through the Chair according to 
rule 28. And I’ll invite him to continue in that form. 
 



764 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 1998 

Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier refuses to 
acknowledge what is right and what is his moral obligation. So 
we urge the Premier to pick up the phone, talk to his federal 
cousins, and listen to what they have to say. It doesn’t happen 
very often, but the federal New Democrats are on the right track 
on this issue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Popowich Milling Oat Plant Grand Opening 
 

Mr. Renaud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This morning the 
minister responsible for Agriculture and Food is attending the 
grand opening of Popowich Milling in Yorkton. 
 
Popowich Milling processes and produces a variety of oat 
products for both retail and wholesale markets in North 
America. They have recently completed an expansion of their 
facilities in partnership with the agri-food equity fund. The 
agri-food equity fund invested $1 million in the company which 
helped build a new processing facility on the northern edge of 
Yorkton. Existing facilities will also be redesigned for organic 
oat milling. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you are aware, the equity fund was designed 
not as a government grant but as an investment strategy where 
the government shares the risks associated with new ventures in 
the agri-food industry, but also shares in the profits. This is just 
one of the many examples of partnerships formed between the 
province and agri-food enterprises to develop and expand the 
agri-food industry in Saskatchewan. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Saskatoon Eastview By-election 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — So, Mr. Speaker, it looks like the 
Saskatchewan Party is the first one out of the blocks for the 
imminent by-election. Just today the former Liberal candidate, 
Francis Kreiser, announced that he will be seeking the 
Saskatchewan Party nomination for the Saskatoon Eastview 
by-election. 
 
I hope the members to my left heard that loud and clear. Right 
now they’re probably asking themselves, is it possible there are 
two Francis Kreisers? Don’t rack your brains, boys; no, there 
isn’t. 
 
This is the Francis Kreiser who previously served as a 
Saskatchewan Liberal Association organizational Chair. It is the 
Francis Kreiser who just recently stepped down as president of 
the Saskatchewan Eastview Liberal Association. And it is the 
Francis Kreiser who believes that the Saskatchewan Party, and I 
will use his words, “ is the only viable vehicle to get to a 
brighter future.” Not the NDP and certainly not the Liberal 
Party. 
 
My colleagues and I could not be more excited about Francis’s 
show of support for the Saskatchewan Party and his willingness 
to get involved at the highest level. There is no doubt in our 
mind that Francis will bring a lot of Liberal support with him. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is also the Kreiser who wore a suit after last 

August 8 to the Saskatchewan Liberal executive meeting 
because, in his words, he said he always wears a suit and tie to a 
funeral. He is a hard-working and dedicated individual, and 
isn’t this novel, Mr. Speaker, he actually lives in that 
constituency. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Spring Gas Price Increase 
 
Mr. Flavel: — Mr. Speaker, there are many signs of spring out 
there as the hon. member from Indian Head-Milestone keeps 
reminding us. Well here’s two other signs of spring for the 
member from Indian Head-Milestone, ones that he will 
recognize as being as predictable as the return of the snow 
geese, crocuses, or the crows. The first one is, in Saskatchewan 
right now the farmers are on the land. 
 
The second one is that in Saskatchewan the price of gas that 
those farmers are going to be using, the fuel, just went up 3 
cents a litre. A coincidence? Perhaps. But it’s as predictable as 
the snow melting, the grass growing, the creeks running, and as 
predictable as the days getting longer. And I ask again, Mr. 
Speaker, coincidence? Of course it is. Just ask the oil 
companies. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Lloydminster Town Hall Meeting 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It was my privilege 
last night to attend a town hall meeting in the community of 
Lloydminster to deal with the Young Offenders Act, and it was 
an enthusiastic crowd that was out there asking some serious 
questions about what’s happening with the young offenders. 
 
It was good to see three members from the government side 
there as well. The member for Lloydminster, the Justice critic 
was there . . . or the Justice minister was there, and the member 
from P.A.(Prince Albert) Carlton. So it was good to see the 
government was well represented there as well along with some 
federal MPs (Member of Parliament). And it was an important 
issue. 
 
The other interesting thing that happens is when you get to a 
member’s constituency you often hear some interesting stories 
about them, as was the case when I got to Lloyd. Apparently the 
member from there, there’s an interesting story that involves a 
parade, a half-ton and a deck chair, but it’s her story so I’ll let 
her tell it to anyone who wants to hear it. 
 
Ms. Stanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have to admit last 
night was a very positive, very useful and very productive 
meeting, and a very non-partisan meeting in Lloydminster to 
discuss what we all recognize is a serious problem in our 
society. We met to discuss the challenge of young offenders. 
 
The meeting was organized by two Members of Parliament — 
one from Alberta, Leon Benoit, and one from Saskatchewan, 
Gerry Ritz — and another MP from Camrose attended. Our 
Minister of Justice was there, as were the members from P.A. 
Carlton and Rosthern. And I directed traffic, Mr. Speaker. 
 



April 24, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 765 

I mention this meeting for the simple reason that it illustrates 
how democracy works, or at least how it should work. We have 
a problem with young offenders. We all recognize it, we all 
want to do something about it, we all want to deal with the 
problem without tarring all our kids; and we want to rehabilitate 
as many of the young offenders as we can while at the same 
time protecting society from those few we cannot change. 
 
This is not a partisan issue. This is a social issue and I am proud 
to say that last night we made considerable progress towards 
dealing with this issue — in this case, by having our capable 
Minister of Justice outline exactly what is being done in 
Saskatchewan and in cooperation with other provinces and the 
federal government. 
 
People who attended were given information; they gave us their 
views; and it was a meeting, Mr. Speaker, to affirm one’s faith 
in democracy. And let me say, I did not fall off that chair on 
purpose. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Compensation for Hepatitis C Victims 
 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d have to 
say that’s a hard act to follow. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Canadians have come to see the Health minister as 
Dr. No. No to more money for health care, no to fair 
compensation for hep C victims. The government can say yes 
— yes to human needs, yes to all victims of hepatitis C. Mr. 
Speaker, those are not my words. Those words were spoken 
yesterday in the House of Commons by NDP leader Alexa 
McDonough. She was speaking about Allan Rock. But, Mr. 
Speaker, she could have just as easily been speaking about 
Allan Rock’s partner in crime, Saskatchewan’s NDP Health 
minister who has also turned his back on thousands of hepatitis 
C victims. 
 
Mr. Minister, you won’t listen to the opposition. You won’t 
listen to hepatitis C victims. Will you at least listen to your own 
federal leader and expand the hepatitis C compensation 
package? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the Minister of 
Health I would want to indicate again to the House that the 
compensation package established for the tragedy of those 
victims of hepatitis C was a package that was put together over 
many, many months of discussion, and developed to provide the 
fairest package that all governments in Canada, including the 
federal government, including every provincial government, 
could come to. 
 
It represents a fair package; it represents an investment of $1.1 
billion to provide that compensation. Mr. Speaker, this is an 
issue that too should rise above any petty or partisan politics. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, to the acting Health minister. Mr. 
Minister, it’s just not good enough to simply pass the buck to all 
other governments. Your minister, or your colleague, is the 
Chair of the provincial Health ministers. You could show some 
leadership, pick up the phone, and call the federal Health 
minister, Mr. Rock, and tell him the package is unfair. Even 
your federal counterpart is telling you that it is unfair. 
 
It’s time to show, Mr. Minister, compassion to all victims who 
contracted hepatitis C through tainted blood. Will you do that, 
Mr. Minister? Will you ask your colleague the Minister of 
Health to listen to your federal leader, call Allan Rock, and get 
working to improve what has become an unfair package? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I just want to repeat again 
that the package as it has been established by every provincial, 
territorial, and, Mr. Speaker, the federal government, in Canada 
is seen by every provincial government of every political stripe 
to be a fair and responsible package. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, this government at least is committed, 
committed absolutely to continuing to build a publicly funded, 
universally accessible medicare system that can provide for the 
needs of all folks in this country and in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Minister of Health. Mr. Speaker, as 
you know this will be put to a vote in Ottawa on Tuesday. All 
opposition parties in the House of Commons, including the 
NDP, now support an expanded compensation package. Yet 
here in Saskatchewan this issue has never been debated or voted 
on in this legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, however that will change on Tuesday. Today the 
Saskatchewan Party is serving notice that there will be a special 
seventy-five minute debate on hepatitis C compensation this 
Tuesday in this Assembly. We will be debating the same 
motion on the same day that it comes to a vote in the House of 
Commons. 
 
Mr. Minister, the motion calls for compensation for all victims 
who contracted hepatitis C through tainted blood. We are 
calling on your NDP government to allow a free vote on this 
issue. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you allow your members to vote freely on 
this issue or are you going to muzzle them the same way Jean 
Chrétien is muzzling his members in Ottawa? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I want to repeat again, as the Minister of 
Health said yesterday quite publicly, that in the view of the 
governments across Canada this should not be — should not be 
— a partisan or political issue. It should not be treated as a 
political football. This is much too important, much too 
significant in the lives of Canadians. 
 



766 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 1998 

Mr. Speaker, when that member stands up and requests a vote 
in this House, I noted that he and his colleagues, not days ago 
— not days ago — voted against the budget presented by this 
government. A budget which includes compensation for 
hepatitis C victims, a budget which includes $1.7 billion for 
health care expenditures. They voted against it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskPower Commercial 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
for the minister responsible for the Crown Investments 
Corporation. 
 
Mr. Minister, all the NDP propaganda yesterday about our 
Crown corporations glossed over the real story. It’s a long and 
sad tale about how the NDP is gouging Saskatchewan taxpayers 
with power rate increases, gas rate increases, and insurance rate 
increases, and it’s a story about mismanagement and cover-up. 
 
Mr. Minister, amid all the glossy publications, one of 
yesterday’s annual reports was unusually short and notably 
plain. It didn’t even have a picture of the minister in it so you 
just know there’s something not right about this. 
 
The SaskPower Commercial annual report consists of a letter of 
transmittal and a dismal financial statement. It says the NDP 
lost $2 million at SaskPower Commercial on $5 million 
investment. Mr. Minister, that’s a return of a negative 40 per 
cent — and not a single word of explanation. Why not, Mr. 
Minister? Why the cone of silence on SaskPower Commercial? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — One thing that the public did notice 
yesterday was the comment by the members opposite that they 
felt that the Crowns weren’t working. And I go back to a 
document that says very clearly . . . it’s called “Privatization 
Dividend;” it was released on July 1996 by the Saskatchewan 
PC (Progressive Conservative) caucus — that would be you — 
and what does it say about the Crowns? 
 
Mr. Speaker, on page 8 it says, and I quote: “The government 
immediately take steps to privatize SaskTel.” That’s what it 
says: “take steps to privatize SaskTel.” It says: “The experience 
gained from that privatization should then lead to the 
privatization of SaskPower, SaskEnergy, and SGI.” 
 
And what would they do with the money? They say they would 
pay down debt. 
 
Well we’ve had some experience with Tories and Crown 
corporations. What was the debt in the Crowns in 1982 — 3.2 
billion. It went to 5.3 billion under that term of your 
government. And you sold assets. You sold the saw mill; you 
sold PAPCO (Prince Albert Pulp Company); you sold the 
Potash Corporation; you sold Saskoil. And . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Next question, next 
question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Even Maxwell 

Smart could figure this out. 
 
Mr. Minister, SaskPower Commercial lost money because the 
NDP wanted to prop up the tourism industry in Guyana and El 
Salvador. You wasted a few million dollars trying to buy a 
third-world power company in a country on the verge of civil 
war. And apparently you have also been poking around in El 
Salvador and Peru searching for new places to waste taxpayers’ 
dollars. 
 
Mr. Minister, you’ve been hemorrhaging money at SaskPower 
Commercial and yet the annual report doesn’t provide one line 
of explanation — not one line. What are you hiding at 
SaskPower Commercial, Mr. Minister? Where is the money 
going? 
 
Will you come clean and provide a full report on what is going 
on at SaskPower Commercial and not keep it hidden in the junk 
file? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, if I could mention on 
the issue of privatization . . . because I do want to table this 
document that shows how the ebb and flow of debt in the 
Crown corporations has occurred between 1982 and 1997. 
 
It was 3.2 billion in 1982 when you Conservatives took over. It 
went to 5.3 billion under your administration, and it’s now back 
down to 3.5 billion. And during your period, and during your 
period of government . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Now I will ask for the cooperation of all hon. 
members. The Chair had some difficulty being able to hear the 
question being put and has not been able to hear the answer 
being provided by the minister. I’ll ask for the cooperation of 
all members of the House. Recognize the . . . Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
members opposite that when they promise to privatize the 
Crowns and pay down debt, we’ve had some experience with 
Conservative numbers on that issue. You sold off Saskoil; you 
sold off the coal mines; you sold off the gas fields; you sold off 
the highway equipment; and the debt in the Crowns went from 
3.2 to 5.3. 
 
Now I want to talk to you about the Guyana issue which you 
raised, and how we kept this a secret. I want to quote from the 
Crown Corporations Committee, July 21, 1997. Here’s the 
answer to the discussion that I gave to the member from Melfort 
about Guyana, and here’s what he said, and I quote: 
 

One final question, (asking about Guyana) and I have to 
say I very much appreciate the candour today in terms of 
this whole information (you’ve given) on Guyana. 
 

That’s what he said when I outlined what the deal would be. 
And he went on to say: 
 

Because after it’s done, (he says, the member from 
Melfort, this is what we’re talking about) . . . we’re 
(making) history . . . 
 



April 24, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 767 

That’s what he said. And he went on to say: 
 

And I think many of the questions have been (answered) 
. . . today. 

 
That’s . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. Next question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s certainly 
understandable that the minister wants to talk about the ancient 
history, because he certainly doesn’t want to talk about the 
present. 
 
Mr. Minister, you talked yesterday about preparing the Crowns 
for deregulation and competition. But what the people of 
Saskatchewan find a little disturbing is, every time the NDP 
tries to compete in the free market you get taken to the cleaners. 
Every time you get taken to the cleaners you try to cover it up. 
 
You tried to cover up the $13 million you lost in Channel Lake 
and that blew up on you. You tried to cover up the million-plus 
dollars you lost at STC (Saskatchewan Transportation 
Company) when your brilliant management team forgot to 
charge the customers. You lost a couple of million more in 
Guyana and then you conveniently forgot to explain how. 
 
Mr. Minister, the NDP spent hundreds of thousand of dollars 
preparing the Crown Corporations’ annual reports and they 
don’t tell the whole story. Mr. Minister, why the cone of 
silence on the NDP’s mismanage of the Crowns? Will you lift 
that cone of silence and tell the truth about the NDP’s 
mismanagement at SaskPower Commercial, STC, and the rest 
of the Crowns you own? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I say to the member 
opposite, one reason that affects the rates in Crowns is debt, 
and you know that. And the fact that you increased the debt 
from 3.2 billion to 5.3 billion does have something to do with 
the rate. 
 
Now I understand why you don’t want to talk about the ancient 
history of a few years ago. I understand why you changed the 
name of your party. But you know what my constituents are . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Now the Chair is having 
difficulty, with the constant comment that’s coming from the 
opposition, to be able to hear the response being provided. I’ll 
ask for the cooperation of the members. Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, when it comes to the 
debt and the sell-off of assets we know what Tories do, and we 
know what you’re trying to do by changing your name in order 
to trick the public that you’re not Conservatives. 
 
But you know what my dad told me? You know what my dad 
told me the other day, who is a bit of a philosopher, 81 years 
old? He said look, I tell you this, if it looks like a skunk and 
walks like a skunk and smells like a skunk, it’s a skunk. And he 

said these people are Tories, they’re Tories. Don’t let them 
have the Crown corporations ever again. That’s what he told 
me. You people are Conservatives no matter what you say. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Regina Health District Employee Termination 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Liberal opposition has learned that Dick Chinn, the 
vice-president of medical operations . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order, order. Now let’s — order 
— let’s allow the hon. member for Thunder Creek to at least 
begin his question without being interrupted by both sides of 
the House. And perhaps it could last longer than 10 seconds. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, the Liberal opposition has 
learned that Dick Chinn, the vice-president of medical 
operations for the Regina Health District, has been fired. Will 
the Minister of Health confirm that Mr. Chinn has been 
terminated and please explain why. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I can neither confirm nor 
deny the member’s statement except to warn all members that 
statements that come from that caucus always receive and 
should receive a double check. 
 
I have a little illustration here — that not many days ago that 
same Liberal caucus was making all sorts of accusations about 
emergency room hours here in Regina. The Regina district 
board had to come very publicly in the Leader-Post and say that 
the Liberals are providing the public with inaccurate 
perceptions. 
 
We had the same thing happening in Swift Current. The 
members from the Liberal caucus stood in this House and 
indicated the beds were going to be closed in Swift Current. We 
had to have the people from Swift Current go to the public 
media and say the Liberals are creating false perceptions. So, 
Mr. Speaker, I can’t either confirm or deny what the member 
says this morning. 
 
One thing I can though, Mr. Speaker, one thing I can confirm is 
this. I’d ask the Liberal caucus to listen to this to see if they 
agree with this statement. 
 

Saskatchewan people accept the fact that health care must 
undergo changes to make it more efficient and effective. 
Some new technology has reduced hospital stays for 
patients recovering from surgery. All of these changes 
mean that we have to re-examine the . . . 

 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Next question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, Dick Chinn has been one of the 
key players in this government’s plan to close the Plains 
hospital. It’s strange that he would be terminated before the 
NDP’s plans to close the hospital are complete. We know that 
the management team of the district board has been under fire 
because of the Liberal campaign to save the Plains hospital. 



768 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 1998 

The Liberal opposition has shown there are major cost 
overruns. We’ve revealed plans to convert the facility into a 
SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology) campus before the government could. We 
uncovered an emergency room audit which shows the Plains is 
the most efficient hospital in Regina. We proved through this 
report also that there is a bed shortage. And on a daily basis 
we’ve shown how patients have become health care victims. 
 
Mr. Minister, wouldn’t you agree that if anyone deserves to 
take it on the chin it’s you, the Premier, and others who are part 
of this ill-conceived plan to close the Plains hospital? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I want the member from Thunder Creek, 
or anyone of that Liberal caucus, to say whether they agree with 
this statement. I’ll just read it again, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Saskatchewan people accept the fact that health care must 
undergo changes to make it more efficient and effective. 
Some new technology has reduced hospital stays for 
patients recovering from surgery. All of these changes 
mean we have to re-examine the delivery of health care 
services to determine what we can afford and what 
traditional services we cannot afford to lose. 

 
I wonder if they would agree with that today, Mr. Speaker, 
because that comes straight from the Liberal Party election 
platform, 1995. Now do they agree with that today, Mr. 
Speaker, or were they misleading the public in 1995? 
 
Now the member from, the member from Melville shouts from 
his seat. He and his friends are travelling all over the province 
holding rallies. I’ll tell you where they should hold their next 
rally. I’ve got two suggestions. Hold your next rally about 
health care on the doorstep of the federal MP from Regina, Mr. 
Ralph Goodale. Why don’t you hold a rally in front of his 
place? Or perhaps, or perhaps better yet, perhaps better yet, why 
not hold it over on the tarmac at the airport when Mr. Goodale 
gets off his first-class seat on Air Canada? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, the Liberal opposition held 
another very successful public meeting last night in Redvers. 
More than 1,500 people have already attended four meetings 
that we’ve staged. A number of others will take place in the 
days to come and there will be a rally at the legislature at the 
end of May. Momentum is building . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. Now the Chair is 
having a difficult . . . Order. The chair is having difficulty being 
able to hear the hon. member from Thunder Creek put his 
question because of the shouting from the members of the 
government bench and I’ll ask for the cooperation of the House 
to allow the hon. member from Thunder Creek to be heard. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, momentum is building, and this 
government and the management team of the Regina district 
board can expect the pressure to be relentless in the weeks and 
months ahead. 
 
Mr. Minister, it’s not too late to show you care. Swallow your 
pride. People will understand if you explain the decision to 

close the Plains hospital was wrong. So will you reverse the 
decision or at least place a moratorium on the closure of the 
Plains hospital until after the next provincial election? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, this government, the 
Minister of Health, and all of its members fully respect that 
privilege that exists in a democratic society for people to gather 
and express their opinions. If, as Dr. Melenchuk indicates, there 
are 10,000 people who will rally here in Regina, that’s entirely, 
that’s entirely appropriate. But what is inappropriate, Mr. 
Speaker, are duly elected members of the legislature being 
dishonest and miscommunicating to the public about what’s 
happening in the city of Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the medical family at the Plains moves from 
that building into the expanded hospital facilities at the General 
and the Pasqua, we will have in southern Saskatchewan at long 
last, Mr. Speaker, the finest medical services for the people of 
southern Saskatchewan that we have ever known. 
 
If that caucus and its members truly, truly were interested in 
health care in Saskatchewan and Canada, they would talk to 
their Liberal friends in Ottawa, who have forsaken — forsaken 
— a commitment to publicly funded medicare in this country. 
That’s what they would do if they were truly responsible. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Youth Addiction Services 
 
Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, how dare those people question the 
credibility of people on this side of the House? Eight months 
ago, eight months ago the Minister of Health said there was a 
need to move quickly to provide better addiction services for 
our young people. He indicated a new facility could be opened 
by the new year. But four months into the new year — still 
nothing. Does that not sound familiar? False, false 
commitments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP made a huge mistake when it closed 
down the Whitespruce treatment facility. Now the NDP must 
correct the mistake by immediately providing the services that 
our addicted youth so desperately need. It’s unforgivable that 
the Calder Centre in Saskatoon, with only 12 beds, is the only 
facility in this province with the resources to handle young 
people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to tell this House . . . ask the minister 
what immediate action he is taking to live up to his promise. 
What is he going to do to provide appropriate drug treatment for 
the young people of this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, first of all I want to assure 
the member that in every health district in Saskatchewan there 
are treatment and addiction services for the people of those 
districts. 
 
An Hon. Member: — More than ever. 
 



April 24, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 769 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I just . . . More than ever, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Does that mean there isn’t more to be done? Of course not. And 
this government and this ministry and this Department of 
Health will be working towards doing more. 
 
Now he asks about credibility. He asks about credibility. Mr. 
Speaker, does that member remember, does he remember what 
they said to this House and the people of Saskatchewan before 
the ’95 election, what their plan for health care was? 
 
Here it is, here it is . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, no, no. 
It’s to hire Texas-style, Texas-style efficiency audits. They 
wanted to do a Texas-style efficiency audit on our health care in 
the province. What does that tell you? 
 
And I wonder if that member would just phone his Liberal 
friend, Mr. Goodale, and ask Mr. Goodale how he’s been voting 
in Ottawa. Has he been voting in Ottawa to cut health care 
funding from 50 cents down to 13 cents on the dollar? 
 
Is that what Mr. Goodale’s position in Ottawa has been? Is that 
the position of the Liberal Party in Saskatchewan, that the 
federal government should be contributing now, instead of 50 
cents on, 50 cents on the dollar, now federal funding at 13 cents 
on the dollar? 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is an abdication, an abdication of 
responsibility to health care in our country. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Crown Corporation International Investments 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, contrary to what the minister was 
talking about yesterday, we in Saskatchewan have the highest 
power rates in western Canada; among the highest in Canada. 
 
This year alone natural gas rates were raised an average of $40 
per Saskatchewan family. And yet we found out that 
SaskEnergy is looking at acquiring an interest in a company in 
Chile called Compania de Consumadores de Gas de Santiago. 
What is this all about? Not one word about this in the reports 
filed yesterday. We’re told as the people of Saskatchewan that 
we own our Crowns. But we’re not told what our Crowns, our 
companies that we own, what they’re up to. Are we going to get 
heartburn in Chile? That’s what the people in Saskatchewan 
want to know. 
 
Will the minister file a full list of all foreign adventures in this 
House so the people of Saskatchewan will know where their 
power bills, and their telephone bills, and our natural gas bills 
are really going. Will we get a complete list of our foreign 
adventures? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — The member from North Battleford, 
who again stretches the truth in saying that our power rates are 
the highest in Canada, which is false, and he knows . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . No, you went on to say they were 
the highest in Canada, which is false. 
 
I want to say, I’m going to say I want to take you one step 
further on the international investments and say this. Like we 

did with Guyana, which was brought to the Committee of 
Crown Corporations, which you, sir, had an opportunity to talk 
about and speak about, and if you missed the meeting, well then 
get on the committee or tell your members to ask the question. 
Or like the member from Melfort who did ask about Guyana 
and said it looks like a good deal and never passed a motion not 
to do it — never passed a motion, never spoke against it, nor 
did your members speak against it — and to come here today 
and say you don’t know about international investment is 
dishonesty. 
 
And I say to you, sir, when it came to the Saturn investment, 
which you had a chance to ask about in the committee, or 
Guyana, which all of you had a chance to ask about, you never 
said one negative thing. You didn’t pass a motion, and today 
you’re being dishonest by coming here . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Capital Construction Tax Exemptions 
 

Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Finance. Mr. Speaker, through 
their own initiative, the people in the Naicam and Spalding 
areas have come to an agreement with the Manitoba and Alberta 
wheat pools to build a $10.6 million inland grain terminal in our 
area. Mr. Speaker, those behind this initiative say their work 
would be much easier if there was a capital construction PST 
(provincial sales tax) exemption on the whole project. Included 
in this price tag is hundreds of thousands of dollars in PST 
charges. 
 
Mr. Minister, your government did extend such an exemption 
when the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool wanted to get into the 
development of the hog industry in the province. The M & P 
(manufacturing and processing) tax credit and some agriculture 
exemptions provides a little relief, but it also adds 
administration costs to pick out which are the exempt products. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you extend a total exemption to other capital 
projects, such as grain terminals, or will you continue picking 
the winners and losers in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, as the member knows, in the 
provincial budget presented March 19 the horticultural and 
livestock tax credit had a deduction reduced from $500 to $100 
so that every producer, Mr. Speaker, would get a tax break on 
livestock and horticultural production. 
 
The member is asking whether a tax break will be given to large 
construction projects. I would say, Mr. Speaker, that the answer 
to that question is that it’s not the policy of the government. 
There are many construction projects going on in the province 
of Saskatchewan — more, Mr. Speaker, than in the past, and 
certainly more than when the Conservative Party was in office. 
Things are moving along well in Saskatchewan. I do not 
anticipate that there will be any special tax treatment for the 
particular project the member refers to. 
 



770 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 1998 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — We would ask leave to return to 
ministerial statements. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Serious and Habitual Youth Offender 
Comprehensive Action Program 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to inform the 
Assembly about the establishment of the serious and habitual 
youth offender comprehensive action program, where we will 
be working with the cities of Prince Albert, Saskatoon, and 
Regina, and other people in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, over 
the next two years the government of Saskatchewan will invest 
more than 1.1 million to establish a partnership that will target 
those youth offenders who cause the greatest concern in our 
community. 
 
Our government is proud of Saskatchewan’s young people. In 
the past month alone, nearly 13,000 young people from all over 
Saskatchewan came to Regina to engage in athletic and music 
activities. Three thousand athletes paraded into the Agridome 
on April 13 to open the 1998 Saskatchewan Indian Winter 
Games. And in early April 10,000 young musicians gathered at 
the Saskatchewan Centre for the annual Optimist Band Festival. 
 
Because the majority of our young people, Mr. Speaker, are 
engaged in positive activities and are leading productive lives 
on the way to becoming responsible adult citizens, the people of 
Saskatchewan expect us to maintain our common sense and 
compassion for children and youth who impulsively do 
thoughtless things, but are willing to learn from their mistakes. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan also expect 
us to protect society from repeat and violent offenders who do 
not take responsibility for their actions. We intend to hold those 
youths accountable for their crimes. We know, Mr. Speaker, 
that in Regina and Saskatoon more than 90 per cent of 
residential burglaries, car thefts, and acts of vandalism are 
committed by a very small number of repeat and chronic young 
offenders — about 50 in each city. Prince Albert has a similar 
situation but on a smaller scale. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this new initiative, SHOCAP (serious and habitual 
youth offender comprehensive action program), is targeted 
specifically to this small group. The new program will be 
staffed by designated police officers, prosecutors, and 
corrections workers. This partnership will work to apprehend, 
identify chronic offenders. 
 
Maintenance of comprehensive files on chronic youth offenders 
will enable prosecutors to make appropriate recommendations 
regarding bail and sentencing. And joint case-planning and 
sharing of information will ensure a firm, consistent approach 
with chronic young offenders and will provide enhanced, 
intensive, coordinated supervision and monitoring. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are fair-minded and 
responsible. They believe young people should be held 
accountable for their actions. And they want us to deal swiftly 
and effectively with those who do not respect the law. Keeping 
our communities safe is a top priority of this government, and 
working with police and prosecutors to protect the public from 
serious, violent, and chronic young offenders is a key piece of 
this strategy. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well it sounds like 
this should solve everything, but I have some very serious 
problems if it will. We’ve just been told that there’s only a 
handful of people that are criminals doing these offences in our 
three cities. Numbers such as 10 or 30 or 50, those kinds of 
numbers are mentioned. And yet with those few numbers that 
are apparently out there, Mr. Speaker, we have achieved the car 
theft capital of Canada. We’ve achieved the break-in capital of 
Canada. 
 
It seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that if we only have those few 
people committing those many crimes, we should be able to just 
pick them off the street, take care of it, and our cities would be 
perfectly safe. Obviously something is very wrong in what 
we’ve just been told. The numbers are either all wrong, or we 
just don’t know what’s happening out there. 
 
The other concern that I have about the direction that’s being 
taken is it only applies to three centres in Saskatchewan. And I 
object strongly to that. And I have to, Mr. Speaker, just give an 
example from my community to sort of underline what I’m 
trying to say. 
 
At approximately the last snowfall that we had this spring, a 
couple of young fellows in my community were working on a 
car in their shed. When there were done, around midnight they 
walked out, found their car had been vandalized and stripped of 
a lot of things. Because of the snowfall that was taking place, 
they tracked three young offenders, managed to capture two of 
them, and phoned the police. The police came up and said, oh, 
we just caught these two for the same thing a couple hours 
earlier that day. 
 
The effort that is being made with what we’ve just been told 
from this ministerial statement, Mr. Speaker, isn’t going to 
change that one little bit because, in my community, we’re not 
getting any help and exactly the same thing is going to keep on 
happening. 
 
And as I look around this particular House this morning, and I 
look at all the people on this side, and I look at the people 
sitting over there, most of their communities aren’t going to be 
getting any help. And all those people that are going to be going 
to bed every night and putting their heads on their pillow will 
have to say, this minister hasn’t helped us one little bit. You 
have to move to either the car theft capital of Canada or the 
break-in capital of Canada to get any help. For the rest of us, 
there is nothing in this ministerial statement. And I suggest to 
that extent this falls far short. 
 
If we take this one step further and divide the money that’s 
being spent here, which is over two years, divide that down to 



April 24, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 771 

one year, and then look at what’s left per city per month, it is a 
very negligible amount and I doubt if it will have a long-term 
effect, even though it is a good-sounding ministerial statement. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First of all, I would 
like to say what I like about this statement. And there are two 
good points underlying it that I think the minister should be 
congratulated for. 
 
The first is that just by virtue of making this statement and by 
creating this new program, he is acknowledging that there is 
much that we can do in Saskatchewan to address the issue of 
young offenders. And I don’t mean to be either political or 
defensive about the federal government when I say I dislike it 
when the provincial government continually makes statements 
that, whatever is wrong with our province, the only solution 
they have in mind is a letter to Ottawa. There are things we can 
do here at home, and I congratulate the minister for taking that 
attitude. 
 
Certainly there are parts of this problem, parts of the piece of 
the puzzle, where we will have to lobby Ottawa and we will 
have to get the cooperation of the federal government. But that 
is not to say that we do not have a responsibility or there is 
nothing that we as provincial legislators and the provincial 
government, cannot do to address the situation. 
 
I also, Mr. Speaker, like the fact that the Minister of Justice is 
zeroing on what I agree is that small number of young people 
who are committing a disproportionate amount of the crime and 
creating a disproportionate amount of the problem. 
 
I certainly agree with the minister’s oft-repeated statement that 
most of our young people are good people and there are only a 
very few who are responsible for our quite appalling break and 
entry statistics. However, Mr. Speaker, I think we have to 
acknowledge that the converse of that point is that if that is true, 
then we have to acknowledge that our justice system has not 
been very effective in dealing with that small minority. 
 
And of course it is particularly frustrating when people have 
had their home burgled or their car stolen and they find out that 
that same young person was in the court system on another 
charge a matter of a few weeks or a couple months ago. That’s 
very, very discouraging and disconcerting. And it does lead to a 
certain amount of disrespect and loss of confidence in our 
justice system when they find out how long it’s been. 
 
(1100) 
 
I am also disappointed that smaller centres are not included. I 
would point out that I get a lot of complaints from Cochin. 
North Battleford — we actually have our house insurance 
surcharge because of the bad break and entry statistics. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, I would like to bring two other matters to 
the attention of the Minister of Justice. I would request that 
when we approach Ottawa, we ask that section 22 of the Young 
Offenders Act be withdrawn . . . 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Now in accepting the ministerial 
statement, the minister was clearly within the acceptable time 
allotment. And I remind the hon. member he has already 
exceeded the amount of time in his response to the ministerial 
statement than the original statement itself. And therefore I’ll 
ask him to take his place. 
 
Ms. Julé: — By leave of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to respond to the ministerial statement. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Ms. Julé: — I thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the issue 
of chronic young offenders has caused serious concern among 
the citizens of Saskatchewan. Their concern surrounds the idea 
or the fact that certainly there’s a lot of destruction done and 
problems in society created by the actions of young offenders 
when they’re hurting something in our society that has been 
whole. The other aspect of the issue that people are concerned 
about in my constituency is just how young offenders are dealt 
with. 
 
Now the minister in his statement has certainly taken some 
expedient action to address the problem, but society must be 
protected and we know that. And so the statement today seems 
to be an attempt to address that. However it is not a 
comprehensive strategy as I see it, Mr. Minister. 
 
What is equally as important is that young offenders experience 
healing in order to restore for them an accepted and meaningful 
place in their communities. There are successful models of 
restorative justice, Mr. Minister. In various centres . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. I’ll want to remind the 
hon. member of rule 28 which requires that the comments made 
in the House are to be directed through the Chair and not 
directly to other members of the House. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, there are 
successful models of restorative justice in various centres 
throughout our country. And that form of justice leads to peace, 
as justice should. It uses the concept of individual 
responsibility, and it uses the concept of forgiveness and 
restoring what one has done wrong. 
 
Saskatchewan municipal and provincial governments would be 
wise to examine and adopt some of those models because they 
do result in a complete healing of mind, body, and spirit for 
everyone involved. I would challenge this government to take 
the initiative, to take some real leadership, by adopting more 
fully the concept of restorative justice. 
 
And there are models in Manitoba. The Mennonite community 
has adopted these models, some of the aboriginal community 
have adopted them, and I believe our communities throughout 
the province can adopt them successfully also. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this province is sadly lacking in 
rehabilitation for young people. Places like Whitespruce need to 
be restored as centres for youth in distress and their families and 
for the healing of their addictions. 
 
But those are places where a healing process is started. Young 



772 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 1998 

people need a continuum of healing. And so I would 
recommend to the House, to the minister, that those whole 
aspects of healings are looked at. Thank you. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 32 — The Wildlife Amendment Act, 1998 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, after 
my remarks I will be moving the second reading of The 
Wildlife Amendment Act, 1998. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s wildlife resource is cherished by 
the people of Saskatchewan. In order that citizens of this 
province may obtain maximum benefit from, and at the same 
time protect, this valuable resource, we have legislation and 
regulations under The Wildlife Act. This Act provides 
provincial authority and control over the province’s wildlife 
resources. 
 
Last year we passed an amendment to the Act which expanded 
the province’s definition of wildlife to include wild plant and 
animal species. This amendment was necessary to allow us to 
develop regulations to provide protection for endangered and 
threatened species. 
 
The amendment being debated in the legislature today deals 
with new penalty provisions under the Act. We believe the new 
adjustments will bring the fines and forfeiture provisions more 
in line with other provincial resource legislation including The 
Fisheries Act and The Forest Resources Management Act. 
 
The new fines and forfeiture provisions will also ensure our 
approach is consistent with the serious crime task force 
announced by our Justice minister in late March. The province 
will invest $1 million over two years to establish police-based 
serious crime units in Regina and Saskatoon to focus on 
organized crime activity. 
 
These units will work with the RCMP (Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police) integrated proceeds of crime units. All 
property or cash acquired through criminal activity will be 
seized and becomes the property of the government. 
 
The proposed Wildlife Act amendments better reflect the value 
the province places on its wildlife resources. This amendment 
will provide for a maximum penalty of $100,000 for 
contravention of any section of the Act and provide the option 
for the court to order forfeiture of vehicles in any situation 
where, because of the seriousness of the violation, it was 
deemed necessary. 
 
The Fisheries Act sets fine levels for all offences at a maximum 
of $100,000, and allows the court to forfeit vehicles where a 
person is convicted of any offence. Similarly, The Forest 
Resources Management Act sets fine levels for all offences at a 
maximum of $250,000 and allows the courts to forfeit seized 
vehicles for conviction of any offence. 
 

Mr. Speaker, conservation is a high priority with Saskatchewan 
Environment and Resource Management, and we are amending 
this legislation to recognize the value of our natural resources 
and enable adequate protection of these resources. The added 
provisions provide the necessary deterrents that are needed to 
curtail the illegal trade and traffic in wildlife species. 
 
The illegal trade and traffic in wildlife is a serious concern in 
Saskatchewan and internationally. The potential impact on our 
provincial wildlife resource is very large. Gall-bladders from 
black bear, trophy antlers from white-tailed deer, eagle 
carcasses and parts of eagles are all worth thousands of dollars 
on the black market. It is critical that Saskatchewan have the 
necessary fine levels in place to serve as meaningful deterrents 
against illegal poaching, trade, and traffic in wildlife. 
 
Our wildlife resources are one of the greatest natural assets of 
this province and we need to work together to ensure that they 
are managed in a sustainable fashion. 
 
The Government of Saskatchewan is committed to protection 
and responsible management of wildlife populations and public 
access to wildlife resources. The public expects no less, and we 
will take every measure necessary to fulfil this obligation to the 
people of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I now move the second reading of The Wildlife 
Amendment Act, 1998. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, a few 
comments in regards to The Wildlife Amendment Act and the 
comments that have been brought . . . made by the minister 
responsible, the minister for the Environment. 
 
Mr. Minister, it’s . . . or Mr. Speaker, certainly the minister 
acknowledges the fact that I think everyone in this province 
enjoys wildlife. We enjoy the different species that are a part of 
our province and that are available to us, and the fact that 
almost any time, especially in rural areas, when you walk out 
the door you come in contact with so many different species of 
wildlife growth, whether it’s animal or flowers or even some of 
the trees that grow wild in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s no doubt that there are areas that we need 
to look at preserving some of this wildlife and some of the 
heritage that we have here, especially with some of the changes 
that have taken place. And I note specifically the recent legal 
decision that open up the doors to night hunting and a major 
concern that has become in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re quite well aware of the fact, and the 
minister is certainly aware of it, that even the peoples that might 
be perpetrating the issue, amongst their own people they find 
that there’s a lot of opposition. And I applaud the members 
from the aboriginal community, and certainly the Metis 
community, who have spoken out against illegal night hunting 
and illegal hunting, and the fact that . . . the abuses in night 
hunting. 
 
The fact that this Bill is bringing forward penalties, whether or 
not the penalties or the increased penalties that the minister 



April 24, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 773 

talks about, we’ll be able to address some of the concerns we 
have here or the trafficking of wild animal, wildlife, wild 
animal organs that we see that has been perpetuated for a 
number of years, whether or not these penalties will certainly 
address those concerns, we’ll have to wait and see. 
 
I think one of the problems that even wildlife resource officers 
may come and be pointing out to us is the fact of the lack of 
support they have indeed in following up on accusations, 
whether it comes through a tip that’s received on the TIP (Turn 
in Poachers) line or other means whereby people would 
communicate with them. But I think in general, the fact that 
you’re coming through with stiffer penalties points out the fact 
that this is something that will not be tolerated. And that’s the 
important question to be brought forward. 
 
The Minister of Justice just a few moments ago talked about 
extra expenditures in the area of dealing with youth crime. Well 
I don’t believe, when we’re talking about wildlife and people 
abusing the privileges of hunting, is much different. And if it’s 
just a pat on the hand because you’ve disobeyed the rules, that 
isn’t going to deal with the number of problems out there. 
 
And this Act goes and moves in the direction of bringing 
forward penalties that are more reflective of the seriousness of 
the crime. And, Mr. Speaker, we certainly in that regard can 
acknowledge and accept the fact and we believe that it’s 
appropriate that a penalty fits the crime. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s certainly important as well 
that when we’re dealing with the serious nature of some of 
these crimes, that there be the resources as well available to the 
officers or the people in charge, to make sure that people are 
dealt with. I think one of the problems we have in this province 
is that on too many occasions we just do not have resources to 
follow up, and as a result we have the continued abuses of The 
Wildlife Act and the treatment and illegal poaching of wildlife. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in general, as I said, the penalties reflected . . . I 
believe what the minister is talking about is indeed bringing 
forward penalties that more reflect the seriousness of these 
crimes and that would deal more appropriately with people who 
would abuse and take advantage of and perpetuate crimes in the 
area of wildlife. And in that regard we can be supportive of the 
Bill. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, I think it would be appropriate as well 
for us to review it a little more in depth because I think there are 
some questions we’re really going to want to look at, some 
concerns we would want to raise in a more serious fashion and 
make sure we’re prepared to look at all the aspects of protecting 
our wildlife at a later date. 
 
However at this time I would move adjournment of debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(1115) 
 

Bill No. 33 — The Provincial Court Act, 1998 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second 
reading of The Provincial Court Act, 1998. Mr. Speaker, this 

Bill incorporates a number of significant changes. The Bill 
specifically affirms the independence of the Provincial Court 
and the judges that sit in that court. 
 
The most significant changes in this Act are being made to 
make it consistent with the agreement that successfully resolved 
the outstanding issues between the government and the 
Provincial Court judges and the recent ruling of the Supreme 
Court of Canada with respect to the independence of Provincial 
Court judges in Alberta, Manitoba, and Prince Edward Island. 
 
A Provincial Court Commission is established to determine 
salaries, benefits, and pensions for Provincial Court judges. 
This commission will make recommendations to the Minister of 
Justice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is important to note that the Legislative 
Assembly will have the authority to roll back any 
recommendations of the commission in accordance with the 
constitutional test of judicial independence. Salaries can be 
rolled back to the national average. Other benefits and pensions 
can be rolled back without restriction, other than meeting the 
rationality test stipulated by the Supreme Court of Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am satisfied that this process strikes an 
appropriate balance between recognizing the independence of 
the judiciary and maintaining the ultimate control of the 
legislature over the expenditure of public funds. This legislation 
reaffirms the independence of the court and establishes an 
independent, effective, and objective process for determining 
judicial remuneration and benefits as mandated by the Supreme 
Court of Canada. 
 
This Bill also incorporates a number of other important 
initiatives that recognize the evolving role of the Provincial 
Court. 
 
First, the qualifications for appointment to the court are 
increased from 5 years experience as a lawyer to 10 years. 
However, discretion continues to exist to appoint someone with 
other legal or judicial experience that is satisfactory to the 
minister and the Judicial Council. 
 
Second, the discipline process for judges will be updated. Mr. 
Speaker, hearings before judicial councils have traditionally 
been held behind closed doors. With this Bill, hearings will be 
held in public to ensure the public is able to see the process at 
work. 
 
As well, the remedies available to the Judicial Council in cases 
of misconduct or incapacity are increased. For example, the 
Judicial Council could order that the judge may continue in 
office on conditions such as that the judge receive medical 
treatment or counselling, or that the judge apologize to the 
complainant or any other person. The membership of the 
Judicial Council is expanded to include two Provincial Court 
judges elected by other judges. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the process used to create this Bill is a tribute to 
the dedication of our Provincial Court judges. The chief judge, 
and members of the Saskatchewan Provincial Court Judges’ 
Association, worked cooperatively with me and officials in my 
department to ensure that all aspects of the Act reflect the 



774 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 1998 

public interest in ensuring a strong, independent court. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act respecting the 
Provincial Court of Saskatchewan and making consequential 
amendments to other Acts. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in regards 
to the piece of legislation the minister is bringing forward this 
morning, The Provincial Court Act, a few comments I’d like to 
make. While I commend the government for addressing the 
need for independence of the Provincial Court, I guess we’re 
going to have to wait and see whether or not we indeed find that 
independence is certainly recognized. The unfortunate part is a 
person has to wonder, when we continually have appointments 
that are just . . . whether or not there really will truly . . . or will 
be independence. And maybe there are other avenues to follow. 
 
But I know one of the concerns that the judges have talked 
about for a number of years, and the government is quite well 
aware of it, is the fact that even — what was it? three years ago 
I believe — the government had brought a piece of legislation 
in indicating that they were going to put a panel in place to 
address salaries and remuneration and pensions, and what have 
you. And that they would certainly agree with, and they would 
implement, the recommendations of the panel. However when 
the panel’s views were brought forward, the government found 
themselves in a position where they were not prepared to accept 
it and then had to retroactively change the legislation. I hope we 
don’t find that in this case. 
 
I think the minister is addressing that to the point that this piece 
of legislation still however, when you talk about giving 
independence, I believe as the minister indicated, this 
legislation is still going to give cabinet the opportunity and the 
ability, if they’re not satisfied with a report that’s been brought 
forward in regards to, especially salaries and pensions and what 
have you, to overrule that. There I think, Mr. Speaker, the 
government may find themselves at odds again with the 
Provincial Court and with certainly the judges who sit on the 
court. 
 
I think it’s certainly time that we really talked and looked at 
very carefully, independence and how we identify independence 
of judges and of the Provincial Court. I’m not exactly sure how 
you totally come to identify that, how you set it out, so that it is 
seen as totally independent. As I indicated earlier, every time 
you’re appointing individuals to the bench — whether it’s 
provincial or federal, because of the fact that we have provincial 
and federal courts — there is, I think the reflection by the public 
that it isn’t totally independent. 
 
And while this piece of legislation may go a long ways to 
identify that, to draw out and basically set some parameters that 
really say this court is now going to act independently and 
responsibly . . . and I guess that’s the other important point to 
remember as well — with independence comes responsibility. 
And we would hope that . . . and we will certainly look forward 
to addressing some of these concerns with the minister in 
Committee of the Whole when we arrive at that point of seeing 
what the intent of the Bill is; how it’s going to meet the goals 
that the government is laying out, as the minister talked about; 

and how it’s also going to make sure and protect the public and 
certainly bring forward the fact that the court is acting 
responsibly and that the public in general can feel comfortable 
that they will be dealt with fairly if perchance they should find 
themselves before the court. 
 
So there are a number of issues that need to be raised, as there 
certainly will be questions to be raised in the Committee of the 
Whole. But I think it would be appropriate to review this Bill a 
little more in-depth before we move into that process of 
committee. And therefore with that in mind I move 
adjournment of debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 2 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 2 — The 
Correctional Services Amendment Act, 1998 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Dealing with The 
Correctional Services Amendment Act, I think there’s quite a 
number of things that we need to address and talk about today 
and we need to clarify quite a number of things that have been 
talked about today and in the previous days and is being 
addressed by this particular Act. 
 
I think first of all I’d like to spend some time discussing this 
government’s neglect — and I use that word in a very planned 
sort of way — has had on this province’s justice system. It 
seems every time that we talk about the justice system the first 
comment, and it seems to be the only comment that comes all 
the way through, is that there are so many good, honest people 
in Saskatchewan. And yes, Mr. Speaker, let me say at the outset 
that is true. 
 
Now having said that, let’s put all those people, by far the 
majority of them, let’s put them aside and let’s deal with what 
we’re dealing with here, are those people that need to be dealt 
with by the justice system. 
 
As you’re well aware, Mr. Speaker — I mentioned that earlier 
in a different situation this morning — we have the dubious 
honour of being a number of capitals — the break-in capital of 
Canada, the car theft capital of Canada. And here’s the 
interesting question, Mr. Speaker: how did we get to be that 
way? How did we get to be that way? 
 
We are famous in Saskatchewan for being a helping province. 
We’re famous for, if we see someone in need, doing something 
for them. Yesterday on the way to Lloydminster, there was a 
young fellow who was hitchhiking and I picked him up and he 
was going to Edmonton to find . . . well he actually has a job 
there for the summer. And so I picked him up. And he’s 
hitchhiked many times between Saskatchewan and Alberta and 
gets rides, because that’s what people of Saskatchewan are all 
about. 



April 24, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 775 

We still take our chance. We still stop and pick up people. We 
help people. That’s a very positive trait in Saskatchewan. 
 
How then, Mr. Speaker, did we get to be the break-in capital of 
the world — or of Canada at least, maybe of the world for all I 
know — and car theft capital. Something must have happened. 
 
And I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that when we deal with this 
sort of thing, there are always some people who say, oh we 
need to, we need to address social issues, and it’s some other 
government that has no concern for social issues. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, if we check for the last three, four decades 
and see which philosophy has been in charge in Saskatchewan, 
we see it’s the CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) 
kind of concept. And where has that led us? Where has that led 
us? It has given us those dubious honours of being those 
break-in capital and car theft capitals in Canada. And I suggest 
it shows that this government and this government’s philosophy 
is exactly what’s at the root of all of this. What other answer 
could there be? 
 
Are the people of Saskatchewan more wicked than any other 
place? They’re no more wicked in Saskatchewan than any other 
province, I wouldn’t think. So it must be something else. It 
can’t be in the water; it can’t be in the air . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . I hear the people from the government side 
picking up on that — maybe it is. 
 
And I’m not surprised, Mr. Speaker, that they grabbed at that 
opportunity because it would give them the out of not taking 
responsibility for saying they’ve governed this province for 
most of the time for the last number of decades, and this is 
where it’s got us. There has been a mismanagement. It’s been a 
gross mismanagement. We need to ask ourselves those 
questions and I don’t think the government has. I don’t think 
they have. 
 
We must look at our social programs and say they haven’t 
worked. This government’s social programs — they haven’t 
worked. If we look at the correctional institute and our Justice 
department and how they work, they haven’t worked. No other 
answer. 
 
The Justice department in this province, Mr. Speaker, 
continually tells us how there’s just a small number of criminals 
in this . . . of young criminals in this particular province. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, maybe we need a couple of numbers thrown 
out here just so we can get a grip on what’s happening . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Member from Redberry is talking 
about throwing members out. Well we’ll throw the numbers out 
and I would hope he would understand the difference between 
the “m” and the “n.” They come close in his alphabet as well, 
but he should be able to follow that. 
 
Violent crime by youth has doubled, has doubled since ’86 . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . We will leave the member from 
Lloydminster in here though because I don’t think anyone 
would want to throw her out. 
 
Youths charged in 4 out of 10 of all cases of break and enter. So 
we may say there’s only a few number of them committing 

crimes, but if they’re still committing 4 out of 10 of all cases of 
break and enter, that’s just about half. They’re charged with 4 
out of 10 of all motor vehicle thefts. That’s across Canada, and 
I believe in some communities such as Regina that’s probably a 
whole lot higher. 
 
Charged in 3 out of 10 of all robberies, 10 per cent of 
homicides, 12 per cent of attempted murders, and yet they only 
make up 10 per cent of the population. Something is way out of 
whack there, Mr. Speaker. And it’s way out of whack in 
Saskatchewan, and this government and its Justice department 
needs to take some responsibility for that. 
 
How did we get here? Until that’s addressed, we can throw all 
kinds of money willy-nilly in all sorts of directions and it’s not 
going to do that much good. It at least won’t solve the problem 
to the extent that the people of this province, Mr. Speaker, want 
it solved. 
 
Any time this government passes a piece of justice legislation, I 
believe it’s incumbent on the members of this Assembly to 
reflect back on the lack of confidence Saskatchewan people 
have in their justice system and this NDP government’s 
tendency to flip-flop on important issues such as youth crime. 
 
The Bill we have before us today, dealing with this Bill 
specifically, Mr. Speaker, it deals with extending protection of 
Justice employees to volunteers who give their time in pursuit 
of justice through justice committees and sentencing circles. 
And that’s a moderately new concept, the idea of justice 
committees and sentencing circles. 
 
Recently in a town hall meeting I was at, Mr. Speaker, it came 
to light that one of these justice committees that exists in British 
Columbia has had some really amazing success. And it deals 
specifically with this component of this Act that we’re dealing 
with — the volunteer component. 
 
In this particular community in the lower mainland of British 
Columbia, Mr. Speaker, on average the one time a week that 
youth went through the justice system there’d be between 40 
and 60 young people would come through on that one time 
every week. That’s a scary number. 
 
They set up a community justice system committee staffed 
virtually totally by volunteers, which incidentally, Mr. Speaker, 
had an interesting response from the professionals in that area 
who obviously hadn’t been able to accomplish very much, who 
objected strongly to that. And I think if we move in that 
direction in Saskatchewan, we’ll probably have that objection 
there again. 
 
However, here’s a success ratio. One year later, Mr. Speaker, 
those numbers going through that justice system in that 
community, which had been between 40 to 60 kids, dropped to 
an average of eight — an average of eight. That’s one-fifth; that 
means out of every five young people that used to go through 
there, four are no longer going through there. It has worked. 
 
That’s exciting, Mr. Speaker, and hopefully if we can look at 
some of those things in Saskatchewan, maybe we can end up 
not being the capital of all the unwanted things, as we are 
presently. 



776 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 1998 

So this particular Bill that we have before us deals, and I’ll 
repeat this again, extending the protection of Justice employees 
to volunteers who give their time in the pursuit of Justice 
through justice committees or sentencing circles. It was an issue 
that was brought up in Lloydminster yesterday, Mr. Speaker, 
when . . . There is also in Lloydminster, I believe, a group that’s 
working in this general direction and the people were concerned 
about the exact position that volunteers find themselves in. 
 
And it’s exciting to know, and I mentioned this earlier, Mr. 
Speaker, that in Saskatchewan we consider ourselves a caring 
province, a helping province; that if volunteering is needed, we 
do that. 
 
(1130) 
 
The people who were involved in some of these volunteer 
situations wanted to know exactly what is the status of a 
volunteer who’s working through justice committees or 
sentencing circles. 
 
I would like to say at the outset, I have no real problem with 
sentencing circles. It is clear that our present way of doing 
things is not working so indeed we need to seek out alternative 
measures. And I was fairly critical of what was happening in 
this province earlier on, Mr. Speaker, and I think that’s why we 
need to look at some other options because what we’ve been 
doing has not been working. It has in fact been a disaster. 
 
Sentencing circles, Mr. Speaker, and justice committees have a 
number of strong components that I think we need to look at. 
One of the components that I think I’m excited about and I 
think almost everyone else is, is that the victim is finally 
involved. 
 
In our traditional system, the person that was apprehended came 
in front of a judge and the judge sternly looked down on him, 
gave him a sentence, and that was it. The victim might be some 
place in the courtroom, had no opportunity to be involved in the 
situation, had no opportunity to look eye to eye with the 
perpetrator and say, you have hurt me, you have hurt my 
family, you have done damage to me — and talk face to face 
and explain that kind of thing that has happened. Sentencing 
circles, justice committees do that. And I think the more that we 
move in that direction in our justice system, I think the better it 
is. 
 
The opportunity for those sorts of things to happen, and if we 
do it right, we may have the same success that’s happening in 
British Columbia at this point. We haven’t seen it here as yet, 
but hopefully we’ll see those successes. 
 
The other thing I think that’s good is that when we work with 
the volunteers in the communities, we develop an ownership for 
the problem, Mr. Speaker. Because the volunteers then say, I’m 
putting time and effort into the perpetrator of this particular 
crime, therefore I have a commitment to go ahead and help this 
person along life’s way and hopefully straighten out their way, 
get them to become a contributing member of society. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, not only will the volunteers themselves 
maintain that ownership, that sense of ownership I believe will 
go on to other individuals. It’ll go on to the family members, to 

the social circle that the volunteers work in. And so I think in 
many, especially smaller communities this will become a whole 
community thing because everyone will know what’s going on. 
They will know who the volunteers are. They will talk to them, 
and they can get involved with the young people that are 
involved in sentencing circles and people of other ages as well. 
So I’m very supportive, Mr. Speaker, of involving both the 
victim and the community in the sentencing process. 
 
As members may know, the community of Shaunavon created a 
youth justice system just over four years ago to deal with first 
time young offenders right in the community. 
 
In order to be eligible for that sort of a process, that youth 
mediation process, the offence must be eligible for regular 
court; the youth must admit guilt. And I think that’s important, 
Mr. Speaker. If the youth just keeps on saying I didn’t do it, I’m 
not responsible, it’s somebody else’s fault, the school messed 
up in my life or my parents messed up in my life so it’s not my 
fault, it’s not going to work. 
 
But when the youth admits guilt and says yes, I was wrong on 
what I did and I really don’t want to go down that road any 
longer and I don’t want to hurt my community, then we have an 
opportunity to work with these people. So the youth must admit 
guilt and both the youth, the parents, and the victims must agree 
to use the process. 
 
And I think that’s important because if the parents aren’t 
involved in it and the youth comes home and he’s supposed to 
or she is supposed to go ahead and be involved in a certain 
process and the parents say it’s not critical, it’s not important if 
you’re involved in that or not, obviously it needs that support 
from home in a major way. 
 
And I like very much, Mr. Speaker, what was involved in the 
Shaunavon thing, where the victim had to be involved as well. 
That part of looking your victim right in the eye and saying, I’m 
sorry for what happened, and the victim can look back at him 
and say, and you hurt me very seriously, you hurt my family in 
these ways — I think that’s good. 
 
Before the mediation circle takes place, the youth is interviewed 
by a youth counsellor to determine whether any intermediary 
factors are in play, such as abuse and some other things that 
may have an effect, that might have a bearing on how 
successful these programs might be. From there, the committee 
contacts members of the community which they believe will 
have a positive impact on the youth. 
 
In the situation last night in Lloydminster, Mr. Speaker, one of 
the individuals was somewhat concerned about where do we get 
all these volunteers from. And I guess it’s sort of the same 
answer that comes back any time that we’re looking for 
volunteers, is you look for those people that are already busy, 
those people who are already working, those people who are 
already contributing, because they always seem to find some 
extra time to help. In the Shaunavon situation, the actual circle 
was conducted in a facility owned by the credit union, showing 
that business itself became involved in those situations. 
 
The mediation circle is quite a relaxed situation where everyone 
gets an opportunity, and repeated opportunities, to become 



April 24, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 777 

involved in what they have to say. A mutual decision between 
all members of the circle, including the offender and the victim, 
is made on the terms of the punishment. 
 
And I think, from those of us who have been involved in the 
education field, we’ve understood many interesting situations 
where we’ve had a young fellow or a young girl who’s been 
involved in a situation at school where they’ve broken some 
rules, and sometimes when you ask them what they think the 
punishment should be, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting the 
punishment they pick for themselves is sometimes much more 
severe than we would pick for them, sometimes severe to the 
extent that we almost want to temper and moderate some of the 
punishments that they choose for themselves. 
 
It’s important to note that according to the situation in 
Shaunavon the victims who have been involved in the circle are 
very satisfied with the process, and I think that’s a key element 
of it. 
 
To continue, volunteers in the Shaunavon situation believe the 
goal of the circle is to keep the young offenders from becoming 
adult criminals. And to that extent, monies that are spent in the 
young offenders’ situation, especially on rehabilitation, I think 
is money well spent. If we don’t spend it there, and if we don’t 
cure the problem, and if we don’t help these people, they will 
become adult criminals. And that means there is 30, 40, 50 
years of expense and cost that they will be to society, both in 
the harm that they will do to society, the fear they’ll put on 
society, plus the cost of the incarceration and the apprehending 
and all those sorts of things that are involved with it. So I think 
in the youth situation, that is always money very well spent. 
 
But again, I want to underline the point I made at the beginning. 
What we’ve done in Saskatchewan in the past hasn’t worked, so 
we have to keep looking at the programs as we introduce them, 
as we work through that system. If they’re not working we must 
change them quickly before we end up building a system that 
becomes just a bureaucratic boondoggle, and after that it just 
isn’t something we can moderate, modify, and change to meet 
the needs of our society. 
 
I believe those criteria of admitting guilt are in place and are 
valid. Too often a victim is the last person considered in our 
judicial process, and that must stop. And, Mr. Speaker, it is my 
concern that’s not always the case. We must also make sure that 
proper boundaries are set for punishments, to ensure the 
offender learns their lesson and the community is protected. 
 
So when we’re . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I have been listening very 
carefully to the member’s remarks on second reading of an Act 
to amend The Correctional Services Act. I want to remind the 
hon. member that second reading debate is debate in principle, 
and by the nature of debating in principle there is a certain 
amount of latitude. 
 
But when I look at Bill No. 2 it is not a . . . I remind the hon. 
member this is not, this is not the entire Correctional Services 
Act which is before the Assembly, but some fairly finely 
defined amendments to it. And I’ll encourage the hon. member 
to tie his remarks to the principles of the Bill which are before 

the Assembly. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I think we’ll be 
doing that. I think the preamble, Mr. Speaker, I felt was 
necessary to show that we look at these situations carefully and 
that we understand the difficulties that exist in a province. And 
that changes that are made are changes that we don’t consider 
permanent, but that we understand if they have to continue to be 
modified to improve them. 
 
And so as we’ve mentioned, Mr. Speaker, the Bill itself deals 
mostly with the protection of volunteers. That, Mr. Speaker, is 
the key thing, because in a society as ours which seems to have, 
unfortunately in some cases, looked south of the border for 
litigation and suing and all those sorts of things, people from 
time to time become a little more apprehensive about 
volunteering because of the fear that somewhere they may be 
held legally responsible for what’s going on. 
 
And I think because of that, we need to ensure that the 
volunteers that do come forward have that feeling of comfort 
and security with the programs that are there and that they have 
standing behind them, and a substantial way behind them, Mr. 
Speaker. The province saying, we support what you’re doing; 
you do what you feel is correct in this case as a community; and 
as a community, directs the individual volunteers and bring that 
to fruition so that the things that we become famous for will be 
gone and that we can stand up and hold our head up high in this 
province and say we’ve developed a program, a program that 
works; we’re modifying the program, and we’ll continue to do 
that. 
 
But I will say that from what I have heard, this is a model 
Saskatchewan should be very interested in looking into — the 
things that are happening in Lloyd, the things that are 
happening in Shaunavon, and the situation that I talked about in 
British Columbia. 
 
So those are things that we should be looking into, and 
seriously consider replicating in whole or modifying if need be, 
with our serious youth crime problem. And I underline, it is 
serious, in spite of the fact that the majority of our youth are 
honest, trustworthy, contributing members of society. And to 
that extent I will end my discussion, Mr. Speaker, and continue 
that when we get into Committee of the Whole. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 17 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 17 — The Certified 
Management Consultants Act be now read a second time. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As mentioned 
previously when we adjourned this debate, this is a very 
straightforward piece of legislation. As far as we can determine 
this is a routine professional association Bill. I’m sure that we 
see a half a dozen or more of these sorts of Bills every session. 
It is the usual procedure that the association involved writes the 



778 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 1998 

Bill, and the government, and ultimately the Assembly, simply 
rubber-stamps them. 
 
This is how the system should work. And I don’t think that we 
in this Assembly should be trying to micromanage people’s 
lives the way that the members opposite so often try to do. I 
think we should in most cases just get out of their way and let 
the people in the groups run their own affairs as they see fit. 
Bills like this show how this kind of attitude can work and I 
think that we should do it more often. 
 
Obviously the members of the certified management 
consultants communities know best what the needs of the 
members are and their clients are. In Bills like this one we give 
them the well-deserved opportunity to translate that knowledge 
and skill into law. 
 
(1145) 
 
Having reviewed this Bill, I would like to congratulate the 
certified management consultants of the province on the job 
they did in composing the Bills and for the high ethical and 
professional standards that it reflects. I would like to note, in 
particular, aspects such as the professional duty to report 
offences, which I think speaks well of the integrity of the 
profession. 
 
Further, our caucus believes that it is very responsible that the 
Bill outlines the schedule of intermediate disciplinary actions. 
Very often we see the professional associations only have the 
power to strip a member of his or her licence. Because this 
action is so extreme, it is very rarely used. 
 
Intermediate actions ensure that professional ethics and the 
public interests are preserved by making sure that offences are 
regularly punished, and making the punishment fit the crime. 
 
I have further discussed the Bill with the management 
consultant association and we understand that the few concerns 
that they do have can be dealt with in Committee of the Whole. 
We will have some detailed questions and comments to raise in 
the committee, but otherwise we have no objections in seeing 
this Bill pass. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 1  The Arts Board Amendment Act, 1998 
 

The Chair: — I would ask the minister to introduce her 
officials before we start. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. On 
my left, Brij Mathur, assistant deputy minister in the 
Department of Municipal Government; and on my right, Bill 
Werry, from the culture, sports and recreation branch. 
 
Clause 1 
 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Madam 
Minister, I’d like to welcome your officials here this afternoon. 
We don’t have many questions this afternoon on this subject, 
Madam Minister, but I guess the first question we have is what 
was the reason for the amendments and the changes that have 
been made? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — The basic intent was to form a single 
arts agency from the basically two large groups now, one being 
the SCCO, the council and culture organizations, and the Arts 
Board, and to bring together the arts community under one 
umbrella which would include the professional artists, those 
who are engaged in some facet of the arts for a living, and those 
who are emerging or beginning; and also those who engage in 
the arts for recreational purposes and really have no end point 
of ever becoming an arts professional. So it brings everyone 
together. 
 
The other change basically was to set up a vehicle, an 
endowment fund where if individuals wish to make donations 
either financially or in kind of works of art to the province to be 
held by the Arts Board, that there would be a recognition of the 
fund, and that there would be an acknowledgement that any 
bequests or gifts made under the provisions would always be 
there for the benefit of the arts, and that the fund would never 
be drawn down for other purposes. So basically, broadly that 
was the intent. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I kind of 
gathered from that maybe that you don’t trust yourself and you 
make sure the money ends up in the right spot. Is that what 
you’re saying? 
 
I guess in a way what we’re doing is kind of putting more 
money in more spots. Will that actually draw down the money 
that was used to go in for the so-called professionals? Will that 
cut the money back from the funding that they used to have? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — No, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there won’t 
be any change at all. The Arts Board has a schedule that they 
use, if you like. There are three levels of grants that they call A, 
B, and C. And the A grants go to recognized professionals, who 
have already achieved national or international acclaim, for 
some assistance. The B category goes to emerging, if you like, 
artists, and the other category is for beginning artists. They try 
to maintain an appropriate balance in terms of percentage in 
how the funds are allocated. 
 
And the endowment fund — there’s to be no confusion at all 
and that’s the reason for the legislation; that the operating funds 
for the Arts Board have always come either from the General 
Revenue Fund of the government or as an allocation shown in 
the Estimates or, in the past, some funding from the lotteries — 
and the endowment fund is meant to be something separate and 
apart from that. Because often there are individuals who are 
interested in the furthering of the arts and cultural principles 
and they want to make some kind of a bequest and there never 
was a vehicle to do that. 
 
So that will be something that will be separate and apart and 
held in trust, administered by the Arts Board, and not to be 
confused with the core funding that goes to the agency. 
 



April 24, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 779 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. So is what 
you’re saying, will there be more money then in the pot now 
than before? Are you planning on raising the funding to the Arts 
Board to accommodate the expanded range artists now that 
you’re covering or not? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Well the money that would potentially 
go into the endowment fund would be private donations and 
there is no intent on the part of the government to reduce the 
core funding to the Arts Board as a result of that. 
 
So presumably through the generosity of donors who give either 
in kind or financial donations to the Arts Board endowment 
fund, then if it was managed and interest accrued to it and so 
on, there would be more money then potentially available, more 
resources available to the arts community. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Could you 
elaborate more on the kinds of artists maybe that will be 
covered under the avocational artists? Could you maybe explain 
that for us? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the avocational 
. . . And actually one of the reasons for this amendment is that 
the legislation that we passed last year differentiated between 
the two and the arts community thought that was . . . we had 
consulted with them but on sober second thought, after seeing 
it, they said, we think that this is divisive in our community 
because some people that might be classed as avocational today 
might, at some point, develop their skills and the market, for 
instance, for their product and actually become . . . evolve into 
professionals. So they don’t want that distinction to be made. 
 
But in the current context, I think you would say that 
avocational would be people who engage in some kinds of arts 
or crafts or some cultural endeavour as a hobby, most often 
operating out of their homes, not full-time, and sometimes for a 
profit. But they wouldn’t be . . . an avocational artist wouldn’t 
be described as making their living from that source. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — I guess the kind of the information I was 
trying to get, Madam Minister, is for an example if my aunt 
knitted booties and every once in awhile sold some, would she 
qualify? Like where do you start and stop? How wide-ranging 
are the people that will qualify for this money? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Well that would be the kind of 
division that some people, for instance, that take their wares to 
farmer’s markets or bazaars and that kind of thing, but really 
have no, they have no end point in mind that they will ever 
engage in this as a living and they never become professional. 
It’s something that they enjoy doing and they want to share 
their talents with others. 
 
In terms of the Arts Board allocations to artists, the Arts Board 
itself is composed of membership from the professional and the 
avocational arts. And there’s the process that they use — we 
call it peer review — where the applications, for instance, for 
assistance will come in from people from a wide range of 
artistic endeavours. They will be judged by their peers on the 
board in terms of the merit of the application, and the assistance 
and support does go to professional and avocational artists. 
 

Mr. Bjornerud: — So it’s the members on the board then that 
will make the decision who qualifies and who doesn’t. Is there 
actually though a set of guidelines that they have to go by, or is 
this strictly by their own judgement. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — The Arts Board has, you know, a 
written and stated policy in terms of who fits what category. 
And they need to do that so that their adjudications and their . . . 
the assistance that they do distribute is done fairly and 
consistently. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — I guess the Bill also removes the distinction 
means between . . . or what it’s doing is removing the 
distinction between professional and avocational artists. Does 
that mean that board can now show, if it so wishes, a preference 
towards one of the other because of who is making the 
decisions now? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — No, the answer to that question would 
be no, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Because the members are drawn 
from all parts of the province — geographically, regionally; 
from all different forms of artistic expression. And they try to 
maintain a balance where rural and urban artists are given 
assistance. There’s some attention paid to regions and also the 
different, the different media, the different art forms, that 
there’s a balance from year to year, and that that balance is 
fairly well maintained. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — I believe in your speech, Madam Minister, 
three arts groups were specifically mentioned: the 
Saskatchewan Arts Board, the Saskatchewan Council of 
Cultural Organizations, and the Saskatchewan Arts Alliance. 
Given the broader view of the arts community reflected in this 
Bill, are there any moves afoot to bring the whole thing under 
one heading, or is that really what you’re trying to do here? 
 
(1200) 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Yes, as I said at the outset that broadly 
that is the intent, is to at the end of the day, through a process of 
evolution, and the wish of the arts community is as well, that 
there will be a single agency at the end of the day. 
 
But this legislation doesn’t force that. It’s enabling so that it 
doesn’t, you know, won’t happen with a big bang and some 
organizations won’t be dissolved and melding into another and 
there’ll be a . . . and they’re working that out themselves now. 
There’ll be a process of evolution whereby they eventually will 
come under a single agency. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — I guess that really answers my question. I 
guess one of the ones I was thinking about is the Saskatchewan 
Craft Council so the door will be open now for them to, in time 
be . . . come in as they wish. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — In that particular instance that the 
member cites, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Craft Council would be 
one of those organizations which is now under the SCCO 
(Saskatchewan Council of Cultural Organizations), the 
Saskatchewan Cultural Organizations’ umbrella. And yes, the 
intent is and talks have been taking place for some time 
between the SCCO and the Arts Board for them to eventually 
become one. 



780 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 1998 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I think that’s 
all the questions I have on the municipal Arts Board at this 
time. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 1 — The Arts Board Amendment Act, 1998 
 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — I move that Bill No. 1, The Arts 
Board Amendment Act, be read a third time and passed under 
its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Municipal Government 

Vote 24 
 

The Chair: — I would ask the minister to introduce her 
officials, please, before we start. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. On 
my left is Ken Pontikes, our deputy minister; behind me is Ron 
Styles, the associate deputy minister of housing, protection 
services and facilities division; on his left is Brij Mathur, the 
associate deputy minister, municipal and community services 
division; and to the left of the deputy is Larry Chaykowski, the 
director of financial and strategic support in the Department of 
Municipal Government. 
 
Subvote (MG01) 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And welcome, Madam Minister, 
and to your officials as well. 
 
I’ll only take a short part of your time here today but I do have a 
few specific questions, some of which were given to you — my 
people, my constituency, and a few other ones that have come 
along in the last while — and I’d like to have an answer to a 
few of those. 
 
The Regina MacKenzie Art Gallery pays no cost for things such 
as lights, heat, security guards, air conditioning — those are I 
believe supplied by Sask government. Could I have the number 
of dollars that is worth? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the estimates 
for our department, it shows, as the member will see, $275,000 
as an annual grant to the MacKenzie gallery. But the actual . . . 
the value of the rental of space and utilities and the other costs 
that you mention would be a factor in the, probably the 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation’s estimates 
because that building, which also, as you know, houses the 
Department of Health and the Arts Board, is owned and 

operated by the SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation). 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, so I guess when they’re up we 
will ask that question of them. How many dollars does your 
department then attribute . . . contribute to the Regina 
MacKenzie Art Gallery? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — That, Mr. Deputy Speaker, would be 
the $275,000 annual figure that I just referred to that’s shown 
on page 94 of the Estimates. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — What is the difference between the grant this 
gallery gets and the Saskatoon’s Mendel Art Gallery gets, and 
what is the reason for the difference if there is any? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, there . . . it’s 
very difficult to draw parallels with these facilities. The history 
of the Mendel Art Gallery in Saskatoon is on a much different 
path, if you like, and there is some assistance provided through 
the lotteries not shown in the Estimates of the department, not 
coming from the General Revenue Fund to the Mendel Art 
Gallery. 
 
But there are a number of distinctions. For instance a large part 
of the provincial art collection, which is a provincial asset, is 
housed at the MacKenzie gallery, and we would, as a province 
preserving our asset, incur some costs in holding and displaying 
that collection, in any event. 
 
So there are, you know, relatively different ways that the use 
and establishment of these facilities have evolved. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — You’re probably quite right that the way that 
these have evolved is quite different. Because I would submit to 
you that in all likelihood there has always been more taxpayers’ 
money go into the MacKenzie than into Mendel Art Gallery, 
and that’s just the point of my questioning. I think you 
mentioned that this was hard to draw a parallel between these 
two, and I think we need to start to do that. 
 
The question comes up: if we just have art for the sake of 
storing it, why not let what Saskatoon does? They have a 
functioning art gallery without the province owning any art 
there; why can’t the MacKenzie Art Gallery operate the same 
way? Because there’s nothing wrong with what the Saskatoon 
art gallery, or the service it supplies, so why the insistence that 
in this one gallery, in one part of the province, the taxpayer has 
to own art there? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, in response to 
the question, the provincial collection is certainly circulated. 
The MacKenzie Art Gallery is the result of a collaboration 
between the university, which had a collection, the province and 
the MacKenzie. And MacKenzie provides services to some of 
the other galleries in the province. So of course it’s in the 
interest of the people of Saskatchewan to have access to these 
works, and that was the intent of the city, the province, the 
university, coming together sometime during the ’80s, which 
resulted in the arrangement that now exists for the MacKenzie 
gallery. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — An interesting but not very impressive 



April 24, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 781 

conclusion because I’m sure the people of Saskatchewan, by 
and large, will say when you look at what Saskatoon is 
providing through that particular art gallery — as I said earlier 
on — why, you know, the taxpayer should be owning this 
particular section of the arts of Saskatchewan, when that 
provides a very good and an adequate facility and service to the 
province. This seems to be just an unnecessary thing that is 
stuck in the city of Regina, probably for no other reason than to 
have it here. 
 
Also on museums as opposed to galleries. What were the 
contributions this year to the museum at Osler? 
 
(1215) 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — The situation with the provincial 
museum is that they fall under the umbrella of the SCCO, the 
cultural organizations. And the SCCO makes an allocation to 
the Museums Association of Saskatchewan, who in turn has a 
formula or criteria for distributing money to their member 
museums. 
 
So the information would be available in an indirect sort of 
way, but we . . . they’re at arm’s length, and so we give no 
direction to the SCCO or the museums association about how 
they should allocate the money. So whether the museum at 
Osler received money from the museums grant program last 
year, or how much, would be information that you could get 
from the museums association but it wouldn’t be something that 
we would have here today to share. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Interesting, Madam Minister, because it 
seems what is happening here is that provincial financial 
management’s rather gone amuck. You say that you give a 
certain amount of money to SCCO, but you really have no idea 
how they spend it, you have not idea who got it. So first 
question then, how much did you give to SCCO and do you 
have any input into how they distribute it? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the money that 
goes to fund the organizations that come under the SCCO 
umbrella is lottery money. And it again is peer review. It is at 
arm’s length from the government. And we think that’s a good 
and positive thing. And they report to us regularly and that 
information is available from the annual report from the SCCO, 
or their member associations also provide annual reports on 
their activities. And it’s a peer review. 
 
I don’t think that it should be . . . I agree that it shouldn’t be a 
subject of people sitting in this House to make allocations to 
their pet projects or, you know, whatever the case may be 
throughout the province. I think the museums association, being 
it’s a peer review where they have their standards, their criteria, 
that museums and collections and curators need qualifications 
and need to measure up to. And they make the allocations based 
on that. 
 
And I think they prefer that, we prefer that. And it isn’t that 
they’re not accountable. They do report to us in the form of 
annual reports which would be available to all of us. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Interesting. You have no control over it, you 
want no control over it, yet they report and yet you don’t know. 

Well for your information, Madam Minister, Osler didn’t get a 
single red cent. Neither did the Hague museum get a single red 
cent. And so maybe rather that just say so, you should look into 
how come. 
 
Those are people in those communities who have put their own 
time and effort and items, that have put that museum together, 
and they do not get one red cent. That’s totally unfair because 
there’s taxpayers and people of Saskatchewan putting money 
into it. And the reason they’re putting money into it and the way 
they’re putting money into it is under your control in some way 
or another. So you need to take some responsibility for that. 
 
And when those individuals from those communities ask how 
come they don’t get one cent, it’s pretty hard to give them any 
sort of a reason. It might be easy to explain why they don’t get 
as much as someone else is getting if there’s some criteria there, 
but to say these museums are totally out of the loop, that is not 
satisfactory and the people of those areas are fairly unhappy 
with the position that you’re taking on that, or the position that 
you’re not taking on it. 
 
Continuing, the Centennial Auditorium in Saskatoon pays all its 
own costs with a grant from the taxpayers of Saskatoon. The 
Centre of the Arts receives over $400,000 in grants from 
provincial taxpayers and has been granted $7 million over two 
years for renovations. Why that difference in the way those two 
are being treated? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, again this 
goes back several decades, a process of evolution, the 
establishment of the facilities in the two cities. In 1967, the 
100th anniversary of the country, the federal government made 
a decision that they would fund some kind of a public 
performing arts facility in every province — one. And they 
provided some funding and the decision was made that the 
Saskatchewan one would be in Regina. 
 
Well Regina wasn’t successful for whatever reasons at the time 
— this is over 30 years ago now — in raising the money that 
they needed to complete their project. Saskatoon, on the other 
hand, was kind of miffed that Regina was chosen and they 
decided to go ahead and build their own, which they did. They 
raised their own funds and they completed it and they’ve 
operated ever since. 
 
Regina’s was partly built. And if you remember at the time, in 
the late ’60s, there was a very serious economic recession in the 
province and Regina’s project fell on bad times and it was 
called the monkey bars beside the lake for a long time when the 
steel frame was there. And so the province of the day stepped in 
and completed it. 
 
So it is and always has been — since it was taken over and 
completed — a provincial asset. So at this time it needs 
renovations and, being a provincial asset, the province has to 
spend the money to upgrade it and keep it functioning. 
 
I know there are always comparisons drawn between Saskatoon 
and Regina ad nauseam. And if, you know, if you made 
yourself a little list, treatment is actually probably on balance, 
quite equal. Where Saskatoon has Wanuskewin, which is partly 
funded, Saskatoon has Meewasin; Saskatoon has Sask Place, so 



782 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 1998 

Regina has the Centre of the Arts; and Regina has the 
MacKenzie Art Gallery. 
 
Saskatoon on the other hand has the Western Development 
Museum, which last year we spent I think about, just over one 
and a half million dollars replacing roofs. Because again, that’s 
a provincial asset. It attracts 150,000 visitors to Saskatoon. It’s 
an important asset to Saskatoon. 
 
And so I mean I’m just not going to get into who is getting 
more and who is getting less. The history of all these facilities is 
different. It’s evolved in all sorts of different ways. They’re 
under different management. So to be trying to compare and 
saying this gets more than this, I think that on balance that the 
people of the province see the treatment as being relatively fair 
even though it’s not the same. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — It’s not the same and it is also definitely not 
fair. Here you have one particular city that gets a building half 
built, so you finish the building. Then you maintain the 
building. And now you’re going to refurbish the building. 
Where Saskatoon builds its own building, maintains its own 
building, and does its maintenance on its own building. Why 
not be very generous at this point, Madam Minister, and give 
the whole thing to the city of Regina? 
 
They’re big enough. They’re much bigger now than Saskatoon 
was when it built theirs. If they can’t handle it and they have to 
shut the doors, let the people of Regina deal with that — would 
be the fairest thing to do for the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, the 
individuals that you were mentioning. 
 
Now I hear a whole lot of squawking from the people back 
there, who are specifically individuals from Regina, and I have 
no doubt they’re concerned about that. I think they should 
rather hang their head in shame that their community can’t 
handle the same kinds of facilities that other cities can; and that 
they have to come running, cap in hand, to the provincial 
government and the taxpayer. From every individual across 
Saskatchewan, from Lloydminster, Prince Albert, Unity, 
Moosomin — everywhere — have to pay the taxes to go ahead 
and keep these facilities open in Regina and yet other cities can 
do it on their own. 
 
There’s something wrong there and I think you need to tell 
them to grow up and just give it to them. Let them handle it on 
their own. I’m sure they can do it quite well. I think you’d be 
surprised how well they would do it if they were given the 
opportunity. So let’s be generous, give them the opportunity. 
 
How much money went to maintain the Museum of Natural 
History? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ve got . . . 
It’s on page 94 of the Estimates — $1.335 million, and as you 
know there was a fire in the museum about 1990 or 1991. Last 
year there was an additional amount because the insurance 
claim for that fire was finally settled, and there’s a 
redevelopment going on in the museum in addition to restoring 
the part that was damaged by fire. 
 
The world of museums is changing and people aren’t happy to 
just go around and see stuffed animals any more and read little 

labels. They want to have interactive displays and so on. Also 
we’ve added the first nations pavilion that’s been developed 
there; so are continuing to renew that. 
 
I just want to say on the other . . . the comments that the 
member opposite made with respect to the Centre of the Arts, 
sometimes the opposition members are critical about 
downloading onto municipalities, and I suggest that giving the 
Centre of the Arts to Regina would be a huge download. 
 
I’d also like to point out that it was the then Liberal 
administration in Regina in the late ’60s that decided to take 
over the Regina Centre of the Arts and own it as a provincial 
asset. When you talk about some of the small museums not 
getting money, I can see why we got $15 billion worth of debt 
in the ’80s. The amount of funding is finite; there’s only so 
much. So the museums association makes their determination 
how it should be divided. 
 
Of course there are small, local museums; good work by our 
volunteers in our province, with efforts to maintain our history 
and artifacts from previous times. And that’s good, but it can’t 
all be funded. There isn’t enough money for everything. So I 
think that it’s, on balance, fair, as I said before, even though the 
treatment is not always the same. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Well you may want to hide behind the 
Liberals of the past, but I don’t think saying that just because 
they did something that maybe they shouldn’t have done, 
you’re going to perpetuate that for ever; I don’t think that’s 
valid at all. 
 
You mentioned parks in Saskatoon and that money was going 
to things like the parks that they have there. How many dollars 
would be going to Saskatoon parks, particularly the Meewasin 
one that you referred to? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have, 
by virtue of legislation that has been passed, four Authorities if 
you like. The one in Saskatoon called the Meewasin Valley 
Authority receives funding of $740,000 a year. That’s on page 
. . . this is all on page 93 of the Estimates. The Wascana Centre 
Authority in Regina receive $782,000 statutory and this year 
will receive 1.84 million in maintenance funding. The Chinook 
Parkway in Swift Current receives 78,000 and the Wakamow 
Valley in Moose Jaw receives 127,000. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. One or two more questions. 
Regina YMCA (Young Men's Christian Association), how 
much funding did they get from the province and did the 
Saskatoon YMCA get . . . what amount, and the same thing for 
the YW’s from both cities. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, to my 
knowledge, we do not fund either the YWCA or the YMCA in 
either city. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. The series of questions that I had, 
Madam Minister, I think points out some of the inequities are 
there. It has nothing to do with the debt in the past, what the 
Liberals did in the past — it has to do with dealing with people 
and municipalities and jurisdictions equally. And I think that 
needs to be looked at. 



April 24, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 783 

If you’re so convinced that on balance the Saskatoon/Regina 
situation is equal, I challenge you to go ahead and put that all 
on paper and say, here’s where the money goes for each city, 
and we’ll take a look at it. And if you’re correct, I’m sure these 
questions will not reappear. If it isn’t fairly close, these 
questions will continue reappearing. 
 
Thank you, Madam Minister. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Madam 
Minister, I’d like to also welcome your officials here today. 
 
The first question I have today is I’d like . . . Could you run me 
through the new policing funding that you came out with in this 
budget, or give me an explanation of what you’re doing. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don’t happen 
to have the detailed tables with me showing exactly the dollar 
effect on each community, but I can broadly. 
 
It was determined that, as you know based on the 
recommendations of a task force headed up by SUMA 
(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) . . . their 
recommendations were that a certain per capita charge would be 
placed on every municipality in the province to equalize the 
funding. Because there are those municipalities now with 
population under 500 and all rural municipalities, regardless of 
their population, that are not required to provide policing. 
 
(1230) 
 
So it was determined that the amount required to have the same 
per capita charge — well based on the municipality size — 
across the province would be $4 million. But that would have 
. . . If we had done it in the method recommended by the task 
force, it would have meant a new charge, a cumulative charge 
to rural and municipalities under 500 population of $4 million a 
year. 
 
And we just felt that at this particular time a lot of those 
communities are under stress with all the changes that are 
happening with rail-line abandonment and elevator 
consolidation and all the changes that we’re faced with in rural 
Saskatchewan; that we didn’t think it was appropriate to have a 
new charge at this time. 
 
But we did want to provide relief for those that perceive 
themselves paying more than their neighbours, so we’ve made 
it . . . it’s represented in the budget in the Estimates on page 93. 
It’s called sub-programs: policing costs restructuring assistance. 
And the effective date will not be till January 1, 1999. So the 
first quarter, being one-quarter of 4 million, $1 million appears 
in this year’s Estimates because in our fiscal year it will come 
in the last quarter — January, February, March of 1999 — and 
the administration of it hasn’t been determined yet. There are 
some options. We could send the municipalities a bill and then 
give them an offsetting cheque. We could simply distribute the 
$4 million, in this case a million dollars in our . . . the fiscal 
year that’s here under review to relieve those municipalities of 
the additional you know the costs, the higher costs. Personally 
I’m sort of leaning towards you know sending a bill and a 
reimbursement, so that there’s some recognition that, you know, 
of the amount that is being picked up. 

But we’re consulting with municipalities now on the 
administration. We have of course until 1999 to determine how 
that’s done. So we will try to come up with a mutually 
acceptable arrangement for how to distribute the money. But we 
think that it is good news in relieving those municipalities that 
are paying more than their neighbours, and at the same time not 
representing new costs to those who feel they can’t afford it. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. And I want to 
be on the record as saying I commend you and your government 
for putting extra money into covering the policing costs, 
because I do agree with you that the smaller towns and the RMs 
(rural municipality) in no way can afford to pay for policing 
with the downloading that’s gone on. 
 
I just want a little bit clearer picture of what’s happening out 
there and I’ll give you an example of a small town out there 
that’s paying very close to $40,000 — and it’s the town of 
Saltcoats that I’m very familiar with — and I believe their 
population is about 540 and I think they’re up to around 
anywhere from 38 to $40,000 for policing. Had we gone 
through with what were the recommendations had said — and 
we’d have talked about $15 per capita for small towns and RMs 
— I believe the town of Saltcoats would have ended up paying 
roughly $7,000 instead of the 40. Will that now, with the $4 
million that your government has put in, will that put them 
down to the 7,000 that they had hoped to get to before? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Yes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that was the 
formula that was used to identify that it would take $4 million 
to provide that equalization. And that the example that you cite 
is really a good one because that’s where, that’s where the 
heaviest burden really was, is on those communities that are just 
over the break point of $500 . . . 500 population. So that when 
they have to pay for . . . According to the legislation, they’re 
required then to commit to the minimum contract with the 
RCMP. Well they have the alternative — having their own 
town policemen or whatever — but most of them opt to contract 
with the 20-hour a week with the RCMP, which is the $38,000 
that you mention. 
 
So in a case like Saltcoats, they would go now to the $15 per 
capita which would be like roughly $7,500, or you know based 
on 500 population. So they would now have a savings if you 
like, of over $30,000, that they could either reduce their taxes or 
use that money to provide other services. 
 
And in some of those communities their biggest single cost at 
that population level is that policing contract. So it will provide 
a great amount of relief for over a hundred Saskatchewan 
municipalities. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you Madam Minister. Yes, I agree, I 
think the town of Kamsack alone is $131,000 that will save 
them. And I know it’s much appreciated. 
 
One thing though, is this a one-year deal? Is this something 
that’s going to be ongoing every year? Or if I kind of 
understood what the explanation was, that this is for this ’99 
year; what happens after that? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — We’re calling it transitional funding 
but we . . . the intent is — and this million dollars is the first 



784 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 1998 

instalment — that in next year’s budget the full $4 million 
would be there; so it would be continuing. 
 
The one thing I would say is that these numbers, this $4 million 
annual amount is based upon the cost of the RCMP now. Those 
services are subject to a contract between the federal and 
provincial government as you know. And so if at some time in 
the future the costs per capita increase . . . I mean we’re not 
saying now that we will pick up all of the costs into infinity, but 
the intent is certainly that in next year’s budget that this figure 
will be $4 million, not $1 million. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Okay, with 
revenue sharing for these same towns that are receiving this 
policing money, will this in any way affect their revenue 
sharing? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — If we use the old formula, which has 
been suspended now for a number of years because of the 
changes in the size of the pool, there would be an effect. But we 
have suspended the formula and we’re consulting with 
municipalities. We’re taking it to the municipal round table — 
you know, we have on a number of occasions — to come up 
with some new method of distribution. And the answer is at the 
current time and in the absence of a new formula, the answer to 
your question is no. It will not affect the amount they get 
through revenue sharing in any way. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — What about then the towns under 500 and 
the RMs out there that are now not being asked, and I’m sure 
are very grateful they’re not being asked, to pay towards the 
policing, but will their revenue sharing then in any way . . . will 
they be penalized in any way or cut in what they would have 
expected in revenue sharing because they are not being asked to 
put into the policing fund? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — The answer is the same, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, as before, that in the current context with the formula 
being suspended, no. There won’t be any effect whatsoever. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — On to a different subject, Madam Minister, 
and I’m sure you’re much more aware than I am even of the 
problems that reassessment caused. And I guess my first 
question would be what have we learned from the reassessment 
we’ve just gone through and the mistakes I believe we’ve 
made? 
 
I believe one of the things . . . that we were not anywheres near 
ready to go into a reassessment with the rules we had in place. 
And I guess what I’m asking you is what have we learnt from 
that and how more or better prepared are we going to be in 2000 
or whenever the next assessment will be? If I understand right, 
it may be even delayed a year. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — I think the member opposite asks a 
very good question: what have we learned? I think the most 
important thing we’ve learned is never ever to wait 30 years 
again before doing a reassessment. 
 
We have some concerns. We’re setting up a committee now that 
will include representation from the municipal associations and 
so on. We’re not suggesting that the reassessment for the year 
2000 should be delayed in any way, but there is a proposal 

which has not been, you know, accepted — it’s just a proposal 
that’s out there — that in the event that we don’t get the 
numbers from SAMA (Saskatchewan Assessment Management 
Agency) early enough, that there’s sort of a plan B where 
municipalities could run two parallel tax rolls. 
 
And we may not have to do that. If we got SAMA’s final 
assessment figures by the end of 1998, we would have a year 
then to work through what the percentages of values should be, 
how the education foundation grant distribution will be affected 
and so on. 
 
Because last time we had a, as you know, as everybody knows, 
we had a crunch where we set the percentages of value based 
upon . . . in August of 1996 based upon the best information 
that was available to us at the time. But then by the time the 
final numbers came out and the pick-ups and all of that. It was 
seen that there was, if you like, some unacceptable shifts. So we 
had to come up with percentages of assessment to — like the 
.83 per cent on agricultural property — to mitigate that. 
 
And we were doing those changes in the year of reassessment. 
You know, we were bringing in legislation in 1997 for the 1997 
amendment, that in April and May, that was retroactive to the 
first of January and was after municipalities had set their mill 
rates, or were required to. And we just don’t think that’s 
acceptable. 
 
So we’re trying to plan ahead for a plan B in the event that we 
don’t get the numbers soon enough. If we do then everything 
will be fine, but we’re trying to cover off that eventuality. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. I guess, 
and probably you know this as well as I do or maybe better 
because of the problems that it caused for your people, but if we 
had of gone with the last reassessment and let SAMA go 
through their procedure they were doing and then . . . but put 
off the actual numbers being used till the following year, which 
would be this year, I think we’d have saved a lot of headache 
for you and us and everyone out there. I think it was the fact 
that we were being asked to go by the new numbers but we 
weren’t really ready to put the other rules in place that would 
guard against shortfalls. 
 
One of the problems there, the problems that I keep getting calls 
about, Madam Minister, and I believe maybe you do, is about 
the revenue sharing for — this is from the towns out there right 
now but I guess for everyone — is that they feel that the 
revenue sharing and the numbers should be out now. They can’t 
understand why we have to keep waiting and waiting to get our 
numbers, and it is causing problems for them out there. Why 
can this not be done earlier in the year? I think it’s causing a lot 
of inconvenience for the municipalities out there. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order. Before I recognize the minister, I 
just wish to remind the hon. member to address questioning 
through the Chair, and I appreciate your cooperation. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Now 
I forget what the question was. No, I don’t. It was . . . We had 
to take it through an approval process through government and 
that approval has been given, and I would say that the cheques 
and the indication of how much municipalities will be getting 



April 24, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 785 

on an individual basis will be known momentarily. It should be 
out within the next few days. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Is there a reason though, Deputy Speaker, 
that this can’t be done earlier. We get the same concern every 
year. And I know even the RMs too, if we could get these 
numbers, Mr. Deputy Speaker, earlier in the year, these people 
could finalize their budgets. And it seems to me that . . . And I 
know from my years in rural municipal government, we were 
always waiting to find out what our shares would be on the 
funding out there and it does cause inconvenience. Is there no 
way that we can move this time line up — probably even a 
month or two months would sure help. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know the 
member opposite raises a good and valid point, and I know it 
comes from his personal experience in local government as 
well. And I have the same experience. It’s not quite so difficult 
for rural municipalities because they set their mill rate later in 
the year — or they’re not required to set it as early, let’s put it 
that way — their statutory deadline is later in the year than for 
urban municipalities. 
 
But the problem that we run into is that we can do it 
hypothetically before the budget, but we can’t talk to the 
municipal organizations or the municipalities prior to budget 
day about specifically how big the pool will be because that’s 
budget information. So we have to wait until the amount of the 
pool is made public. 
 
And then we wanted to consult with them about whether we 
should suspend the formula, whether they wanted a new 
formula. There’s been some expressions that the cities wanted 
to have a separate pool from the larger urban pool. So we talked 
to the municipal organizations and the municipalities about all 
of those options to determine if there was a consensus around 
one of them. And whatever consensus could be reached is what 
will be reflected in the figures that come out. But that’s why we 
wanted to talk to them about it. 
 
(1245) 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I have a 
suggestion that may help you with this problem and help the 
people that I’m concerned about too, is that if we had about a 
six-week fall session, then come in here in about the middle of 
January like we should be coming in here, we would be out of 
here by now. Those numbers would have been out — the 
budget could have come out a lot earlier than this — and it 
would make everybody happy that’s concerned. 
 
I know the members opposite, Mr. Deputy Speaker, would 
appreciate that. I know everybody in my party would. 
 
Madam Minister, on a little bit different subject here but a 
concern that has been brought to me and I’m not sure if this 
maybe should be Highways or Municipal Government. But the 
towns of Langenburg, and I think Kamsack, and I know there’s 
towns that size all over the province where the highway runs 
right through town, and correct me if I’m wrong, but I think are 
very concerned about the assistance they get, or lack of, for the 
portions of the highways — I know in Langenburg’s case it’s 
No. 16 that runs right through the town and the lack of 

assistance they get on this portion of the highway. 
 
I believe in the smaller towns, assistance is given for a portion 
of the road that runs into those towns off the highways. Why, 
when we get to towns of that size, do we not have funding or 
some assistance for them? Or more assistance? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I like to offer 
whatever information I can but I think that particular question 
should be directed towards the Minister of Highways in 
estimates for Highways. 
 
I just want to make a comment on the member’s suggestion that 
maybe . . . that we should have a fall session to make 
information on municipal revenue sharing earlier. And I’d just 
like to observe that having a fall session would cost quite a lot 
of money and we might have to reduce the size of the 
revenue-sharing pool in order to pay for that. And I don’t think 
the municipalities would like that very much. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Madam Minister, I think it would 
work really well if we had a six-week fall session. And I think 
we should run it like the party that I was with before. Leaks 
came out of there all the time every time we did something, and 
I would think you could leak what was coming in the budget 
and then towns would know ahead of time. 
 
Regional parks, Madam Minister, regional parks, the funding 
has dropped considerably over the years for regional parks. And 
I guess the question I have is, are we getting to the point that 
there’s . . . I know a lot of the regional parks aren’t being 
funded now. Is there anything in the works, now that financially 
we have got our house in a little better order than it was before, 
to return some of the funding to these regional parks? 
 
These regional parks are really good for the tourist industry in 
this province. I’ve known a number of the smaller regional 
parks are totally funded by the municipality and it’s a real load 
on them right now. And I believe they’re doing us a great 
service here by bringing people into the province. And is there 
any future plans of maybe starting some funding back up for 
these people? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, again the 
funding for all parks, except for the urban parks and the 
Authorities that are funded under statute, the funding for parks 
has always been and is now in the Department of the 
Environment — Environment and Resource Management. 
 
So I would suggest, with respect, that perhaps he could reserve 
this question until the Minister for the Environment is in 
Committee of the Whole. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, welcome to your officials. I 
have one issue that was brought forward by one of my towns 
and it’s regarding a downloading of responsibility again. This 
one is for inspection of new buildings. 
 
I’ve been told the volunteers on councils have the responsibility 
now to check over the new buildings and ensure that they meet 
the new codes. These people are volunteers. They are elected in 
rural communities, they take time out of their real lives to take 
on an additional responsibility. And they now are expected to 



786 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 1998 

know, and if they don’t know . . . they’re expected to find the 
funds to hire someone to ensure the building codes are met. Can 
you give me an idea of why this change was made. Is it done 
through regulations? And when did it take effect? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, from memory 
I’m not sure of the year, but it must have been prior to 1990 
because I remember as the reeve of a rural municipality myself, 
we passed a bylaw. I think most municipalities around that time 
period were asked to pass bylaws adopting the National 
Building Code. 
 
And most municipalities, rural municipalities and small urban 
municipalities, do contract this out. They will engage . . . I am 
told that it’s 1988; I knew it was prior to 1990. But they will 
engage someone from a larger urban community, you know 
nearby or something like that, because of course most smaller 
municipalities don’t have enough construction activity to 
warrant the hiring, you know, the engaging of a full-time 
building inspector, so they usually contract that out. 
 
There is a great variance in the method and the amount of 
sophistication, if you like. A lot of rural municipalities, for 
example, don’t even have a zoning bylaw and don’t have a 
system that requires building permits to be taken out. 
 
My experience was that in a larger rural municipality, that we 
did have a zoning bylaw, we did adopt the building code, we 
did require development permits for any kind of construction. 
We didn’t charge a fee for any kind of agricultural buildings, 
but we wanted to know where they were going, you know, just 
to make sure that they didn’t obstruct sight lines and so on. So 
we had a development plan that asked people to apply for any 
kind of development. And if it was a building that required 
inspection, then we had an arrangement with the city of 
Saskatoon where their building department would go out, for a 
fee, and do that inspection so that it was done by a qualified 
inspector. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Has there 
been any changes in the regulations? Are there any new 
regulations that make . . . that have occurred recently that have 
made it . . . that is bringing this to the attention of the local 
municipalities and made their responsibility even clearer? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m told that in 
1995 there were some updates to the National Building Code. 
So that would have an effect on any municipality that had 
obviously adopted the National Building Code; then they would 
be also adopting the changes or the updates to it. 
 
But I don’t think that it would be onerous on a municipality, 
either the previous provisions or the changes, the updates. And 
the municipality would want to consider very carefully their 
liability if they permitted some kind of a substandard building 
to be put up and say a fire or a collapse of the building or 
something ensued. So I think it would considered normal 
practice for a municipality to be satisfied that standards were 
being met. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Of course, Madam Minister, Deputy Speaker, 
I’m sure that the minister knows that all councils, everyone, 
wants to have safe buildings. Of course though there can’t be 

any opportunity for them to be liable, and that’s exactly what 
these small towns and the RMs are trying to do. 
 
But again this is going to cost money. There are provincial 
standards. There are federal standards that have to be met. And 
larger centres, like you said, can afford to have somebody hired, 
paid staff. But this is just another . . . (inaudible) . . . for the 
small towns who are trying to encourage businesses to start up, 
because they now are required to check not only the commercial 
buildings but also residentials as well. 
 
They now need not only just a floor plan, they actually have to 
have a blueprint. And this is going to slow down the issuance of 
permits. And I also understand that during the construction they 
have to have it inspected three times. So not only is someone 
that’s trying to build something going to have to wait for town 
council to have a meeting and to check over the permit, they’re 
also going to have to wait until somebody can come out to do 
some of the inspections. And I think this is again something that 
is a great concern for the smaller communities. 
 
I also understand that in the community it could cost up to 
around the 6 or $700 mark to have one of these permits or the 
inspections taking place. It’s an additional burden. And I’m 
wondering if it’s something that the government is well aware 
of and if it’s something that the . . . if you’ve been told by the 
councils how tough this is going to be on them when it comes to 
their budgeting again. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I really believe 
that this need not be onerous for smaller municipalities; that 
they certainly can, you know, contract services from a 
neighbouring municipality that has someone on staff. And 
certainly there don’t have to be delays because the council can 
pass resolutions delegating that authority to their 
administration; so that the administrator, secretary of the 
municipality, or other staff people can act with dispatching 
these cases. 
 
And there is a variety of different reasons for an inspection. 
There is electrical inspections; all kinds of trade inspections; 
might be mortgage inspections. In the event of a mortgage, the 
institution requires inspections at regular intervals. 
 
So there are a variety of circumstances, but I think that they 
shouldn’t . . . small communities shouldn’t make it difficult for 
themselves. There are ways to do it with dispatch and at a very 
minimal cost to the municipality and the ratepayer. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:58 p.m. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................761 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................761 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................761 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................761 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................761 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................761 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................761 
  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................761 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ..........................................................................................................................................................................................761 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Kasperski ...................................................................................................................................................................................762 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................762 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................762 
  Lingenfelter .......................................................................................................................................................................762, 763 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................762 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................762 
  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................763 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Community Marketing Initiative 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................763 
 Regina Women of Distinction 
  Murray.......................................................................................................................................................................................763 
 Compensation for Hepatitis C Victims 
  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................763 
 Popowich Milling Oat Plant Grand Opening 
  Renaud .......................................................................................................................................................................................764 
 Saskatoon Eastview By-election 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................764 
 Spring Gas Price Increase 
  Flavel..........................................................................................................................................................................................764 
 Lloydminster Town Hall Meeting 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................764 
  Stanger .......................................................................................................................................................................................764 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Compensation for Hepatitis C Victims 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................765 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................765 
 SaskPower Commercial 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................766 
  Lingenfelter ...............................................................................................................................................................................766 
 Regina Health District Employee Termination 
  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................767 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................767 
 Youth Addiction Services 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................768 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................768 
 Crown Corporation International Investments 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................769 
  Lingenfelter ...............................................................................................................................................................................769 
 Capital Construction Tax Exemptions 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................769 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................769 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Serious and Habitual Youth Offender Comprehensive Action Program 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................770 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................770 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................771 
  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................771 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 



 

SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 32 — The Wildlife Amendment Act, 1998 
  Scott ...........................................................................................................................................................................................772 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................772 
 Bill No. 33 — The Provincial Court Act, 1998 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................773 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................774 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 2 — The Correctional Services Amendment Act, 1998 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................774 
 Bill No. 17 — The Certified Management Consultants Act 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................777 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 Bill No. 1  The Arts Board Amendment Act, 1998 
  Teichrob.....................................................................................................................................................................................778 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................778 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 1 — The Arts Board Amendment Act, 1998 
  Teichrob.....................................................................................................................................................................................780 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund 
 Municipal Government — Vote 24 
  Teichrob.....................................................................................................................................................................................780 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................780 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................783 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................785 
 
 
 


