





























































Hansard: April 16, 1998


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 609 
 April 16, 1998 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
present petitions today on behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 

These petitions come from the Fairlight, Redvers, Manor, 
Antler, Fertile areas, Storthoaks, Mr. Speaker, of my 
constituency. I so present. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As well to present 
petitions: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And these petitions I’m presenting are signed by individuals 
from the Storthoaks, Redvers, Wakaw areas of the province 
of Saskatchewan. I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present today. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
And as is in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The communities involved, Mr. Speaker, are Carnduff, 
Carievale, Oxbow. I so present. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. I too rise to present a petition, 
and I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

And these are signed by the good people of Glen Ewen. I so 
present. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise on 
behalf of people of Saskatchewan. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 

Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are primarily from the 
community of Carragana in the north-east. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
to present today regarding Channel Lake. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Everyone that has signed this petition is from Naicam. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to present 
a petition this afternoon as well to the legislature from the 
people of Saskatchewan. This petition surrounds the whole Jack 
Messer, Channel Lake fiasco, and I’m pleased to present on 
behalf of the people from the Spalding area of Saskatchewan 
that have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present a 
petition on behalf of people in Saskatchewan concerned about 
the closure of the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And the signatures on this petition are from Yorkton. Mr. 
Speaker, I so present. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise to present 
petitions from people of Saskatchewan who are very disturbed 
about the impending closure of the Plains Health Centre, and 
praying that this Hon. Assembly will provide adequate funding 
to the Regina Health District so that the Plains hospital may 
remain open. Your petitioners this afternoon come from 
Limerick and Flintoft. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I join with my 
colleagues in presenting petitions to stop the closure of the 
Plains hospital. Prayer reads: 



610 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 1998 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and provide 
adequate funding to the Regina Health District so that the 
essential services provided at the Plains may be continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed the petition are all 
from the Limerick area of my constituency. I so present. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today to 
present a petition: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the people that have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are 
primarily from Limerick, and I so present. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition has been signed by the folks from 
the city of Weyburn. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll read the prayer 
from the following people begging relief: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reach necessary agreements with other levels of 
government to fund the twinning of the Trans-Canada 
Highway in Saskatchewan so that work can begin in 1998, 
and to set out a time frame for the ultimate completion of 
the project with or without federal assistance. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These are from the communities of Consul, Craven, Climax, 
Shaunavon, Bracken, Frontier, Maple Creek, Piapot, and Fox 
Valley. I’m happy to present them on their behalf today, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly on the 
following matters: the twinning of the Trans-Canada 
Highway; saving the Plains Health Centre; and calling an 
independent inquiry into the Channel Lake issue. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 31 ask the government the following: 
 

To the Minister of Health: what was the incidence of 
reported cancers in the area of Saskatchewan covered by 
the two northern health districts for the fiscal period April 
1, 1996 to March 31, 1997, and is the total rate divided into 
various types of cancers? 
 

And the second question, a much similar question: 
 

What was the incidence of reported cancers in the area of 
Saskatchewan covered by the two northern health districts 
from the fiscal period April 1, 1995 to March 31, 1996, and 
is the total rate divided into various types of cancers? 
 

And I so present. 
 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 31 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for Crown Investments 
Corporation: how much did SaskPower pay in legal fees to 
the Milner Fenerty law firm of Calgary for the sale 
transaction of Channel Lake Petroleum from Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation to Direct Energy Marketing Limited; 
what was the cost of legal fees paid to Milner Fenerty law 
firm of Calgary for the subsequent legal opinion 
surrounding the sale of Channel Lake Petroleum dated 
June 10 and June 12, 1997? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Belanger: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, I’d like to bring to the attention of members in the 
House, four very special visitors we have today. As I call their 
name I’ll ask them to stand. And I have my middle daughter, 
Kellie, with us today in your Assembly. And then I also have 
my youngest daughter, Taylor, and my oldest daughter, 
Michelle, and my god-daughter, Cheryl, who are all visiting 
here today to watch the proceedings of the Assembly. 
 
And I must say, Mr. Speaker, in the future as part of my effort 
of being a parent, I decided to bring them along for a few days 
to give their mother a rest. But I urge you to make me promise 
never to do that again. And so I’d ask the Assembly members to 
invite them here today. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Through you, 
to the rest of the Assembly, I would like to introduce my 
constituency assistant, Jeannie Ball, her husband Garnet, and 
their son, Garrett, who are in your gallery today visiting. And 
I’d like to ask all members to welcome them here. 
 



April 16, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 611 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today I would like to introduce to you and through you to the 
members of the Assembly, in the west gallery, a young man 
who is fairly important in my life. My son, Jordan, who has 
come down to spend the week in Regina. And when I told him 
he could come and watch today, he wanted to make a speech on 
the Canadian Wheat Board, and I said the member for 
Kindersley could certainly learn something from that. But 
unfortunately we can’t have participation from the gallery. I’d 
like all members to join with me in welcoming Jordan to the 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, up in your gallery we have a 
person wearing yellow. That is a person by the name of Mr. 
Corey Ecarnot. This young man, who has just turned 15, has 
been curling for a couple of years, and he made it to the 
provincial A finals this year. And Corey is the son of my chief 
of staff, Adelle, and her husband Joe. Please welcome him. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Toon Town Animation Studio 
 
Mr. Whitmore: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A Saskatoon firm, 
Toon Town Animation Production Studio, has begun work on a 
number of animated projects involving both aboriginal and 
non-aboriginal themes. 
 
Gilbert Baldhead from the One Arrow First Nations and Kim 
Warden from the Poundmaker First Nations are two of many 
aboriginal artists working on the projects. Animation director, 
Steve Rabatich, said that the animators are hired strictly on the 
basis of talent. It just happened that many aboriginals are very 
talented artists. 
 
Long-term plans for Toon Town involves animated Christmas 
stories for locally created characters, creating children’s 
cartoons for TV and movies, and was once the only domain of 
the big American studios. With the talent pool available in 
Saskatchewan, that will soon change. 
 
Rabatich says, “Talented artists like Gilbert Baldhead, Terrence 
Sutherland, Carrie Saganace, Kim Warden, and Kelly 
Sutherland are just a few of the many artists we hire but these 
particular aboriginal artists are in a class of their own.” 

 
Mr. Speaker, I applaud the people of Toon Town Animated 
Productions for breaking into new areas in animation 
production in Saskatchewan and congratulate the many 
aboriginal artists who are helping making it possible. 
 
Thank you. 
 

Saskatchewan’s First Astronaut 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to note a 
very important event that was scheduled for today. 

Saskatchewan’s first ever astronaut, Dr. David Williams, was 
scheduled to be blasted into outer space aboard the space shuttle 
Columbia. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the last report I got was the mission has 
been delayed today due to weather. But regardless of when Mr. 
Williams slips the surly bonds of earth, I’m sure all 
Saskatchewan residents will be proud. 
 
I think each and every one of us has a certain fascination with 
the space program. The training it takes to become an astronaut 
is something not many of us could handle. Dr. Williams, who 
now lives in Ontario, is an emergency physician and will use 
his time in space to do experiments involving brain research as 
well as studying the effects of space travel on human sleep 
habits. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, while we prefer if more doctors remained on 
call here in our province, Dr. Williams is another sign of how 
much Saskatchewan has to offer the rest of Canada and indeed 
the rest of the world. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

A Guide to Historic Sites 
 

Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
April 8 A Guide to Historic Sites, a new Saskatchewan 
publication, was launched. This new book will be the first in the 
“Discover Saskatchewan” series. 
 
A Guide to Historic Sites, Mr. Speaker, features 232 pages, 32 
colour photographs, and 11 maps, and was edited by Dr. Ralph 
Nilson of the University of Regina. And the book was published 
by the Canadian Plains Research Center at the university. It is 
now available through bookstores, Saskatchewan visitor 
reception centres, and through Tourism Saskatchewan. 
 
This new “Discover Saskatchewan” series, Mr. Speaker, is the 
result of a partnership among Saskatchewan municipal 
governments, the University of Regina, Canadian Plains 
Research Center, Tourism Saskatchewan, and the Saskatchewan 
Heritage Foundation. Plans are under way for at least a dozen 
more titles under this series. 
 
The Guide to Historic Sites includes all provincial historic 
parks, provincial heritage property, federal heritage sites, and 
provincial historic markers. 
 
A number of Saskatchewan’s museums, non-governmental 
heritage plaques, and municipal heritage properties are also 
included, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We all know that Saskatchewan is one of the best places in the 
world to live, Mr. Speaker. It also happens to be a pretty good 
place to take a holiday. With this new series, not only will 
Saskatchewan residents be more able to enjoy our sites, but 
out-of-province visitors as well. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



612 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 1998 

Hospital Bed Shortages 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
according to the Health minister there is no bed crisis. Liberals 
are fearmongering he says . . . he tells the people of 
Saskatchewan. Well our office has received a number of calls 
from emergency room nurses this morning telling us that the 
General Hospital went on bypass last evening. 
 
And why is that? Because there were 12 patients who couldn’t 
be admitted. There were no critical care beds; no emergency 
beds; no observation beds available. 
 
Most people would believe this to be one more example of a 
health care system which is in a state of crisis. Most people 
would believe this is one more example of a serious bed 
shortage in Regina, which serves the entire population of 
southern Saskatchewan. 
 
But why should this government be concerned? After all there 
is no health care crisis. There is no bed crisis in this city. The 
Health minister tells us so. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Task Force on Balancing Work and Family 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Mr. Speaker, last October the government 
announced a one-year initiative aimed at making the workplace 
more family friendly. A task force was established to address 
this growing issue. Public input into the task force is vital to 
finding solutions to the problem of balancing work and family. 
 
I could read off a number of very real statistics to illustrate the 
need to make the work place more family friendly, but we 
already know from personal experience that this problem exists. 
 
Nobody in crisis should have to choose between unemployment 
and family duty. It’s pretty hard to give a 110 per cent to your 
job when you’re worried about your eight-year-old getting 
home from school before you get home from work. And it’s 
equally difficult to concentrate on a tedious task when your 
kid’s running a fever and grandma can’t help out. 
 
The task force is our government’s response to this important 
issue. We want to hear from the people of Saskatchewan. We 
encourage those who attend to discuss their experiences in 
balancing work and family. There are no quick fixes or easy 
solutions to this problem. The only way we can address this 
issue is by working in partnership with business, labour, and 
community to develop ways to help people find a balance 
between their jobs and their families. 
 
The task force meetings resume April 22 in North Battleford, 
and then move on to Prince Albert, Humboldt, Moose Jaw, 
Regina, La Ronge, and Swift Current, and Saskatoon. All 
MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) have the agenda 
for the task force meetings and I’m sure would welcome their 
constituents to drop into their offices to get the information. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Former MLA Voices Concern on Health Care 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Day after day the 
Premier and this government try to duck responsibility for a 
health care system that is in a state of crisis. The most popular 
target of course, is the federal government, and that’s why we 
found the letter written by former New Democratic MLA Lewis 
Draper so interesting. Mr. Draper writes, and I quote: 
 

The provincial government cannot blame the Liberal 
federal government for health care cuts. The provincial 
government announced the closure of 52 small rural 
hospitals to save money well before the federal election. If 
the provincial government saved this money, can they fault 
the federal government for claiming their share? 
 
After witnessing the disasters of health care reform in rural 
Saskatchewan, I shudder to think what’s going to happen 
to us now. We have lost our small hospitals, our rural 
doctors have been driven out of the province, and nurses 
fired wholesale. 

 
The former NDP (New Democratic Party) member closes by 
quoting Charles Dickens, by suggesting, “God help us, every 
one.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s time the Premier and this government took 
note. This is not Liberal opposition fearmongering. It’s the 
thoughts of a New Democratic who knows the government has 
crossed the line. 
 

Tourism Industry Grows 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. According to 
Statistics Canada, the number of jobs in the tourism industry in 
Saskatchewan is growing. In fact tourism-specific jobs grew by 
10 per cent in 1997. 
 
Tourism Saskatchewan is an industry-led partnership with the 
government. Its mandate is to develop and promote tourism in 
the province. This partnership is clearly succeeding. Tourism 
and tourism-related sectors of the economy account for nearly 
one-quarter of over 10,000 new jobs in service industries in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Randy Williams, Tourism Saskatchewan president, says, “new 
trends in what people are looking for worldwide, like natural 
experiences and cultural experiences, has positioned 
Saskatchewan well. Saskatchewan is being seen as a destination 
now more than it has ever been before.” 
 
In our great city you need only to look to the Wascana Centre, 
the Science Centre, the Royal Saskatchewan Museum, the 
Globe, the MacKenzie Gallery, and others; the RCMP (Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police) Depot and Museum, and the Casino 
Regina and so much more. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is why we will continue our prosperous 
partnership with industry to further promote and expand 
tourism in this wonderful province of ours. And as I earlier said, 
Mr. Speaker, that means jobs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



April 16, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 613 

Educational Success of Northern School 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
very pleased to report to the Assembly today about the 
educational successes of the Minahik Waskahigan School in 
Pinehouse Lake. Minahik Waskahigan School is a progressive, 
kindergarten to grade 12 school serving approximately 380 
students. During Education Week in March this year, the staff 
and students at Minahik Waskahigan School demonstrated the 
dedication they have to their education. They celebrated the 
week by filling it with special educational events and concluded 
with an annual winter carnival. 
 
One event of note was a northern reading challenge. The school 
competed against other northern communities and had great 
success. They read over 29,000 books in 10 weeks. Students 
and staff at Minahik Waskahigan are now busy preparing for 
the Northern Junior Summer Games held from June 8 to 12 in 
their community. Students from across the North will be in 
Pinehouse Lake to participate, compete, and meet new people. 
 
Without the hard work and dedication of students and teachers 
at Minahik Waskahigan, none of this would be possible. The 
staff and students have made a commitment to make their 
school and their community the best it can be. I am proud of 
their accomplishments and I would ask that other members of 
the Assembly join with me in congratulating them on their 
successes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Prosecutions Branch Decision 
 

Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Justice. Mr. Minister, yesterday I 
met with a young man who feels that the justice system has 
failed him. Peter Stevenson of Regina alleges that he was 
sexually assaulted on a number of occasions between 1986 and 
1989 by former FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 
Nations) vice-chief, Dan Bellegarde. Mr. Stevenson has spoken 
to the Regina city police, the RCMP, and the Crown 
prosecutor’s office about these events. All three have provided 
him with assurances that charges would be laid. 
 
Then senior officials in your department took it upon 
themselves to review the files and they suddenly decided not to 
lay charges. Mr. Stevenson had been given no real explanation 
for this decision. In the end he is left with unmistakable 
impressions that the decision by your senior Justice officials not 
to proceed was driven by politics rather than justice. 
 
Mr. Minister, why did your department decide not to lay 
charges in this case? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank the member 
for that question. As she knows, the issues relating to decisions 
around prosecutions are not made by my office or anybody in 
my office. These matters are handled by the director of public 
prosecutions in consultation with the people in that office. I 
have a great deal of respect for the ability of these people to do 
their job well, and if there are concerns I suggest that this 

person contact the people at the prosecutions department and 
I’m sure they’d be happy to sit down and talk with him. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, this morning the Saskatchewan 
Coalition Against Racism issued a news release condemning 
the actions of your department. SCAR pointed out that even 
though the Criminal Code does not require corroboration in 
these cases, Mr. Stevenson has people who will corroborate his 
allegations and other victims who are willing to testify. 
 
SCAR also notes that Mr. Stevenson has volunteered to take a 
polygraph test and Mr. Bellegarde has refused to be interviewed 
or even give a statement to the police. SCAR says, and I quote: 
 

One is left to question on what basis the Department of 
Justice is willing to sacrifice Mr. Stevenson in this case. 

 
And that’s a good question. On what basis did your department 
decide to sacrifice Mr. Stevenson after he received numerous 
assurances the charges would be pursued? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — As I previously stated, we have very 
capable people who work as prosecutors in our department of 
public prosecutions. They have a very specific role to complete, 
which is to carefully evaluate and examine all of the evidence 
that’s presented to him after investigation. And I’m supportive 
of the kinds of decisions that they make and I’m supportive in 
this case of them having done a full job of reviewing the matter. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, there are many aboriginal people 
just like Mr. Stevenson who believe the justice system does not 
work for them. 
 
The Saskatchewan Coalition Against Racism says that the 
justice system has failed Mr. Stevenson. Your senior officials 
have said it is not in the public interest to proceed with the 
charges. Why? What message is this sending to other victims of 
sexual assault and of exploitation? 
 
Mr. Minister, Mr. Stevenson and his lawyer have made a very 
reasonable request. They’ve asked for a meeting with Mr. Daryl 
Rayner of the public prosecutions branch, Department of 
Justice, to review the decision not to lay charges. And you’ve 
received a copy of that letter. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you give them the commitment that Mr. 
Rayner will meet with Mr. Stevenson and his lawyer? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the department of public 
prosecutions deals with these matters directly and I’m certain 
that if the letter has gone to the department of public 
prosecutions they will respond appropriately. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



614 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 1998 

Inquiry Into Channel Lake 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My questions this 
afternoon are for the minister responsible for CIC (Crown 
Investments Corporation). Mr. Minister, yesterday you said that 
the problems with the Channel Lake deal were never raised at 
the November 6 board meeting which you chaired. The 
evidence shows that that simply isn’t the case. 
 
Document no. 900 is an information item that went to the 
November 6 board meeting outlining the Channel Lake sale, the 
trading losses, and the prospects for legal action against Lawrie 
Portigal. Mr. Minister, you chaired that meeting and you were 
aware of the information that was presented. You were in on the 
discussion that occurred according to Jack Messer’s sworn 
testimony, and yet you said the issue was never raised. 
 
Mr. Minister, why did you make that statement when it simply 
isn’t the case, simply isn’t true? Will you now admit that you 
knew about the Channel . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Now the hon. member is coming 
very, very close to being directly in contradiction of the rules of 
parliamentary procedure and I will ask him to withdraw that 
remark and rephrase it and go directly to his question. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would withdraw that 
remark. Mr. Minister, why did you make that statement when it 
now appears that that is not the case? Will you now admit that 
you knew about the Channel Lake fiasco all along and that you 
participated in its cover-up? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I say again, being the 
minister who tabled on the second day of the Assembly, a 
110-page document outlining in great detail all of the issues 
about Channel Lake, it’s very difficult for the member from 
Kindersley with a straight face to stand in the House and say 
that somehow we covered this issue up. 
 
The fact of the matter is that the document they referred to, the 
information item, I reviewed the agenda for that particular 
board meeting. I don’t find it on the agenda. There’s nothing in 
the minutes, nothing in the minutes that relate to it. 
 
I say to the member opposite, if there was a discussion under 
the president’s report, it didn’t happen with this document in 
front of us. I’ve checked my records; I didn’t have the 
document at the time. If there was a discussion under the 
president’s report, it didn’t raise any flags with me. 
 
But I want to come back to the member opposite and say that 
we prepared for the Assembly two important documents. One 
called the Deloitte Touche report, which interviewed many of 
the same people that your inquiry will now re-interview. And I 
would expect Mr. Messer, in dealing with the Deloitte Touche 
people, gave them the same statements he’s giving now. And so 
for you to come here and say there’s a whole bunch of new 
information isn’t accurate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Jack Messer also said 
that the details of the Channel Lake fiasco were a matter of 

record with CIC. A memo from Mike Shaw of CIC supports 
what Mr. Messer is saying. He has listed a number of 
SaskPower documents that were provided to CIC. This includes 
all SaskPower board documents dealing with the sale of 
Channel Lake, including the June 20 meeting where the botched 
sale was discussed. 
 
Mr. Minister, all of this information was provided to CIC. You 
were on the board of CIC prior to June 27 and you were the 
Minister of CIC after June 27, yet you say none of this 
information was ever brought to your attention. Well why not? 
Why didn’t your CIC officials raise Channel Lake with you? Or 
did they simply raise it and then you covered it up? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I say to the member opposite that 
this is the most amazing cover-up that’s ever occurred in the 
province of Saskatchewan, where the government brings to the 
Assembly two documents that outline in great detail — in great 
detail — what happened with Channel Lake. And then tables in 
the committee a thousand documents, including the one you 
bring here today, that we tabled, and say somehow we’re 
covering up. 
 
I say again to the member opposite, what I have said clearly is 
that I was not briefed by my officials on Channel Lake. And to 
that end Mr. Messer indicated today that he did not brief me. If 
you were being truthful here you would say that. You would 
say that Mr. Messer . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. Now on the same 
matter that I previously brought to the attention to the hon. 
member from Kindersley, I ask the hon. minister to withdraw 
his last remark and wrap up his response. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I say to the member 
opposite that . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I ask the minister to withdraw the remark and 
then wrap up his response. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I withdraw the remarks that the 
member opposite was being untruthful. And I say to him this, 
that if you read, read the document, you will read on page no. 
22, the documentation presented to the board of SaskPower 
was, at a critical juncture, incomplete to the point where the 
board was not being effectively informed by written material. 
 
I say to you also, Mr. Messer said today he didn’t brief me. 
That’s where we’re at; that’s where the document comes in. If 
you would have read this five weeks ago you could have saved 
yourself a great deal of difficulty. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Minister, you’re right about one thing. This 
is indeed an amazing cover-up. Let’s get this all, let’s get this 
all straight. You’re saying that in six months nobody every 
briefed you on this entire mess. Your SaskPower officials never 
briefed you; your CIC officials never briefed you; your own 
cabinet colleague never briefed you on this. Why not? Why do 
you think they didn’t brief you? This is now the biggest scandal 



April 16, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 615 

your government is ever faced with, and now you’re saying that 
your own cabinet colleague sitting right over there didn’t brief 
you on this entire matter. Mr. Messer even believed that the 
former minister did brief you on this entire situation. 
 
Mr. Minister, were you — let’s just try and get this down 
unequivocally — were you ever briefed on the botched Channel 
Lake sale by the former minister? And if not, was this not a 
huge breach of his responsibility as the minister responsible at 
that time? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — To the member opposite, I’m not 
sure that he was in the committee today, but if he was he would 
have heard Mr. Messer say that he did not brief me — that’s 
what he said, that’s what he said. And I want to say to you, as it 
relates to the document that says that proper material and 
incomplete material was given to the board by officials in 
SaskPower, it’s my understanding that all of those officials will 
appear before the committee and your questions should be put 
to them as it relates to materials given to the board, because 
that’s why we’re having the inquiry. 
 
But I would urge you, as I did yesterday, after hearing from half 
of one witness, don’t jump to a whole bunch of conclusions. 
Let’s do the interviews, let’s do the process, and at the end is 
when we should come to conclusions in that committee. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hospital Bed Reductions in Swift Current 
 

Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
latest health care fire is heating up in Swift Current where the 
district board’s CEO (chief executive officer) has announced 
that the number of hospital beds at the city’s regional hospital 
may be slashed from 134 down to 80. 
 
Mr. Premier, the doctors weren’t even consulted about this 
possible elimination of 54 beds. This sparked an emergency 
meeting of Swift Current physicians Tuesday night and they’re 
preparing to do whatever they must to oppose this move. 
 
I want to know, Mr. Premier, what are you going to do to 
oppose this move? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I think that the member 
opposite needs to give consideration . . . He recognizes how the 
system works today and that is that the district health boards, 
that the district health boards in the province are responsible for 
making decisions based on the needs that they have in their 
community. I’m not informed or advised, Mr. Speaker, 
currently as to the kinds of decisions that the district health 
board is making in respect to meeting the needs of the Swift 
Current area. 
 
And so I say to the member opposite that if in fact he knows 
some information about what the district health board is doing, 
then he recognizes that the process is working, because the 
responsibilities of the district health board are the decisions 
around health care, are with the district health board. And if he 
has some information that relates to decisions that are being 

made in the district, I’d be happy that he shares those with me 
because those are decisions the district health board would be 
making. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Speaker, either the Minister of Health 
and the Premier don’t understand the extent of the problem, or 
they simply don’t care. 
 
Mr. Premier, if the number of beds in Swift Current drops 
below the 100 mark, the Swift Current Regional Hospital will 
lose its status as a regional centre. That means it will be almost 
impossible to retain or attract specialists and the services they 
provide. 
 
Mr. Premier, you have gutted our health care system in our 
smaller towns and regional centres and cities. You’re the one to 
blame for the fact that there’s “no vacancy” signs hanging 
above our hospitals here in Regina. 
 
Mr. Premier, what immediate action will you take to prevent 
these bed closures at the Swift Current Regional Hospital and 
what are you going to do today to ensure its status as a regional 
facility is not in jeopardy? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to just take a moment 
here to talk about the direction that the member opposite 
continues to take when he talks about health care. Because I’ve 
now witnessed him, Mr. Speaker, on a couple of occasions 
standing up in the House and recently at a meeting — a public 
meeting in Assiniboia — where the member opposite continues 
to make statements which are absolutely and totally false and 
inaccurate. 
 
The member opposite makes comments like: about the Regina 
Health District, that we’re going to lose beds in the Regina 
Health District; at the Plains Health Centre, that we’re going to 
reduce and there’s going to be staff losses. We’re not going to 
see any bed reductions in Regina. We’re not going to see any 
staff reductions in Regina. We’re not going to see further 
financial cuts to the district of Regina. 
 
And I say to the member opposite he needs to stop 
fearmongering around the province of Saskatchewan, using his 
Liberal politics to try to convince people in this province that 
we have a crisis. There’s only one crisis in this province, Mr. 
Speaker, and it’s over there in the Liberal caucus. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Speaker, what’s amazing about that 
comment is that the Health minister is saying we’re 
fearmongering. 
 
Well I would ask that he apologize for saying that. The 
Southwest Booster, the papers around this province, the three or 
four families that have come to this legislature each and every 
day for health care, they’re not here to fearmonger, Mr. Health 
Minister, and Mr. Premier. They’re here because you have let 
them down. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just last week the Premier told an NDP 



616 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 1998 

fund-raising crowd in Swift Current that concerns about the 
health care system are unfounded. He told the people that health 
care remains a top priority. These are all quotes, Mr. Minister: 
“but that the renewal process is built on a good, solid basis.” 
Mr. Premier, you told your New Democrat crowd, and I quote, 
that, “Swift Current is a very, very important centre of medical 
care for the south-west.” 
 
Mr. Premier, here is your chance to put your foot down and 
ensure that the quality of health care in the south-west doesn’t 
deteriorate any further. You sell yourself as the saviour of 
medicare . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. The hon. member has been 
extremely lengthy in his preamble and I’ll ask him to go now 
directly — order — I’ll ask him now to go directly to his 
question. Order. I’ll ask the hon. member to go directly to his 
question. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Premier, will you stand up today and 
show some leadership and be a Premier and step in and make 
sure that these 54 beds aren’t pulled out of Swift Current? Do 
what’s right. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, to the member opposite, 
when he talks about showing leadership in this country around 
health care, he needs to recognize what’s happened in this 
province, Mr. Speaker. He needs to look at what’s happened in 
this province. 
 
Today we spend $1.72 billion in health care, the largest 
financial contribution to health care in the history of this 
province, Mr. Speaker — the largest. Every penny of that health 
care funding, Mr. Speaker, is made up by and large by the 
provincial government. Fifty-five . . . or 70 per cent of that 
funding today, Mr. Speaker, is made up by the people of 
Saskatchewan. We fund health care. 
 
Now if the member would have been listening last June, had he 
been listening last June when the federal Minister of Health 
stood up in Vancouver, speaking to the doctors across Canada, 
he said this, Mr. Speaker. He said to the doctors there that 
provinces are coping with less money today than they ever have 
because of the federal cut-backs. 
 
And I say to the member opposite today, we spend $1.72 billion 
in health care in this province. We have better services, we’ve 
got stronger physician services, we have the best health care 
service to the province in the country today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Inquiry into Channel Lake 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, last week I asked the Premier if it 
was true that he had intervened because he was unhappy that 
Lawrence Portigal, the man Saskatchewan taxpayers had 
already paid a $327,000 severance package to, was back on the 
payroll of SaskPower. 
 
The Premier said he couldn’t remember for sure. He said he 

hadn’t told Mr. Messer to get rid of Portigal in 1996, to the best 
of his recollection. Today Mr. Messer testified that he believes 
he saw a memo, authored by the Premier, expressing his 
displeasure at Portigal being on the payroll. 
 
Will the Premier concede that it is important for him to come to 
the inquiry to explain this matter to us. Will the Premier instruct 
his members to now vote to add his name to the list of 
witnesses? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, what I have learned, 
listening to this hon. member and his questions, is that I will not 
rely on his statements and I’ll rely on what the written transcript 
of what the evidence was this morning. Because the member 
gets up and says that there is a memorandum, according to Mr. 
Messer as he testified, from the Premier’s office. And I’ll check 
the transcript to see whether that’s true or not. Because it is not 
true by my information, but I haven’t checked the transcript. 
 
Mr. Messer said twice, as I am informed, that I did not speak to 
him about Lawrie Portigal. And said on the third occasion there 
may have been a document, not a Premier’s document, but a 
document. I don’t know what he was referring to. You ask Mr. 
Messer what he was referring to. But I repeat to you again what 
I said to you again last week, and please stick to the truth and 
the facts. I do not micromanage. This is a decision made by Mr. 
Messer, and what I said last week is still my position today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, documents filed with the inquiry 
show that as early as March 1997, even before the last-minute 
switch that cost us $5 million, the board had suspicions about 
Portigal. 
 
Portigal was asked point blank by the board if there was 
anything in the Channel Lake sale deal, in it for him personally. 
That was back in March. The fact that so many people had 
reservations about Mr. Portigal, apparently including the 
Premier, is something that has to be looked into. 
 
Did the Premier know that the plan to sell Channel Lake was in 
order to cover up the trading losses? Why was the Premier 
worried about Mr. Portigal? What did he say in this regard? 
Will the Premier undertake to locate the document referred to 
by Mr. Messer today, and will he file it with the inquiry? Will 
the Premier come to the inquiry and bring the documents with 
him and submit to questions to try and clear up this matter? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, again I will note with 
care the question that this member has put, who I think now has 
established a reputation in the House of being somewhat loose 
with the facts in his questioning and the interpretation as against 
the sworn testimony. 
 
And I repeat to the hon. member opposite what I’ve said before 
with respect to the situation. What I told him a week ago, I 
repeat again today, with respect to Mr. Lawrie Portigal. That is 
the situation. There is no documentation. The documentation 
that comes from our office, you have. 
 



April 16, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 617 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Local Telephone Service Subsidization 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today, Mr. 
Speaker, I’d like to address a question to the minister in charge 
of SaskTel. Mr. Minister, I’ll quote for you very briefly from a 
letter I got from a constituent which goes as follows: 
 

The Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications, 
CRTC, is reviewing whether or to what extent rural and 
remote telephone services should continue to be subsidized 
in the province. The loss of this subsidy would mean local 
telephone, local rates in rural Saskatchewan could increase 
five times or more at some point in the future. 
 

Mr. Minister, is it your intention to represent the province at 
these hearings? Is it your intention to go along with this type of 
increase in the future? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I think the question 
raised by the member from Maple Creek . . . or from Cypress is 
a very important question because it speaks to the issue of rural 
telecommunications not only in Saskatchewan, but right across 
Canada. 
 
And as the member has clearly indicated, if we were to go to a 
fully competitive market for telephones, what would happen 
without a continuation of cross-subsidization of the system, as 
you say, you would see rates increase by a hundred, two 
hundred or three hundred per cent. That’s not only in 
Saskatchewan but that’s in rural Canada. 
 
What we have going on at the present time are hearings by the 
CRTC. I think the hearings will be held in Saskatchewan in 
Prince Albert. I’m not sure of the date, but my colleague from 
Rosetown, the member of Intergovernmental Affairs, is 
working on this file. 
 
But I would urge all members, all members, to take the same 
interest, especially rural members, in this item as the member 
from Cypress Hills. Because these hearings will be crucially 
important, and I would urge the caucus — the Conservative 
caucus, the Liberal caucus — to prepare briefs, to defend rural 
Saskatchewan, so that we avoid the increases that will occur if 
we don’t fight this proposal by the CRTC. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A supplemental to 
the same minister. Minister, it does state in this memo that I 
received from my constituent, that your government is not 
compelled by the CRTC rulings, but however it does say that 
key issues to be considered include determining whether 
telephone services to rural and remote areas should be 
subsidized and to determining the appropriate level of subsidy 
that should be examined and the mechanisms that the subsidy 
should be done under. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, if you don’t go there and fight against it, you 
are sort of dragged into it, is what it’s saying. And my 
constituent is saying that her bill will go up from $16 plus the 
$4, which is $20 now, by 500 per cent, which would be a 

hundred dollars, without ever making one phone call. Are you 
prepared to say no, we are not going to do this. Are you 
prepared to give that commitment today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I say to the member 
opposite that we will be there and will be presenting to say that 
the ability for rural Saskatchewan, rural Canada, to survive is 
very dependent on the ability to have some cross-subsidization 
whereby the most remote areas of our province and those with 
the smaller communities are not put at the vagary of the huge 
increases that would occur. 
 
And I’ve just been handed a note that says the hearings will be 
held at the Marlboro Hotel conference centre in Prince Albert. 
And the fact of the matter is, I think that it probably would be a 
good occasion that, in advance to these hearings held on 
Tuesday, June 2, that there would be a resolution put by the 
Assembly. 
 
And I would urge you, having raised it, you have an opportunity 
to second the motion. I would have our minister raise it in the 
very near future so we could go as a unified voice to those 
hearings and speak clearly on behalf of rural members, rural 
people in Saskatchewan, but I think continue the leadership role 
of rural Canada where our Premier and our legislature could 
play that role. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 6 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Sonntag that Bill No. 6 — The Cattle 
Marketing Deductions Act, 1998, be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll be relatively brief in 
my remarks regarding this particular item. 
 
The Minister of Agriculture was certainly brief in his remarks 
surrounding the whole situation with cattle marketing in 
Saskatchewan deductions Act. The minister’s remarks, I don’t 
think dealt with the main aspects of the Bill. We fully do expect 
that the minister would want to take the opportunity to speak to 
the Bill, as it is relative to his department; at least I think at this 
point it still is. 
 
I’m a little surprised that you didn’t make yourself available to 
enter into this debate. At any rate, I think we are well aware of 
the importance that livestock plays in Saskatchewan. It’s an 
industry that is changing, no doubt. 
 
New types of livestock unheard of just a few years ago, such as 
bison and elk, are becoming more common in Saskatchewan, in 
addition to all the exotic brands of cattle that are now in 
Saskatchewan. We are encouraged by this type of 



618 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 1998 

diversification for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Innovation of course, is the key to continued growth within the 
livestock industry. Of course part of this innovation is the 
ability to fund research and development projects. That’s the 
reason why there is a check-off. The industry supports a 
check-off and I, along with the Saskatchewan Party members, 
also respect their opinion in this area. It is important that we 
continue to advance the livestock industry through better 
scientific methods. That’s what this money, I understand, is to 
be used for, and we support it for that reason. 
 
While the government may be slow to see the value of changes 
in this and other areas of the agricultural industry, we certainly 
see the benefits. The government gives groups such as the elk 
breeders the bureaucratic run-around as far as which department 
governs them. This is one of the fastest growing sectors of our 
livestock economy, but so far the government has refused to 
classify elk as livestock. I think when we get to Ag estimates 
we’ll certainly have more to say about that subject. Meanwhile 
the government gets itself in bureaucratic knots; the livestock 
industry goes about business efficiently and effectively. And 
they do it in spite of I think, Mr. Speaker, the government 
opposite. 
 
Now let me be clear that we understand that the industry itself 
asked for these changes to the legislation, and had input into 
these changes. Because of that we will support the Bill that is 
before us and will not hold it up for too long. But as the official 
opposition, I think it’s incumbent upon us to raise some of the 
concerns that any legislation that is presented for consideration 
. . . Many of the concerns I have are not necessarily specific to 
this Bill. As I’ve said, we support this Bill, but it is something 
that we see as a bit of a pattern with this government and its 
legislation. 
 
The livestock industry supports the automatic check-off, as has 
been stated, and therefore we will bow to their wisdom and 
support the Bill without hesitation. However we will support 
the continuance of the check-off for research, development, and 
promotion of livestock industry. 
 
There are a few governance issues that I think we should speak 
about, and these really don’t apply specifically to Bill 6, but 
rather to many Bills that we have seen come down from this 
government since 1991. Once again we see some very specific 
wording that is contained in the old Act removed in this new 
Bill, and removed completely out of regulation . . . or to 
regulations. 
 
This is a clever way for this government . . . that this 
government has hit upon to change laws of this province 
without ever having to come before the scrutiny of the 
legislature. And quite frankly, I guess who could really blame 
them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
If you’ll allow a slight but pertinent digression, Mr. Speaker, I 
have to say that we believe that this is an area that should be of 
great concern to all legislatures — all legislators — when we 
see a government that wants to continue to move debate away 
from the legislature into either committees, where it can be 
hidden, or into regulations, where the government only, through 
order in council, can make changes. And I think we should be 

. . . all legislators should have reason to be concerned about that 
persistent trend that this government has embarked upon over 
the last number of years. 
 
As I said, Mr. Speaker, it’s important to note that the livestock 
industry is supportive of this piece of legislation. Many of my 
friends and associates that I know in the livestock industry have 
put a lot of effort and work into promotion of the livestock 
sector in Saskatchewan. And you can only . . . you only have to 
think about the number of trade missions that have involved 
cattle producers and other livestock industry people all over 
North America, and indeed all over the world, with respect to 
promotion of agricultural products and livestock products out of 
Saskatchewan to the rest of the world. 
 
And we certainly support, when it comes to those efforts, the 
efforts of the cattle producers of Saskatchewan in embarking 
upon those types of promotional activities and educational 
activities for people all over the world. They’ve had an industry 
develop in terms of promotion. They’ve had an industry 
develop in terms of all kinds of things related to the livestock 
industry, whether it is exports of, direct exports of the product 
of cattle, or direct exports of semen; other related activities in 
the agriculture and livestock industries are extremely important. 
 
We realize certainly in opposition that the industry has a great 
deal of work ahead of it — yes. But it has also embarked upon 
this with the full knowledge and understanding that they are 
willing to take it on. They are prepared to take it on and they’ve 
done a very good job in the past. 
 
Research dollars, as we all know in this legislature, return 
many, many times in investment back to the province of 
Saskatchewan. And we can see that in the advances that we’ve 
seen in the livestock sector — the cattle sector particularly with 
relevance to this Bill. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we see no reason to hold this piece of 
legislation. The cattle industry, as we know — we’ve spoken to 
them — is supportive of this piece of legislation. For that 
reason, we think that if cattle people across Saskatchewan are 
supportive of it we see absolutely no reason to object to the 
legislation. 
 
We object to this government, in some respects though, moving 
too much of what we consider debatable legislation into 
regulations. We’d preferred to have opportunity, as I think is 
right, to have opportunity to speak to the issues rather than just 
watching this government pass orders in councils on an almost 
daily basis. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, as I said, we see no reason to hold this piece 
of legislation and would be prepared, if we have any more 
questions, to answer them in committee when we get to that 
stage. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 5 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Sonntag that Bill No. 5 — The Animal 



April 16, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 619 

Products Amendment Act, 1998 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This piece of 
legislation is yet another in a long series of very minor in 
nature, technical of type Bills that are before us in this session. 
In our province we’re facing all kinds of challenges, and it 
seems a little bit ironic that this is about all that we’ve seen in 
terms of legislation from this government at this point in this 
session. 
 
This particular piece of legislation deals with The Animal 
Products Amendment Act, of which there’s very little in it that 
we see of concern. The minister again hasn’t spoken in any 
great length about this piece of legislation. But we see, as I said, 
very little concern about the piece of legislation and would ask 
any further questions that we might have in committee. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
(1430) 

Bill No. 7 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Sonntag that Bill No. 7 — The 
Pastures Act be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On the whole our 
caucus finds nothing objectionable about this piece of 
legislation. Again it’s another more or less housekeeping type 
of change to legislation that comes before us today. Its main 
intent, as we understand it, as the minister has stated at least, is 
to simplify the legislation, the regulation of community pastures 
in the province. 
 
As has been pointed out, pastures are currently under the 
jurisdiction of the agriculture development group and the 
adjustment Act and The Department of Agriculture Act. It 
should also be noted that many aspects and definitions 
pertaining to pastures are contained in The Provincial Lands 
Act as well. Plus the definitions in this Act make reference to 
the Indian bands as defined in the Indian Act. 
 
And let’s not forget about the way in which this program has 
been bumped around to different departments, Mr. Speaker. 
From various branches in Ag and Food over to Rural 
Development and then to the pastures branch, back again to Ag 
and Food. This kind of bureaucratic shell game underscores the 
public’s frustration, I think, with big government. 
 
Farmers, like businessmen throughout the province, so often 
find they’re caught in an endless web of red tape whenever they 
want to deal with government. And what, and what good in the 
end does all of this do? What does this all serve? As far as I can 
see, the only people who benefit are the officials in the 
government who are pursuing some sort of empire-building 
exercise. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we seem to be spending an inordinate amount of 
time in the Assembly dealing with Bills that do nothing but shift 
commas in old legislation or that reshuffle responsibilities from 
one part of the bureaucracy to another. And this is a pretty 
classic example of that, Mr. Speaker. We think that this should 

stop. We as members have got to start looking at some 
legislation and asking the question, what would happen if we 
didn’t pass this legislation. 
 
In this case, the answer would be, absolutely nothing, Mr. 
Speaker. Nothing would happen if this legislation passes and 
nothing would happen if it doesn’t pass. So we don’t see a 
whole lot of reason to hold it up but we also don’t see a whole 
lot of reason to pass it. And I think that’s the concern that 
people all over Saskatchewan are expressing with members, I 
would hope with members of the government. They’re certainly 
expressing it with members of the official opposition. 
 
We think that there needs to be a bringing of more discipline to 
the public service when it comes to these types of legislation. 
We have to start emphasizing the servant part of civil servants a 
little more. Then maybe we wouldn’t be buried under the 
burden of all of these meaningless Bills that continually are put 
before us. 
 
And I think that one of these areas of government, the NDP has 
a very particular weakness in this area. Well let’s face it, the 
NDP has pretty much become a bureaucracy type of political 
party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said, this piece of legislation, in spite of the 
fact that it won’t make one iota of difference whether we pass it 
or don’t pass it, we see little reason to hold it up. But if there is 
any further questions we will be asking them in committee. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 8 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Sonntag that Bill No. 8 — The Stray 
Animals Amendment Act, 1998 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very happy to 
speak to Bill No. 8, just another in a long line of vitally 
important, earth-shattering pieces of legislation that have been 
brought before this House so far this session. 
 
On the surface, Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t appear that there’s very 
much in this legislation that we would have a major concern 
with, Mr. Speaker. Again the government tells us that an update 
to The Stray Animals Act was requested by such groups as 
SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) and 
the Saskatchewan Stock Growers’ Association. 
 
It appears the Minister of Agriculture is having a little bit of 
difficulty following this afternoon, Mr. Speaker. We’re dealing 
with Bill No. 8, The Stray Animals Act, which you presented to 
the legislature for consideration of this House. 
 
The first thing that I noticed in this Bill, it has been changed to 
reflect the changing nature of the livestock industry in 
Saskatchewan. As we all know and as we’ve discussed in Bill 
No. 6 previously, the livestock industry in Saskatchewan has 
changed a great deal in a relatively short period of time. 
 
No longer are we simply discussing cattle and horses when we 



620 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 1998 

are talking about livestock in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
There is a much . . . a very large specialized livestock industry 
in Saskatchewan now that includes bison, wild boar, elk, and 
numerous other kinds of animals that weren’t at one time 
considered sort of domesticated livestock. But we’ve seen 
producers in a lot of cases looking for diversification 
opportunities to enhance their bottom line on their farming or 
ranching operations. 
 
The discussions that we have had with the Saskatchewan Elk 
Breeder’s Association, we are told that the government doesn’t 
want to put elk under the Department of Agriculture. And we’ll 
have some questions to be asking the minister, and certainly the 
minister responsible for Environment when we get to their 
estimates, with respect to that. 
 
We think that if you’re going to include other types of what 
might have been considered at one time exotic livestock in the 
Department of Ag, certainly elk would appear to be one that 
should be included in that department as well. 
 
It’s confusing, I think, to producers across Saskatchewan, they 
domesticate formerly exotic animals and that they are not 
included in the Department of Agriculture as other ones in the 
past have been. 
 
Much to the chagrin of those involved, this fast growing 
industry, SERM (Saskatchewan Environment and Resource 
Management) seems to have a lot of control in this situation. 
The elk breeders’ association believes it’s a fight between the 
bureaucrats in the two different departments, and it appears that 
SERM has a better group of fighters, Mr. Speaker, because they 
seem to be winning the day. At any rate, we’ll get into those 
questions in estimates of those departments. 
 
The current Stray Animals Act, as I’ve said, we have no 
fundamental problems with it. However, I want to make some 
general comments on the potential areas of concern that are 
addressed in the legislation that can be more closely scrutinized 
in the Committee of the Whole. 
 
First and foremost, we want the assurances that provisions of 
this Bill do not put an undue burden on local government. As 
we’re well aware, over the last few years this government has 
hammered municipalities over and over again with constant 
downloading. Revenue- sharing grants have literally 
disappeared. Municipalities have been left without adequate 
funding to maintain services. 
 
The rural municipalities do not have adequate funds to build or 
maintain roads, even though these roads are under a great deal 
of stress due to the province’s inattention and disinterest in 
maintaining safe highways in Saskatchewan. 
 
And you only have to think back of this government’s 
intentions a few years ago to cultivate up the highways. The 
minister responsible for Highways at that time was going to, 
was going to turn a large part of the highway network in 
Saskatchewan back to gravel. You can’t help but think that that 
was a major step backwards in direct . . . directly opposite to 
what most other provinces are doing — Alberta particularly. 
Mr. Speaker, coming from Alberta, you would know that the 
highways in that province are in a great deal of better condition 

than we see here. 
 
The Speaker: — I suspect the hon. member for Kindersley will 
welcome interruption, first of all, drawing to his attention that 
he’s not to include the Chair in debate, and secondly, reminding 
him that the Bill before us is The Stray Animals Amendment 
Act and I’m sure that he’ll want to direct his remarks to the Bill 
that’s before the House. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I assumed you 
would be aware of that. These assurance . . . we need assurances 
with respect to this piece of legislation, Mr. Minister of 
Agriculture, that it will not result in higher costs at the local 
government, municipal government area. 
 
We recognize however, the importance of having an efficient 
method of dealing with stray animals in the country. They do 
pose a safety hazard for those in the immediate area. People 
have enough trouble coping with the number of deer; they 
shouldn’t have to worry about loose cattle, horses, and elk or 
wild boar wandering around or getting in their path as you drive 
over the rough country roads or pothole-infested highways of 
this province. However, the intent of this Bill is to improve the 
handling of stray animals that may be roaming the countryside 
at any given point in time. 
 
So we would have no objection to seeing this piece of 
legislation moving to committee and we’d be prepared to ask all 
of the very important questions at that point. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 10 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. MacKinnon that Bill No. 10 — The 
Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation Amendment Act, 
1998 be now read a second time. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the Bill 
before us, An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Opportunities 
Corporation Act, seems at first glance to be innocent enough. 
The minister, in presenting the Bill, even says some of the right 
things. She talks about job creation, investment in the future, 
and modernization of the economy, and so on. The minister has 
obviously been listening to the opposition because she wouldn’t 
understand what’s really being said. 
 
But my first question, Mr. Speaker, is why, why are we being 
asked to give carte blanche agreement to SOCO (Saskatchewan 
Opportunities Corporation) to borrow $150 million? Is it 
exclusively to build a recreation park in Regina? And if so, why 
doesn’t the proposed amendment, or for that matter the 1997 
amendment giving SOCO the first $100 million, say exactly 
that? 
 
The proposed amendment limits the use of these borrowed 
funds to capital construction projects only. I find this interesting 
because in May 1994 the then minister in charge of SOCO said, 
the other thing that will change with this property division 
within SEDCO (Saskatchewan Economic Development 
Corporation), which had been built up over the years to have a 



April 16, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 621 

whole array of property, some buildings in Regina, Saskatoon, 
industrial parks in many of our small communities, 
Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation will not have a 
properties division and this will be a significant, a very 
significant change from where we were in the past. 
 
Now all of a sudden we’re being asked to spend $150 million 
on capital construction projects. I’m not sure, Mr. Minister, if 
the people in Saskatchewan realize that SOCO, in the last few 
years, from the General Revenue Fund, have put in $21.5 
million. This is from SOCO, from this department that was set 
up by the government to replace what they obviously hated, 
SEDCO, and now we’ve spent $21 million of taxpayers’ dollars 
to actually set up another brother of SEDCO. 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. Speaker, this leaves the legislation open to all sorts of 
potential misuse by this or other successive governments; this 
sort of misuse, Mr. Speaker, on which the government has 
expounded endlessly; this sort of misuse that the very creation 
of SOCO was supposed to prevent from happening — but here 
it is happening, Mr. Speaker. The door is wide open, wide open 
for governments to build edifices to their own lack of planning 
and foresight. 
 
But never mind. The minister says, trust me. The $50 million 
will only be used as I say, despite what the legislation says. Last 
year the previous minister in effect said the same thing — trust 
me. I only need a hundred million dollars and it’ll only be used 
to do as I say it will; $100 million here, another $50 million 
some place else, $5 million everywhere. It’s no big deal, right? 
That’s what the previous minister said. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it might not be a big deal to the members 
opposite and to the government members, but it is a big deal to 
us. To the people of Kelvington-Wadena, $5 million is a lot of 
money; $5 million lost in Channel Lake is a very big deal to the 
people of Rose Valley, who lost their hospital last year. 
 
It’s a very big deal to the people of Englefeld, who lost their 
school last year. And it’s a very big deal to the RMs (rural 
municipality), who can see no daylight at all on how they’re 
going to maintain their road system. It’s a very big deal to the 
small businesses who have either already folded and moved 
away to less oppressive tax systems or being forced to seriously 
consider that. And, Mr. Speaker, if $5 million is a big deal, then 
$150 million is 30 times a bigger deal. 
 
Okay, I agree R&D (research and development) parks could be 
a good idea. The minister points to the success of Innovation 
Place in Saskatoon. Good and well. Indeed some good things 
have come from it and the foresight of the people who put it 
there. It does not necessarily follow, as the minister suggests, 
that this guarantees the success of more of them, more R&D 
parks, especially when we don’t know how many of them the 
minister is contemplating. 
 
Using this kind of logic, if one R&D park is good, 27 of them 
should be 27 times as good. But I don’t think so, not necessarily 
anyway. 
 
What we have to ask this government is, where’s the plan. 

Where’s the list of pre-committed tenants? Where’s the money 
going to be spent? Are we going to be asked to borrow another 
no-big-deal $50 million next year? The people of 
Kelvington-Wadena need answers to these kind of questions 
before they’ll support this Bill. 
 
And then, Mr. Speaker, there’s the question of the debt itself. 
The people of this province have been told for the past seven 
years, the debt is a very bad thing. They’ve been told that 
borrowing is evil and paying down this existing debt is the only 
priorities at the expense of all other priorities. Now today we 
are being asked to support a Bill to authorize the borrowing of a 
hundred and fifty million dollars with nothing but just vague 
justifications and with no real, supportable plans. 
 
I don’t happen to believe that borrowing money is intrinsically 
evil. Yes of course the people of the province have a right to 
expect their government to invest in their future. What is wrong 
however, is the sort of trust me, I know what’s good for you 
approach. How or why should the people of Saskatchewan trust 
a government with $150 million when the ministers of that 
government openly and blatantly categorize $5 million as no 
big deal? 
 
Show us the plan, Madam Minister. Show us the business plan 
that justifies the investment. Show us the controls that eliminate 
the misuse of money by either this or future governments. Show 
us that some thought has been given to whether this is truly the 
proper priority in use of limited resources. And show us that the 
projects contemplated fit into some kind of long-term strategy, 
any kind of a plan for the future that this government may have. 
That’s what the people are asking for. 
 
And lastly, Mr. Speaker, I would ask that the minister show us 
that she has an understanding that the interest charges on $150 
million will accumulate whether or not this government has a 
plan. There will be interest. 
 
Until the people of Kelvington-Wadena have answers to all of 
these questions, I suggest that we adjourn debate on this Bill. I 
move that this debate be adjourned. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 18 — The Pharmacy Amendment Act, 1998 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I rise today to move second reading of The Pharmacy 
Amendment Act, 1998. 
 
In 1996 a new Pharmacy Act was passed to better regulate 
pharmacists and retail pharmacies in Saskatchewan. The Act 
was proclaimed on January 1 following development of the 
necessary drug schedule regulations and bylaws. 
 
In the course of developing the regulations, it became apparent 
to the Saskatchewan Pharmaceutical Association and 
Saskatchewan Health that there was a deficiency in the original 
Act. While the Pharmacy Act allowed for drug schedules to be 
established and regulations, it did not allow for change to those 
schedules to be made automatically. 



622 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 1998 

The drug schedules in the regulations set out the conditions of 
sale for various drugs. For instance, there are some drugs, such 
as prescription drugs, which should only be sold by a 
pharmacist. Some non-prescription drugs also pose a health risk 
and need to be kept behind the counters so the pharmacist can 
advise the customer about the risks. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Pharmacy Amendment Act, 1998 will ensure 
that changes to federal drug regulations will be automatically 
reflected by the drug schedules pursuant to The Pharmacy Act. 
In this way it will not be necessary for the Saskatchewan 
Pharmaceutical Association to file numerous bylaw 
amendments reflecting changes to the narcotic control 
regulations of Canada and the food and drug regulations of 
Canada. 
 
It will also ensure that when a drug changes status, such as 
deletion from the narcotic control regulations, it is then placed 
on an appropriate alternative schedule. In this way the public is 
better protected from drugs that may cause potential harm. The 
Saskatchewan Pharmaceutical Association is supportive of that 
amendment. 
 
With this, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of 
The Pharmacy Amendment Act, 1998. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in light of 
the comments made by the Government House Leader in 
regards to The Act to amend the Pharmacy Act, Bill No. 18, as 
we’ve reviewed this piece of legislation, there really doesn’t 
appear to be a lot in the legislation other than conforming to 
federal regulations and bringing the drug Act in this province, 
The Pharmacy Act in this province, into guidelines with the 
federal Act and certainly making sure it’s compatible and meets 
all the requirements of the federal Act. 
 
And this seems to be a straightforward, appears to be a 
straightforward piece of legislation. And with that in mind, I 
don’t see any reason why we should even hold it up, but allow 
it to go to committee. If there are other questions to be raised, 
we’ll certainly raise them in committee. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 19 — The Physical Therapists Act, 1998 
 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I rise today to move second reading of The Physical 
Therapists Act, 1998. 
 
For the past two years we’ve been consulting with the 
Saskatchewan College of Physical Therapists to develop this 
new Act. The current Act is outdated and does not contain the 
necessary and standard provisions required in newer 
professional legislation. 
 
I’m pleased to say this new Act contains some very positive 
changes for both the profession and the people it serves. 
 
In 1997, Mr. Speaker, this government made similar changes to 
the legislation governing occupational therapists. The 
legislation will set out a clear and more effective process for 

responding to and resolving public concerns about physical 
therapists. The Act will also ensure flexibility in setting 
registration requirements and issuing licences. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this new Act will also ensure that physical 
therapists are accountable to the people they serve. The Act 
contains a number of updated public accountability measures 
that are standard in today’s professional legislation. 
 
For example, representatives of the public will be included on 
the college’s council and disciplinary committee. Disciplinary 
hearings will be open to the public and entire discipline . . . the 
entire discipline process will be transparent. This will enable 
the society to more effectively respond to public concerns 
should they arise. 
 
The Act will also require the association to file an annual report 
with the minister’s office. As well, bylaws which may impact 
the public will require the government’s approval. The approval 
process will allow for consultation with key stakeholders such 
as physicians, therapists, educators, and health districts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are some very positive changes, developed 
in close consultation with the profession. I believe this Act will 
serve physical therapists, their clients, and the province well 
into the future. 
 
I beg to inform the Assembly that His Honour the Lieutenant 
Governor, having been informed of the subject matter of the 
Bill, recommends it to the consideration of the Assembly, and I 
move that Bill No. 19, The Physical Therapists Act, 1998, be 
now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, while I 
was quite agreeable to move the previous Bill, The Pharmacy 
Act, into committee, and had given some consideration to 
possibly moving The Physical Therapists Act into committee as 
well, Bill No. 19, I have given second thought, listening to the 
comments made by the Government House Leader. Some of the 
thoughts that I have in regarding the Bill, while I believe the 
profession and the intent of the legislation deals with the 
number of concerns the physical therapists have had over the 
number of years and are attempting to address these concerns 
and certainly raise the profile of the profession, there’s some 
areas I think we need to take a little closer look at and just 
consult a bit more with the association to indeed understand 
how much they have had involvement in the establishment of 
this piece of legislation. 
 
One of the areas of concern I do have, and we just want to do 
some follow-up on, is the fact that the legislation removes the 
discretion of the minister to overturn disciplinary judgements. 
And while I don’t have a problem with that, Mr. Speaker, I 
think we need to look at the legislation a little more carefully. 
 
While we talk about appeals, I think one of the concerns I 
would have is we need to be assured that there is an avenue that 
people have to go to that may be somewhat removed from the 
profession itself; so that if disciplinary action is taken, people 
. . . or therapists themselves can feel quite confident that when 
disciplinary action is taken, that they’re being dealt with fairly. 
And from the minister’s comments, I’m not exactly sure if the 
appeal process will allow for that fairness. 



April 16, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 623 

As I understand it, the college itself will have their appeal 
committee in place and a person may find themselves dealing 
with their own colleagues and may feel somewhat intimidated 
in appealing a decision made by the association. So I think 
that’s where the original Act, in having the ministerial 
involvement, was trying to address that. But at the same time, 
why I think it’s important that ministers of the Crown not be 
involved, as certainly that becomes a political situation. 
 
But I think it’s important that there be an open and fair appeal 
process that at least allows for other involvement by other 
individuals on the appeal panel. And that’s one of the questions 
and areas that we’ll certainly want to look at and get some input 
and feedback from the therapists, the physical therapists 
themselves, as to how they would see this make-up of the 
appeal panel in order that everyone, anyone involved in the 
profession, can feel that they’re quite comfortable in raising 
appeals regarding decisions made by the therapists or by the 
college. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s appropriate that we take a moment 
to address this Bill a little more at length before we move it to 
committee. And with that in mind, I would move adjournment 
of debate on this Bill. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 15  The Gas Inspection Amendment Act, 1998 
 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to 
move second reading of The Gas Inspection Amendment Act, 
1998. 
 
Mr. Speaker, safety of the public is the major focus of this 
government. The gas inspection department has one of the most 
important mandates in that respect. These amendments are 
intended to strengthen that mandate. 
 
The first amendment is intended to facilitate the undertaking of 
routine maintenance on gas equipment. Mr. Speaker, there are 
important and very safe maintenance activities that individuals 
can perform on furnaces or other gas equipment. The gas 
inspection department wants to encourage this work to be done. 
The Act as now written requires that a gas permit be obtained 
before undertaking any maintenance work. This is not the 
intention. Therefore to make this clear and to encourage such 
work, we are proposing the amendment to subsection 2(o)(ii). 
 
(1500) 
 
The second amendment is intended to clarify the 
responsibilities relating to the activation of gas equipment. The 
Act now obligates the gas utility to activate newly installed 
equipment. With gas equipment becoming increasingly 
sophisticated and complex, the installing contractor, as a result 
of factory and other specialized training, is in a better position 
than the gas utility to undertake proper and safe activation. 
 
The amendment to subsection 13(3) will result in the installing 
contractor now being clearly more accountable for the total 
installation of gas equipment, including its proper activation. 
 
The final amendment, to subsection 23(3), is intended to give 

gas inspectors clear and broader authority to take appropriate 
action to correct and deal with hazards regardless of their cause. 
This is very important if hazardous situations are to be 
addressed in a timely and appropriate manner. Without the 
amendment there may be situations where action is delayed or 
not taken because of some uncertainty as to whether it was 
caused by one of the circumstances now listed in the section. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these amendments will add to the safe and 
efficient operation of the gas industry in the province. 
Accordingly, I move second reading of The Gas Inspection 
Amendment Act, 1998. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 
responding to the comments made by the Government House 
Leader, it’s certainly important that we have . . . deal with gas 
inspection services because of the potential hazards that may 
arise if gas connections aren’t fitted or hooked up properly, or 
the installation of a new building, and someone does it very 
carelessly, and certainly the results could be quite catasta — 
well forget that word. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Catastrophic. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Catastrophic, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But certainly, Mr. Speaker, when you think about gas 
installation, it’s important that we have specific guidelines in 
place to address the seriousness of gas installation and hook-up. 
And as well, Mr. Speaker, to make sure that the public is 
protected but also to just do away with some of the extra red 
tape that certainly takes up the time of indeed getting the 
approval needed for a permit to do a gas installation. 
 
And I know in my area of the . . . or in my constituency, on a 
number of occasions I have been contacted by individuals who 
are in the process of a building project but have found 
themselves on a waiting-list for a gas inspector to come and 
approve the installation hook-up so that they can indeed move 
ahead with their building project. 
 
And that I found, Mr. Speaker, to be very frustrating for 
individuals as they . . . Whether it’s a housing project, whether 
it’s a business, Mr. Speaker. I think it’s important, Mr. Speaker, 
that we certainly do have regulations in place, and guidelines 
and Acts that address any concern that may be of significance to 
the general public so that the safety of the public is maintained; 
and as well, that the public can feel quite satisfied that indeed 
they are being represented well and that we as legislators in this 
Assembly are mindful of the concerns of the public. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think there are certainly a few other questions we 
need to look at. We need to take a little more time to indeed 
take more careful review of the piece of legislation before us, 
the Bill No. 15, The Gas Inspection Amendment Act, 1998, to 
indeed determine whether or not it meets all the criteria that the 
government is hoping to accomplish, or that the public and 
indeed individuals who work in the gas field as well are looking 
for, and whether or not it is . . . While we are attempting to 
move some of the roadblocks, maybe putting some other 
roadblocks in place. 
 
And I think those are some issues that we need to look at before 



624 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 1998 

I would suggest we move into committee and get into further 
debate and specific questions regarding the Act. 
 
With that in mind, Mr. Speaker, I would move adjournment of 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Agriculture and Food 

Vote 1 
 
The Chair: — I would ask the minister to introduce his 
officials, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To my left is 
Terry Scott, the deputy minister of the Department of 
Agriculture and Food. Behind Terry is Jack Zepp, director of 
administrative services branch. And behind me is Ross Johnson, 
budget officer, admin services branch. 
 
And on the road, en route from Melville and Swift Current 
respectively, are Carol Eaton, executive director of 
administration and finance for Crop Insurance in Melville, and 
Lorne Warnes, executive director, admin, from ACS 
(Agricultural Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan) in Swift 
Current. 
 
Subvote (AG01) 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 
welcome to yourself and to your officials. Throughout Ag 
estimates we’ll have questions on a number of subjects. You 
could have just asked. We would have told you that there was 
no need for the Crop Insurance folks to come in just yet. Over 
the next number of days, weeks, and months we’ll have lots of 
opportunity to discuss various things within the Department of 
Agriculture, but crop insurance wasn’t one of the ones I had in 
mind today. 
 
But anyway a number of things that we want to discuss with 
you over the next period of time, including things like rail-line 
abandonment, what that will do in terms of highways; certainly 
crop insurance will be an issue we’ll want to discuss with you; 
grain marketing. 
 
The Estey report is another area that we’ll want to discuss. The 
Canadian Wheat Board’s complaint against the railways, we’ll 
want to discuss. Hog marketing, we’ll want to discuss in 
Saskatchewan and the environmental concerns surrounding that 
issue. Grain marketing will be an area that will be of interest I 
think to people in Saskatchewan. And certainly safety nets are 
another topic that we will want to discuss over the next period 
of time. 
 
Mr. Minister of Agriculture, I wanted to touch on one subject 
that’s come to my attention in recent weeks that we had 
discussed with the elk breeders’ association here in 
Saskatchewan, that we wanted to address a number of questions 
to you with regard to this new, evolving . . . relatively new, 
evolving industry that’s turned into quite a boon for agriculture 

producers, livestock producers in Saskatchewan, with large 
numbers of elk farmers starting up, and have started up all over 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I understand it’s one of the fastest growing agricultural 
livestock opportunities in the province of Saskatchewan 
currently. And we would like your views on this industry 
relative to its growth and its potential, what your department 
sees as its potential. And we will want to discuss with you a 
number of things about that growth potential and where we see 
that industry going in the future here in Saskatchewan. 
 
I understand that there’s a great deal of bureaucratic struggle 
going on between your department and the department of . . . 
SERM. We feel that certainly there’s concerns from an 
environmental standpoint and an environmental resource 
management standpoint, but you have to also look at the 
situation relative to an expanding livestock industry, livestock 
opportunity here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could give me a few thoughts on 
elk breeding here in Saskatchewan and game farming in 
general. I understand that the cabinet is studying this issue and 
is about to approve a new policy paper regarding game farming. 
Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairperson. I just want 
to start off by saying that I’m actually very pleased. Last year 
my estimates came up fairly late in the session and now we’re 
probably about halfway through the session and I’m pleased to 
be able to stand up and talk about Agriculture estimates, 
because I’m not sure of the priority of agriculture on the 
opposition benches. But day 26 into the session, I haven’t had 
one Ag question in question period, so I really am pleased. I’m 
not sure if that’s because I don’t put the emphasis on . . . 
 
But I’m pleased to be able to stand up today and talk about 
Agriculture in the estimates, Mr. Chairperson, and particularly 
about the elk industry, as it is one of the very, very important 
industries in Saskatchewan. 
 
I was at the annual meeting of the elk producers about a week 
. . . just over a week ago and spoke to them there. There were 
over 500 people — breeders, producers — at that session. That 
is the largest meeting in Canada of Canadian elk breeders. The 
only larger one was in Edmonton where the international 
meeting was last year. 
 
Elk has been around . . . some of the producers go back almost 
20 years but it’s in the last 10 years really that there’s been 
tremendous growth in the industry. We have seen a large 
demand in the Asia market for antler velvet. And we’ve seen 
breeding stock, very high quality breeding stock, being 
developed here, which resulted in large horns and a good return. 
 
We see the breeding stock selling for . . . bred heifers about 20, 
$25,000; bred cows up to 30, 35, $40,000 is not unusual. So this 
industry is very strong and growing and obviously the return is 
there. 
 
Now there are a number of things that have to take place for 
industry to prosper. And one of the things is that government 
create the climate in which those elk producers can produce 



April 16, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 625 

their product and get it to market in a fashion that will give 
them the best return. 
 
I think we’re doing that. I’ve worked very closely with the 
president and directors of the elk breeders’ association and I 
think that there are a number of issues that are coming forward 
that are being resolved. 
 
(1515) 
 
You’re right; we’re out right now consulting. There was a 
consultation paper put forward after discussions took place with 
the industry and we are now in the process of trying to finalize 
those discussions. And there are a number of issues that we’ve 
worked with the breeders, with the producers on. While I don’t 
know that every one of them is finalized to everyone’s 
satisfaction, I think it is a big step forward. 
 
What we’re trying to do, because these animals are under the 
round table discussions of about three years ago . . . These 
animals are not considered wild, but the only . . . the difference 
between elk and let’s say cattle or . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Wild boar. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Wild boar, exactly, is that the elk are 
indigenous to Saskatchewan. So they are treated a little bit 
different than something that’s not indigenous to the province. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Why? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — In terms of . . . Why, the member from 
Rosthern asks. Well specifically because of disease. We have to 
be very certain. And that’s where SERM comes in. 
 
SERM has a responsibility for the control of the health of 
animals in the wild. And while there may be some differing 
opinions on exactly how this should play out, I think for the 
most part that, through the discussions with the industry, we’ve 
been able to satisfy, satisfy a lot of those things. 
 
So I think the industry is growing very rapidly. It’s a strong 
industry. We’re supportive of the industry. We are trying to 
move . . . there are a number of things being moved out of 
SERM into Agriculture. How many, we’ve got to make those 
decisions. Because as the industry grows and they become more 
domesticated, we can do that. Never forgetting though that they 
are indigenous and that any movement of elk into this province 
could affect the wild. And so SERM does have a responsibility 
there as well. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — So what you are saying is that the Department of 
Ag is not prepared to do the testing and the disease control on 
elk that you do in other areas in the livestock industry. Is that 
how I would interpret your statement? 
 
Because your department certainly regulates in other areas of 
livestock here in Saskatchewan — in the cattle industry 
certainly, hog industry. You have volumes of regulation about 
the movement, transport, all kinds of things surrounding disease 
control and that sort of thing which are obviously very 
necessary. 
 

Is your department not prepared to enter into those same types 
of disease testing type programs that are prevalent in other areas 
in the livestock industry? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Quite the contrary, Mr. Chairperson. 
Last year we put in $50,000 for research of disease — E. coli 
and Cervi, meningeal worm. And this year we put in another 
$50,000 into research for disease, the purpose of which is to be 
able to develop a foolproof system of testing for disease, which 
we don’t have right now. We think there probably isn’t a 
problem, but at the end of the day if there is a problem 
somebody has to take responsibility, and that is the government 
if they don’t have the proper rules in place. 
 
So what we’re doing is putting money into the testing. There’s 
two researchers, one in New Brunswick and one in Saskatoon. 
They’ve been working on this. We hope to, within a relatively 
short period of time, a year or two — these things are always 
hard to predict — but develop a protocol agreement. Because 
that way we’ll be able to import elk to our province and have 
reciprocating agreements with other jurisdictions. 
 
But the key is to ensure that those protocol agreements don’t 
breach the standards that we have as far as disease in the wild 
species and in the elk producers’ stock themselves. Because as I 
said earlier, these things are very, very expensive animals and 
we have to make sure that when they come in they’re clean. 
 
So we’re putting money actively into that. Our department’s 
working very closely with them, because as you identified, I 
think you understand that it’s a very, very important area. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Minister, over the last number of days we’ve 
had all kinds of concern coming forward from the elk farmers 
of Saskatchewan. You must be aware of some of the concerns 
that they have brought to your attention with respect to their 
industry. They have put out a policy development type of 
information and statements over the last number of weeks and 
months with regard to where they would like to see the industry 
grow and go in the future. 
 
Certainly the antler velvet market is important and the breeding 
stock market is important. But they are also looking to open up 
meat processing facilities here in Saskatchewan so that the 
industry doesn’t collapse once we’ve seen a state where the 
antler velvet market is not buoyant enough to handle the 
increased numbers of elk that are being produced in 
Saskatchewan as well as certainly the breeding stock. 
 
As we all know, and I think there’s a great deal of concern 
within their industry that what we may see happen is similar to 
what we’ve seen happen in a number of other what might be 
considered sort of exotic type of livestock areas, where at one 
point we see huge dollars being put into breeding stock, and 
then almost overnight a collapsing market because there just 
simply isn’t a continued growth in the number of people that 
want to move into a market that has no return on their very 
substantial investment. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, are you aware of the concerns that the 
industry has? Have they been brought to your attention? And 
maybe you could tell us a little bit about some of those concerns 
and what you’re doing to address them. 



626 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 1998 

Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Yes, I’d be happy to do that. But before I 
do that I want to correct something that I said earlier. My 
deputy just corrected me on it and it’s E. Cervi and P. Tenuis. I 
think I said E. coli, which is not the right term, and I was 
thinking P. Tenuis and didn’t say it. I do know a little bit about 
these things. 
 
What we’re doing is . . . what we’ve done is put out a 
discussion paper. That discussion paper has stimulated a lot of 
discussion. And we understand the industry has some concerns. 
They have gone through the paper thoroughly I think for the 
most part. We are dealing with the board of directors, who we 
deal with as representatives, as democratically elected 
representatives of the industry. 
 
And we get phone calls from time, you know, to time from 
producers directly and we listen to those very carefully. 
Because the important thing here is to make sure that we find 
the solutions to some of the problems that they have in 
developing the industry. 
 
I think there was a lot of concern over some of the wording in 
the paper, but I want to make it very clear that that paper, that 
discussion paper that was put out, was just that — a discussion 
paper. As I said, it’s generated a lot of discussion for a few 
reasons. One of them was wording and understanding exactly 
what was meant in that discussion paper. 
 
There’s some concerns about protocol agreement. There’s 
concerns about, I think some of the people in the industry 
would like to see the Environment and Resource Management 
completely out of the business of elk production in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
But I said . . . I think you were asking me what the people were 
calling in about. And I said one of the things that they call in 
about is there are some producers who would like to see the 
Department of the Environment completely out of the picture 
and have Agriculture just doing everything. 
 
Well I think we’re moving closer to having Agriculture 
administer most of the industry. But as far as having . . . the 
reality is, as far as having SERM completely out of the picture, 
that is not a reality. But I think they can be removed to cover 
the areas that they should concern themselves about, and that is 
disease control in the wild. And that means having a say in 
protocol agreements where the movement of elk go back and 
forth from the border. Because they have responsibility to the 
people of this province to ensure that there are healthy elk 
indigenous species in the province. 
 
So yes there have been some calls. We’ve had many 
consultations. I met with the elk breeders a week or so ago, 
some of them. We’ve been meeting for over two years off and 
on, on this — I have. And I think we’ve made great strides. 
 
While there is some frustration, I think from some of those 
people who have been a long time in the industry and just have 
a little frustration that they think not enough is happening, I 
hope that this round of consultations . . . and we’re going right 
now through our process of cabinet and committees to make 
sure that we have the best possible policy. 
 

We’re meeting, I believe next week with the ag caucus and the 
elk breeders, and I think environment caucus as well. I know 
that you’ve probably met with them, which is your 
responsibility. And I think that’s a good thing, because we have 
to be able to determine exactly what is needed for the industry. 
 
So I guess I would invite you, with any people you know in the 
industry, to bring those concerns forward. But we have to look 
at the results of the consultation. That’s what we’re putting 
together now. We’ve got the survey. We mailed out surveys, 
questionnaires to all the producers — not just elk producers, but 
white-tail and red deer producers, and the number of people 
who are involved in the raising of deer and elk. 
 
I think there was about 500 questionnaires sent out. We got 
those back. We made all . . . We had consultations after that. 
And now we’re putting together a package. Some of it will be 
similar to what was in the paper; some of it won’t be. 
 
But I think the key is, and I’ve told this to the elk producers, 
that after we go through this process — and we’re meeting with 
them as a caucus to hear them out — after we go through this 
process and before the regulations are put forward, they will 
again have a chance to sit down and talk and lobby with us to 
put their concerns forward. At the end of the day, I would hope 
that we resolve as many issues as possible. Am I optimistic that 
every one of their concerns will be addressed? Probably not, 
because in the real world that doesn’t . . . But I think we’ll 
address all the . . . most of the concerns that they have. 
 
Now the one corollary there is that if some producers think that 
SERM are going to be completely removed, unfortunately that’s 
not going to be the case, but their role will be reduced, and 
more of it is coming, the intent is for more of it to come into 
Agriculture. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Minister, just for the record, could you tell 
us who are the members of the NDP ag caucus and what 
possible reasons would they have or what is the point that they 
would have in meeting with the elk breeders of Saskatchewan 
rather than just simply your department or SERM? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — It’s a government . . . We have a very 
thorough system of government caucus committees in this 
government because we don’t . . . where decision making — I 
know they don’t like to hear this but he asked the question — 
where decision making is very thorough and very broad based, 
so that the member for Shellbrook-Spiritwood is, Saskatchewan 
Rivers rather, is the Chair of the agriculture caucus of the 
government caucus. And we have member for Last Mountain is 
on the committee; we have the member for Carrot River on the 
committee; we have the member for Redberry on the 
committee. And we also are going to be having, inviting the 
environment committee; we have different committees, but 
because the environment’s involved, they’re going to be invited 
as well. 
 
As to why we’re going to be meeting with them? Because the 
elk producers asked for it. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — The fact of the matter is — this is pretty much 
unrelated — but the fact of the matter is you got nothing else 
for some of these back-benchers to do and you might as well 



April 16, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 627 

put them to work meeting with some people around 
Saskatchewan. Frankly, I’m a little bit surprised you would 
want some of them to meet with them, but anyway the fact of 
the matter is, is you do meet with them and that’s certainly your 
prerogative and we wouldn’t want to suggest that you shouldn’t 
be. 
 
(1530) 
 
Why do you think . . . is it only surrounding the issue of the fact 
that elk are native to Saskatchewan that you would not want to 
see it moved entirely into the Department of Agriculture or are 
there other reasons? You’ve really only outlined the fact that 
they are native to Saskatchewan and that . . . is that the only 
reason? And would that follow then that we won’t see things 
like a fallow deer or all kinds of things that are native to 
Saskatchewan — antelope farming if we ever get to that stage, 
or a white-tailed deer, or things of that nature — would it also 
fall that we wouldn’t see those moving only under the sole 
responsibility of the Department of Agriculture? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Well that is the main reason, and it’s the 
fact that any species that is not indigenous and is produced here, 
SERM does not have a concern about. They don’t have a 
concern about wild boar; it’s not indigenous. They don’t have a 
concern about bison. Although bison was indigenous, there are 
no bison around in the wild. 
 
And the key . . . this is the main . . . that’s the main reason, for 
disease reasons — it’s separation. And really the producers are 
concerned about separation as well because they don’t want to 
be mixing the genetics. I mean the genetics of the domestic elk, 
if I can call it that, are much superior to those of the elk in the 
wild. 
 
So it flows both ways. And we are talking about ways to 
monitor escapes or monitor intrusions, and I think that that’s 
one of the discussion areas. So that’s the main thing. 
 
And it’s like anything else. The Department of Environment 
and Resource Management has a responsibility to the 
population and the people of this province to maintain those 
populations of indigenous wild animals. And if they weren’t 
concerned about the elk in the wild, then what’s the purpose of 
SERM, I mean in this instance. They have a responsibility so 
they’re going to be involved in it. 
 
But that involvement, we’ve worked together with SERM for 
many years in many areas to transfer some of the administration 
to Sask Ag and Food; for example, the environmental 
regulations on intensive livestock operations. We’ve been 
working about, something like 15 years with them and it’s 
worked very well. 
 
So while they’re not out of the picture, their capacity has been 
changed over time to one of monitoring. But it’s just right that 
they live up to their responsibility and monitor the indigenous 
and protect the wild species. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Minister, if you’d give us an assessment of 
where you and the elk breeders are in disagreement at this 
particular time. 
 

Hon. Mr. Upshall: — The discussions that are going on have 
been wide-ranging as put forward in the consultation document. 
There is not an answer to where there’s going to be 
disagreements because there is no final document. I explained 
the process earlier. 
 
We’ve gone through the consultation; we’re going to be 
meeting with them as . . . I’ve met with them as minister and 
I’m going to be meeting with the caucuses. I would assume that 
your caucus or your ag caucus will meet with them if you 
haven’t already. I encourage you to do so because it’s an 
important industry. 
 
We won’t know exactly what they agree or disagree with until 
the final decisions are made. But we’re going to get the 
consultation process done. We’re going to write a draft set of 
. . . a draft agreement. That will be taken back to the industry 
before the regulations are finalized. 
 
And so like I say, at the end of the day I’ll give you one specific 
area where I can see that some people — I don’t think all, but 
some people — may not agree and that is, as I said earlier, if 
there is going to be some people saying I want SERM to have 
nothing to do with the elk industry in this province, they’re not 
going to be satisfied because SERM is going to have, as we 
talked about, the responsibility to the wild population, to secure 
them from any disease, and that means some involvement in 
protocol agreements for the movement back and forth. 
 
So that’s an example of one area. But I think for the most part 
we’re going to see agreement on a large number of issues. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — So as I understand the process then, you’ll be 
meeting with the elk farmers, with your ag committee, and then 
the ag committee will be making recommendations from there 
to cabinet. Is that the process? And then from cabinet we’ll 
either see . . . we’ll see regulation or we’ll see actual legislation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Yes, the process that we go through 
includes cabinet committees, the caucus members, and others. 
You know, for example, the member for Lloydminster has a lot 
of elk producers in her area and she’s very concerned about it; 
so we have an open-door policy in our caucus meetings. If you 
have an interest you can certainly come and participate. 
 
But we go through a series of cabinet committee, caucus 
committee, cabinet, and then to finalize the regulations, and that 
will vary as far as the actual process from time to time but it’s 
fairly set. 
 
But before the final regs for the further changes are put in place, 
I stood up at the elk annual meeting, the elk producers’ annual 
meeting just over a week ago, and told them that they would 
have a chance to review those regulations again. So I did that 
because I think it’s the right thing to do, but also because of the 
concerns over some of the wording in the consultation 
document that was misinterpreted, I guess, by some of the 
people reading it. 
 
And rightly so. I mean some of the wording, I think 
governments, as you know, don’t always do everything right, 
and you might say we never do anything right, but that’s been I 
think, handled pretty well by the department. We’ve got a very 



628 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 1998 

good group of people working on the elk industry in the 
department. They understand the industry well and they truly 
believe that this is an industry that can grow and they’re 
working to that end. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Is it not correct, Mr. Minister, that part of the 
concern that they have surrounds the whole area of regulation? I 
believe that they would feel more comfortable with legislation 
than regulation. The concerns are obvious with regulation — 
that you and your department and the minister responsible for 
Resource Management and his department can change 
regulation just simply by order in council without having to do 
much in terms of any kind of debate, certainly not in this 
Assembly. 
 
And that’s part of their concern. They see a situation where you 
may not be telling them the whole story here; that you’re going 
to say we’ll do all of these kinds of things and then when it gets 
to the regulation stage you embark upon another direction. Is 
that not part of their concern? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Well I have not personally heard that 
they don’t trust this department. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Take it from us. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Take it from you? No, thank you very 
much. I won’t take it from you. 
 
I can give you an assurance — that’s not how I operate. And 
we’ll be working with them on the regulations. If there is a 
change, if there is any proposed, if, after the regulations are put 
forward, I could see us continuing to work on them to achieve 
more of the objectives that they may want if they’re not 
satisfied. 
 
This is not going to be sort of a cast in stone. Nothing is in 
government and legislation nor regulation. 
 
But I can guarantee you that if there are changes in regulations 
after we’ve gone through this process, they will be thoroughly 
— and mark my words — thoroughly consulted. Because as 
your former party would know, if you don’t go around 
consulting and telling people and explaining and working with 
them, that you don’t last in government very long. 
 
And it is my intent, because I believe that we can help grow this 
industry, to be very open and honest and forthright with these 
people. They have been with us, in terms of coming to us and 
saying, you know, we want some changes. We’ve dealt with 
them . . . Well not totally. We’re in the process of dealing with 
that. And I can assure you that there is no intent to do any 
trickery about the regulations. Because I know who that hurts, 
and it’s not you. So there’s no intent to do that. 
 
And in terms of this government, we strive to be open and 
honest and forthright with the folks out there. Because if you 
don’t, you don’t last long. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — So then, Mr. Minister, you would be prepared to 
give us the assurance, absolute assurance, that the elk breeders 
that are affected by this policy paper will have a chance — a 
reasonable chance — of having their concerns addressed prior 

to the cabinet deciding on this and implementing the policy 
paper? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — That is correct. We are working directly 
with the elk breeders’ association, their representatives. We 
receive calls from individual members, which is very . . . which 
is right; if they want to call, to call. Or their member or you, if 
you are their member, or anybody. But we will be consulting 
before these new regs are put in place. 
 
We’re consulting with the industry again. With the industry 
being the board of directors of the . . . As you can appreciate, 
we have already sent out 500-or-so questionnaires and allowed 
. . . have people send back in those questionnaires with their 
opinions on them. I don’t think we’re going to do that again. 
 
But through their democratically elected organizations they, as 
the member for Wood River knows because he was at the elk 
breeders’ meeting last week, as well as myself, and knows a lot 
of the players very well, we will be allowing . . . or not 
allowing; we’re giving the opportunity for the board of directors 
to see the final versions and tell us what they like and don’t 
like. 
 
And if there’s any more changes we can possibly make to reach 
their objective, we will do that. So that’s the commitment I can 
give you. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — So we can reasonably, Mr. Minister, we can 
reasonably assume from here then that before implementation 
the elk farmers of Saskatchewan will have full opportunity to 
view the proposed regulations, to discuss the proposed 
regulations, to point out, and point out where they see there are 
problems with the regulation and reasonably expect to have 
input into the implementation, and also input into whether the 
regulation makes sense or not for their industry. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — I’m trying to be as open and polite with 
you as possible. I don’t want you to try to put words in my 
mouth, so I’m going to repeat what I said. 
 
We have dealt with the entire industry in the form of 
questionnaires to, I believe, every member, the intent was to go 
to every member, 500-and-some I think we sent out. They had 
the opportunity to respond. We’ve gone through the 
consultation. 
 
We are now going to be making government decisions on 
regulation. Those regulations before taken . . . before finalized 
will be taken back to the board of directors of the elk 
association, elk breeders’ association. That board of directors, 
on behalf of their membership, will have an opportunity to have 
final input into the regulations. 
 
I would not guarantee, as I said earlier, that we’ll be talking to 
every elk producer again. Because in the sake of time — and I 
think the industry wants this too — in the sake of time we want 
to get this to a conclusion. 
 
So that’s the commitment that I give to the association and to 
you. 
 
I just want to give you a little statistic here, while I’m on my 



April 16, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 629 

feet, about the growth of this industry and the importance of 
this industry to the province. In 1991 we had, under the census 
data on specialized livestock — and this is the Sask Ag and 
Food annual report, ’96-97 — there were 2,744 elk. By 1996 
there were 8,598 and it’s grown substantially since ’96. 
 
So there’s a tremendous growth, as in bison. With bison we 
went from 1,600 to 7,000, and deer from over . . . doubled — 
2,250 to nearly 6,000. So we’re not . . . we take the industry 
very, very seriously and that’s why we’ve gone through the 
process that we were going through. And what I wanted to 
accomplish is the best set of regulations to help this industry 
grow. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Can you explain the 
workings of the technical advisory committee and the wildlife 
diversification task force which were set up to look at this issue. 
Could you explain exactly what their role is? 
 
(1545) 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairperson. This is a 
very technical question, if I could just get your attention here. 
 
The technical advisory committee was a committee . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — You have our undivided attention. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Thank you. Was a committee set up by 
the department, chaired by the deputy minister of Agriculture, 
to try to bring together interests. We have people from the elk 
producers’ association. We have people from the wildlife 
federation and others to try to talk about what we could achieve 
as far as changing regulations that might suit the desires of the 
industry. So that started, I think in 1996. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Could you give me a copy of the make-up of that 
committee, who is involved on those two committees — the 
technical advisory committee and the wildlife diversification 
task force. Could you undertake . . . maybe your officials have 
it with you, I don’t know; otherwise would you undertake to 
provide us with that information? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — The wildlife diversification task force 
was done through SERM, I believe. We don’t have the name of 
the people on that but they came up with a number of 
recommendations through that task force. And that would be 
available through SERM, either through estimates or if you just 
call the minister’s office I’m sure you can get a copy of their 
recommendations and who was on the committee. 
 
As far as the Saskatchewan technical advisory committee on elk 
production . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . well it would be elk 
and deer as well. It was chaired by former assistant deputy 
minister, I believe, Dale Sigurdson. This, by the way, this 
committee has expired now. This was set up, I said ’96. I think 
it actually started before that but it’s no longer in existence. 
 
But Rick Alsager from Maidstone was on it, I think at that time 
representing the game farmers’ association. I think it’s now the 
elk producers’ association or the elk breeders’ association. Dave 
Bueckert from Tugaske; Wally Envik from Shaunavon; Ron 
Friessen from Warman; Rudy Jurke from Lloydminster; Rob 

Naber from Melfort; Curt Schroeder from Regina; Bentley 
Brown from Turtleford; Ryan Clark from Fairlight; Dwight 
Forwood from Wood Mountain; Duncan Hockley from Yellow 
Grass; Philip Murray from Oxbow; Byrnne Rothwell from 
Moose Jaw; and Alan Stein from Moosomin — for those are the 
members on the committee. That’s all. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Would we assume then that all of those people 
have an involvement, a direct involvement, in elk breeding or 
game farming, on that committee? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — I don’t have, I don’t have in front of me 
each organization that they represent, but I recognize a lot of the 
names on here and there’s a lot of them who are producers — 
elk producers and deer producers. There are also representatives 
from the wildlife federation and Nature Saskatchewan. And 
there may be some other representatives but that was the 
majority of the make-up of the committee. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Would it not make sense for only people directly 
involved in the industry to be on the committee? We understand 
that there’s, for example, the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool has a 
representative on either that committee or the one we’re 
speaking of or the wildlife diversification task force, and what 
possible reason would people from outside of the industry have 
to be on a technical advisory committee advising on technical 
matters surrounding the breeding and the game farming 
industry? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Well I think, I think that when these 
committees are put forward, we try to get a broad base, 
representative base: a number from the producers’ association 
because they are key; a number from wildlife federation 
because they are key; and Nature Saskatchewan as well; and 
then there may be some other players in there, wouldn’t be as 
many as the producers, but who represent other interests. 
 
The key here is not, I don’t think, who’s on the committee, but 
what the accomplishments are, what we can put forward. And I 
say that committee now has expired and we are going through 
the policy routes, through the consultation process, to which I 
think has worked pretty well. And so I’m not sure it’s a concern 
who is on the committee rather than what the committee can 
accomplish. 
 
So we have to be sure, we have to be sure that all people who 
have concerns are represented. Because I know from experience 
of being government, if you don’t cover all the people who are 
concerned, you’re never going to get a policy that somebody 
isn’t going to be sniping at and you don’t want that for the 
benefit of the entire industry. 
 
If you, for example, eliminated wildlife federation on the issue 
of elk production in Saskatchewan, I think that wouldn’t be 
very smart because they have a great interest in the wild elk and 
how they interact with tame elk and in terms of disease and 
numbers and all that stuff. So it’s a matter of making sure 
there’s a broad base of representation to get everybody’s views 
aired. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Well yes, certainly we would agree with that, Mr. 
Minister, but we also wonder why . . . if you had a committee 
that was sort of looking at the overall impact on agriculture and 



630 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 1998 

the overall future prospects in agriculture for the industry, we 
would agree with that type of assessment, but in terms of the 
technical advisory committee, what possible . . . what could 
anyone outside of the industry possibly add to the discussion in 
a technical fashion that someone in the industry couldn’t? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — And the fact of the matter is this. We 
could proceed as government in consultation with the elk 
producers and the deer producers — in this case you’re talking 
about elk — without consulting anybody else. There’s 
absolutely nothing stopping us from doing that. Let’s bring all 
the elk producers in, the board of directors, or whoever they 
wanted to bring in; sit down and hammer out a policy on elk 
production in Saskatchewan, a policy on protocol, disease 
controls, and go on from there. 
 
But the fact of the matter is that would be a foolish thing to do 
because Nature Saskatchewan, the wildlife federation, have an 
interest in the indigenous population that could be affected by 
the domestic population. So all you’d be doing is causing 
yourself grief if you didn’t go and consult with as many people 
as possible. 
 
So I’m not sure what your point is considering that this 
committee is no longer functioning. But it’s in a process that we 
have gone through over period of years, from this committee 
now to the consultation process and the policy paper that we put 
forward. 
 
And we want to talk to everybody because you should know 
you don’t steamroller, you don’t steamroller issues like this 
through, because the moment you do, you’re going to have so 
much . . . cause yourself so much grief that nothing will get 
done. 
 
And you know who would be hurt? The industry would be hurt. 
Because if you ignore the people who have interests in the 
indigenous population, they will — and don’t talk to them and 
say here’s what we’re doing to make sure that population is safe 
— then they will be fearful the other way, that their population 
is going to be hurt because the people who are game farming 
don’t care about them. But that’s not true. 
 
So in order to reduce suspicions or fears or bogeyman theory, 
you bring as many people in as possible to talk to them. Let 
them each have their opinion. And it’s a democracy in which 
we live and in a democracy the minority have their say and the 
majority have their way. It’s ever been thus in a democracy. 
 
And that’s why you talk to everybody, hash it out, and then you 
try to determine by consensus. And if that doesn’t work, by the 
majority who . . . what should happen. So in this case a number 
of producers are on the committee — wildlife federation, 
Nature Saskatchewan and others. 
 
So I’m not sure what your point is, but my theory is, talk to as 
many people as possible, get all the information, because at the 
end of the day you try to bowl your way through and forget 
about some folks, you will halt the industry because there will 
be an outcry. 
 
So let’s try to make the industry grow by making sure we take 
care of each and every . . . all the aspects that will help it grow. 

Mr. Boyd: — My understanding, Mr. Minister, is that the elk 
breeders would like to have the right to import a domestic elk 
from outside of Saskatchewan. Yet this policy paper deals with 
the importation of wildlife under The Wildlife Act. Is that 
correct? Or is this something that is going to be an item that will 
be up for discussion in the policy development stage? 
 
(1600) 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — With regards to the importation, as I said 
earlier, there’s a growing role for Ag and Food in the elk 
production industry. And that’s what we’re pursuing. It will 
evolve. Some things I think can be accomplished very quickly; 
some things that may take longer. 
 
But I want to repeat what I said earlier. There’s no decisions 
made for sure yet. We’re in the process of decision making. But 
remember too what I said earlier, is that SERM has a duty to 
oversee the safety and disease control of the indigenous elk 
population. So as far as protocol agreements are concerned, 
while we are migrating the authority to Agriculture, I don’t see 
a complete removal of SERM from the picture. 
 
Those decisions aren’t made yet. But as far as the Department 
of Environment and Resource Management goes, I would think 
that they would want some monitoring of whatever capacity — 
like I say I don’t know the final outcome — but of some 
capacity. But the objective would be to move as much as 
possible under the jurisdiction of Ag and Food. 
 
But as I said earlier, if you think there’s going to be a complete 
removal of SERM from that aspect, there won’t be. Because as 
a responsible government we can’t do that — not just SERM — 
you can’t do that because there is a group of people out there, 
like wildlife federation, like natives of Saskatchewan, and I 
would say like a lot of elk breeders, who want to make sure that 
the indigenous population remains healthy. Because it’s in their 
best interests that they remain healthy because there are noses 
touched through fences from time to time in the elk industry, 
believe it or not, and we want to make sure that both, both the 
wild and the domestic, are disease free. 
 
SERM has a responsibility for the wild; Agriculture has a 
responsibility for the domestic. But even at that we’re moving a 
lot of the administration, or trying to, over to Ag and Food. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Does any of the game farming take place on 
Crown agricultural lands currently, and will this change under 
the policy paper? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Now I can’t be flying around monitoring 
everything, but to our knowledge we’ve never found game 
animals being raised on Crown land, so unless . . . If you have 
some knowledge, you might want to share it with us. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — No, I just wondered whether you were aware of 
any. And is it permissible if a producer were to, that has in their 
operation Crown land, to produce elk or deer on that property? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — As it stands now, no. But that’s one of 
the areas that’s under discussion. And the outcome of those 
discussions, well as I say, we don’t know yet but there may be 
some movement in that area. We’re continuing to talk and that’s 



April 16, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 631 

what we’ll be talking about when we meet with the game . . . 
with the elk producers’ association next week. And this will be 
ongoing until the final regulations are . . . final decisions are 
made for the regulations. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — What is your department’s position on that? 
Should they be, should it be permissible or should it not? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — We have been exploring the option of 
including some Crown land over a period of time. We have 
talked with the industry about that. You know, it’s a possibility. 
Whenever you go into something like this you have to take into 
account all, all views. So we don’t know exactly what the 
outcome is going to be, but we have been exploring that and 
talking to the industry about that. Like I say, as it stands now 
there is no hunting allowed on, on Crown land. 
 
I think in the future one of the areas, I just might say, in case 
you ask the question as soon as I sit down, is that the 
endangered spaces or endangered habitat lands probably will 
not be used for production. But as far as some of the other 
Crown lands, I think that’s open for discussion and for possible 
change. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — As you know, Mr. Minister, a lot of the land that 
the Crown holds is land that would be pretty adaptable to game 
farming in Saskatchewan and therefore I would think that it 
won’t be long before you’ll see — if you haven’t already and I 
suspect you have — see producers coming forward and wanting 
to produce elk and fallow deer on those properties. 
 
I’m a little bit unclear. You say that’s one of the areas that is up 
for discussion. When you suggest that it is up for discussion it 
. . . I think what you are implying is that you are not prepared to 
do that but you might consider it somewhere down the line. Is 
that a fair assessment of your comment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — This area . . . I can say this. To our 
knowledge there has been no restrictions to the growth of the 
industry because you can’t produce on Crown land. However 
there has been some interest. And because there has been some 
interest, we are actively in the discussion stages of whether or 
not we might be able to accommodate some of those people in 
certain circumstances, under certain conditions, or certain lands, 
in order that they might be able to produce elk or deer on 
certain Crown lands. 
 
So I think we’re trying to accommodate the need that’s out 
there. But like I said, it hasn’t been an impediment to growth; 
there hasn’t been a large demand for it. But if there’s some 
people would like that, we’re willing to talk about it and see 
what we can do about it. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Game farm elk, I think — well maybe we can’t 
— but can we agree that they are privately owned animals on 
privately owned land? We can agree on that, I hope. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Is this a trick question? They’re 
privately owned animals to my knowledge. I don’t know if 
there are any publicly owned elk out there except for the 
indigenous species, and they’re on private land. That’s what I 
understand. 
 

Mr. Boyd: — Never a trick question, Mr. Minister, just 
wanting to gain your thoughts into this area. 
 
Yet the policy paper states that SERM, who is responsible, as 
you’ve said for yourself, SERM, the resource management 
folks, wanting to ensure that native elk are properly handled for 
all people of Saskatchewan . . . and I think that’s probably fairly 
reasonable. I don’t think you’d get too much objection from too 
many people in that area. 
 
However, we understand that SERM is wanting to have a hand 
in developing regulation for the harvesting of animals, privately 
owned animals on privately owned land. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Maybe you could explain to me, I’m 
sorry, a little bit more what you mean by the harvesting of 
privately owned animals on private farms. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Well the breeding, the harvesting of the elk 
velvet and the eventual . . . if the industry evolves, and I think 
that’s what the goal is — the industry evolves to the point of 
having meat processing facilities here in Saskatchewan. 
 
We understand that the policy paper states that SERM and the 
minister sitting right beside you there whispering in your ear 
wants to have a hand in this, in the discussions, wants to have a 
hand in this, the discussion surrounding the harvesting of these 
animals and all of the aspects involved in elk farming. And yet 
they are not responsible in that area. Their responsibility, as you 
have said, is for the native population outside of privately 
owned facilities and privately owned elk. 
 
Why then would SERM have any input whatsoever into this 
area? Do you think SERM should have any reason to be 
involved in that aspect of the business? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — So let me get it straight now. You’re 
saying in the breeding of private elk and private farms — you 
can do that now; SERM has no involvement in that. 
 
The harvesting of the antlers for the velvet. That’s going on 
right now. SERM has no involvement in that. 
 
And as far as the processing, you can take your animals to the 
processing plant, and SERM has no involvement in that. 
 
So in the three areas that you, the areas that you mentioned 
there of the industry, there is no involvement by SERM. I’m not 
sure where you’re going but . . . 
 
Mr. Boyd: — We have been told, Mr. Minister, that SERM 
seems to have some degree of interest. And maybe you could 
consult with the minister sitting right beside you, to ask you 
whether or not SERM has any interest in the regulation directly 
affecting and controlling privately owned animals in privately 
owned facilities on privately owned land. Do they want to have 
input into that part of the business or does their only interest lie 
in the native elk of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Well I’m not sure how I can answer that 
any more thoroughly. You’re talking about the involvement of 
SERM. Now I’ll repeat, SERM has an interest in disease, which 
means in the separation of domesticated elk and the indigenous 



632 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 1998 

population. They have a responsibility there and a concern — 
not a concern, but involvement in that aspect. 
 
But as far as breeding elk or harvesting the antlers or do you 
want to take your elk to the slaughterhouse or get it slaughtered, 
SERM has no involvement there. If there’s something else that 
you’re alluding to, I just ask you to tell me what really you’re 
talking about. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Do you anticipate seeing Resource Management 
people marching onto privately owned land to have a look at 
privately owned elk, the elk police that the minister sitting 
beside you there wants to have running around Saskatchewan? 
Are we going to be into a situation where we’re going to see 
this kind of thing, where the minister jets in and marches down 
the road, jackboots and all, and walks onto facilities? Is this 
something that we should be concerned about, where people are 
in the elk farming industry concerned about these kinds of 
things? 
 
I think they feel it is reasonable for Agriculture people, the 
Department of Agriculture people, to be concerned about 
disease in their privately owned facilities and privately owned 
elk. What I’m asking you is, is Resource Management people 
going to be involved in undertakings, going onto privately 
owned facilities to inspect, or to have a look at facilities, or to 
be involved in any aspect of their business? 
 
(1615) 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — I don’t anticipate it will be much 
different than what it is right now, because SERM, through 
their capacity in enforcing The Wildlife Act, can access 
property. We have had discussions with the industry about 
escapes and intrusions, and I said earlier we want to monitor 
escapes, we want to monitor intrusions, for the safety of both 
the indigenous population and the domestic population. 
 
So your alliteration is very . . . has a lot of flair to it but not 
much substance, when you talk about walking on with 
jackboots, because in the carrying out of their responsibilities, 
they can access farms right now. And like I said, escapes and 
intrusions are being talked about so I don’t see a whole big 
change in that area. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — I think that’s, Mr. Minister, where a part of the 
concern is here. The elk industry, as I understand it, the people 
there feel that it is a privately owned industry. They have full 
appreciation for the fact that there is wild animals roaming 
Saskatchewan that are under the management of Resource 
Management people. They don’t have any . . . I don’t think they 
have any dispute with that; they fully understand that. 
 
I think where their concern lies is that very, very over-zealous 
Resource Management people are going to be intruding, 
intruding upon their privately owned . . . in their privately 
owned facilities, looking and inspecting privately owned elk, 
and making all kinds of recommendations and saying you’re not 
following regulations in this area or whatever. Making all kinds 
of wild-eyed interpretation of regulations. And in fact, and in 
fact implementing regulation through orders in council that will 
directly affect their business. 
 

And I think that’s where their concern is. They have some very, 
very serious problems with Resource Management people being 
involved in their privately owned facilities. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — I think the member, Mr. Chairperson, 
better understand what he’s saying here. He’s making some 
very serious accusations. And I know he has immunity in the 
House, but we have thousands of government staff in 
Saskatchewan who work with the people every day. If you have 
any evidence, sir, of those people not carrying out their job in a 
professional manner, then it is incumbent upon you to relay that 
information to the Minister of Saskatchewan Environment and 
Resource Management. 
 
But don’t stand in this House making wild-eyed accusations 
that you may or may not substantiate. If you can substantiate it, 
you stand on your feet right now and you relate — the 
minister’s sitting right here — and you relate to him those 
people who are not . . . who are acting in a manner that you 
described as not kosher to the situation. Because as government, 
it is incumbent upon us to treat all people fairly. And we do 
that. 
 
Well if I want to go back to the Tory years and talk about 
people fairly we could digress quite dramatically, but I don’t 
want to do that. I just want to tell you, sir, that’s a serious 
accusation you have made. Please stand in your place and 
substantiate it, or say that you will in a letter or get a hold of the 
minister to tell him that. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — No one is making any kinds of accusations. What 
we are saying, what we are saying is, is there is a concern in the 
industry that this may happen. And we want the assurances 
from you, as Minister of Agriculture in Saskatchewan, and 
eventually the minister, when we get to his estimates for 
Resource Management we’ll also want that assurance that we 
are not going to see some of the concerns that the elk farmers of 
Saskatchewan come to be. 
 
They have concerns in these areas. And the member over there 
from Regina says it’s making a mountain out of a molehill. 
 
But I’ll tell you, sir, when someone puts $24,000 into one bred 
heifer in the elk industry, they have a lot of concerns, they have 
a lot of concerns about the welfare of that animal. Some of 
these people have more invested than you’ll ever see in your 
entire life, sir, when it comes to investment into an industry. 
They would make you pale in comparison to the amount of 
investment you have in Saskatchewan. 
 
So if you want to, if you want to somehow or another suggest to 
the elk farmers of Saskatchewan that their concerns are making 
are making a mountain out of a molehill, well then I’ll ask them 
to . . . 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order, order. Order. I wish to remind 
committee members that questions and answers should be 
directed through the Chair according to rule 28 — order, order 
— according to rule 28 of our rule book, questions and 
responses are to be directed through the Chair; that is backed up 
by Beauchesne’s Parliamentary Rules found on page 49, rule 
168. 
 



April 16, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 633 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you. I think the point that we’re trying to 
make to the minister and to the others here today is the fact that 
some people in Saskatchewan in this industry have made a 
considerable investment — a very, very considerable 
investment in some cases — and they feel that their interests are 
not being very well served at this point. They feel that their 
interests would be better served with your department than with 
the Resource Management department. 
 
Now you can dispute that and there’s perhaps, there may even 
be legitimate reasons for disputing that. I am only saying to you 
what the industry has said to me. They have serious concerns in 
this area and they want to be . . . they want some assurance 
from this government that their concerns are not going to be 
trampled upon. They have concerns that their industry has the 
ability to grow. 
 
We’ve seen that substantial growth in Saskatchewan. You 
yourself have witnessed . . . the minister knows of the 
significant growth, something in the neighbourhood of 15 per 
cent on an annual basis — tremendous growth, tremendous 
opportunity, tremendous investment in Saskatchewan by 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
They want to ensure that the resource is managed properly also. 
But they also want to ensure that the substantial investment that 
they have is not put at risk because of regulations that will not 
serve any real purpose. That’s the concerns that they have. 
That’s the kind of concerns that we are relating to you. 
 
We’re not trying to make accusations that Resource 
Management people are not doing their job. We want to ensure 
that the job is done properly but we also want to ensure that the 
interests of these people who have made considerable 
investment in Saskatchewan are addressed. And the flippant 
comments of some members of this legislature are not in 
keeping with their interests, I don’t think. 
 
And that’s the concerns that these people have. When they 
address their concerns to this government, Mr. Minister, they 
get those kind of flippant comments back. 
 
And if you think that people want to invest in Saskatchewan 
and want to stake their lives and put their capital and their 
family’s capital and seek opportunities and jobs and everything 
else here in Saskatchewan when they have an attitude of that 
kind of display, I don’t think it’s going to happen. 
 
I think the role of this department, Mr. Minister, and SERM 
should be one of cooperation, should be one of helping, should 
be one of trying to do what they can to accommodate a growing 
and expanding industry here in Saskatchewan. They don’t 
believe that their interests are being held in that kind of esteem. 
They think that they . . . that their interests are not being well 
served at this point. And that’s why they have some serious 
concerns about where their industry is headed in Saskatchewan. 
 
So I would caution members of this Assembly when they want 
to make those kind of flippant comments about the industry that 
they should take the industry a far, great . . . a far degree more 
seriously than their comments in this legislature lead us to 
believe that they are taking that industry. 
 

The people of Saskatchewan that made this province what it 
have, have invested blood, sweat, and tears in this province and 
do not need those kind of accusations or comments from 
members of this government, members of this government 
purporting to on one hand help the industry and, on the other 
hand, making some sort of flippant comment about is this how 
you judge the worth of people in Saskatchewan. 
 
Well I tell you, sir, that that is one of the criteria of how you 
judge people in Saskatchewan — the amount of time, the 
amount of time, the amount of effort and the amount of 
investment that they make in Saskatchewan. 
 
And I defy anyone in Saskatchewan to say that the fruits of 
labour that people make and invest in this province, whether it 
be the labour of their hands, the labour of their intelligence, or 
the labour of their capital, is somehow or another wrong, 
because I do not feel that way. I think the investment that 
people make in Saskatchewan in terms of their labour, in terms 
of their intelligence, in terms of their resourcefulness, and yes, 
in terms of their capital investment, is important to 
Saskatchewan. 
 
It is important to Saskatchewan and members of this 
government should not dismiss that. Members of this 
government should not dismiss that and, Mr. Minister, I would 
hope . . . I would hope you would want to have some discussion 
with some of your members and perhaps make them aware of 
the value of this industry and the sensitive nature that people 
feel about those kinds of comments about an expanding 
industry and expanding opportunity for Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
Game farming, I think, represents a tremendous opportunity for 
Saskatchewan. We want to see that it’s regulated properly, yes. 
But we do not want to see it over-regulated to the point where 
we are going to see people losing opportunities here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’d appreciate your comments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Well I hope you feel better. I hope you 
feel better now because that’s about all you’ve accomplished. 
Because I’ll tell you something — we have had tremendous 
support of this industry over the years of our government since 
1991. Its comments . . . and you can rant and rave all you want 
about how you’re more caring than we are about the elk 
industry. That’s irrelevant because we know it’s not true. You 
know why it’s not true? Look at the numbers. 
 
In 1991 we had 65 producers. Today we have 360 producers. In 
1991 we had 2,744 — 1991 when we took government — elk. 
Today we have 13,500 elk. That’s a growth of about 20 per cent 
in the last few years, every year. That’s because we are working 
with the industry. That’s because the elk industry has a depth in 
this province that is second to none. 
 
And I tell you, my friend over there from Kindersley, member 
from Kindersley, if you can talk about the scare tactics of the 
Department of Environment marching in with jackboots onto 
their farms and scare away investment if you like. That is your 
choice. But I’ll tell you that A-on. And we are going to be 
working with this industry as we are right now to keep it 
growing at a pace that is almost second to none in North 



634 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 1998 

America. 
 
And I just ask you . . . I know you have to do a job of criticising 
the government and that’s your job and I can take that. But I tell 
you for the good of the industry, for the good of the industry to 
maintain this growth, I ask you to consider your words and 
choose them very carefully when it comes to scaring off, 
potentially scaring off investment because of something that 
maybe will happen promoting your bogyman theory. 
 
We have commitment from members in this caucus, in this 
government from all over this province who have elk breeders 
and who know them on a first-name basis. I have met with the 
industry myself on many occasions. These are good people. 
They’re growing the industry. And we’re going to continue to 
work with them. 
 
So please if you support the industry like you say you do, don’t 
talk about the bogyman. Ask legitimate questions about what 
can help this industry grow. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — I think that’s exactly what we’ve been doing this 
afternoon, sir. We have been asking the kinds of questions that 
the elk producers have asked us and have provided us with to 
bring to your attention. 
 
The elk producers of Saskatchewan obviously have concerns. If 
they didn’t have concerns they wouldn’t be talking to people 
about their problems or their concerns. I think it’s incumbent 
upon us to bring to your attention the concerns of people that 
have brought their concerns to us . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Well the fact that people want to get into those kind of 
discussions is probably a debatable point. 
 
(1630) 
 
The fact of the matter is, is that the industry wants to see it 
regulated properly, yes. They do not want to see overregulation. 
They worry that by moving it, by not having it in the 
Department of Agriculture where they rightfully believe it 
should be, they think that they’re going to be in a position 
where they’re going to be overregulated. They think there’re 
going to be in a position where they’re going to see Resource 
Management people on a constant basis coming and inspecting 
their facilities, and having a look at their elk. 
 
And if I’m hearing what you’re saying, sir, is correct, that this is 
not going to happen, I think that will go a long ways to 
alleviating some of their concerns. But their concerns I think are 
real, and the evidence will be in the regulations that you 
eventually come forward with. If the regulations that you come 
forward with are not the types of things that the industry is 
looking for, then I think their concerns are well-founded. 
 
If their concerns are addressed, then I think they will feel that 
this is a department, SERM, and Agriculture that are listening 
to them. At this point they do not hold that belief it would seem. 
So I would implore both the Minister of Agriculture and Food 
and the minister responsible for Resource Management here in 
Saskatchewan to listen to what these people are saying. They 
are the industry — you are not. They are the industry players 
that have made that growth. It has had nothing to do with what 
your government has done. It has everything to do with what 

they have done. 
 
So I would ask you that if you want advice on where this 
industry should be going, they are the people that can give you 
the advice. They are the people that can provide you with the 
information on what kind of regulations they feel are 
appropriate and alternatively, what kind of regulations they feel 
are not appropriate. 
 
So we’ll leave it at that, Mr. Minister, and ask you to once again 
provide this Assembly with the complete assurance that their 
interests and their concerns are going to be listened to and 
addressed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Well I can again assure the member that 
their concerns are going to be listened to and addressed in a 
manner that will involve consultations and negotiations as to 
what we might be able to achieve together. 
 
I appreciate the fact that you think we’re on the right track. I 
appreciate the fact that the elk producers in this province have 
done a wonderful job at growing the industry, but you can’t 
leave government totally out of it because we are concerned 
about the disease aspect, as are the producers, as are the people 
in the wildlife federation. 
 
The government’s role is to try to maintain the population. We 
have more elk behind fences than we do outside of fences in 
this province — outside of fences. I mean, we’ve got a 
tremendous industry here and when it comes to import 
protocols and disease, we have to work together with SERM, 
with the industry. We’re doing that. 
 
And I think that we don’t disagree here. We may disagree on 
the tactics of debate in the House but we don’t disagree that this 
industry is growing and it can grow more and prosper. And our 
job is to try to provide the right climate for the elk producers in 
this province, for the people who are concerned, for the people 
who are looking after the interests of the indigenous population. 
I think we’re doing that very well. 
 
And we have in this province more producers than Alberta or 
Manitoba. There’s about 305 producers in Alberta — we have 
360. In Manitoba there’s about 70 or 75 compared to our 360. 
 
We want to work with the industry. We are working in this 
industry. I think that together . . . And I appreciate your interest 
in this, I appreciate your interest, but I just repeat: please don’t 
run around crying wolf because that doesn’t help the industry. 
And I think the people in the industry know that. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Minister, I 
want to welcome your officials and thank them for coming 
today. And I’d like to continue a little bit on this line of the role 
of government and what they are going to be . . . what role 
they’re going to be playing as far as the elk industry goes in the 
province. 
 
I think, as the member from Kindersley has mentioned, the 
main and clear statement that the elk producers want to put 
across to you is this industry belongs to them. It does not belong 
to government. They brought the industry to the fore. It’s 
thriving in a very good fashion, and we want to make sure that 



April 16, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 635 

this continues. 
 
We don’t want regulations that are going to impose on us extra 
financial burdens such as is stated in the policy statements. I’m 
referring to policy statement no. 24. SEBA (Saskatchewan Elk 
Breeders Association) disagrees with this statement because 
they say that according to it the elk producers would be 
responsible for the removal of wildlife attempting to enter the 
farmer’s facility. 
 
Now if wildlife, whether it’s other elk or whatever it is, are not 
where they’re supposed to be, naturally that’s the place that 
SERM should come into play and SERM should be the ones 
responsible for making sure that the wildlife are taken out. The 
responsibility being the financial responsibility as well as the 
work involved in doing that. 
 
My husband and I happen to be getting into some elk and I 
really don’t feel that I want to have extra financial burden with 
removing wildlife that might be trying to get into my property. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, when you look at a concern such as that, 
maybe we need to have you deal with one of these concerns at a 
time. And if you could just comment on this and understand 
why SEBA is concerned about it and give us some indication of 
whether that kind of a regulation will not come into play, we 
would be most happy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — I congratulate you for getting into the elk 
industry. I think it’s a very exciting industry and growing. And 
you’re right, we don’t want to put any onerous financial 
responsibility onto producers. 
 
That discussion paper that you refer to is just that, as I said to 
the member for Kindersley. It’s a discussion paper. Those final 
decisions are not made as to who’s going to be responsible for 
the cost of removing that, the intruder. 
 
But I don’t think there’s going to be any onerous responsibility 
on the producer to bear all the cost of that. SERM has a 
responsibility. And see, the key here, and this is what I’m trying 
to reinforce, it isn’t an either/or situation. You said the elk 
industry should be deciding. As I said earlier, the industry has 
had tremendous input. But you can’t forget about the wild 
population. You can’t forget that SERM has a responsibility for 
the wild population. 
 
This is a partnership, the way I see it. And that’s what I try to 
facilitate with the Department of Agriculture trying to get more 
control over the management of the industry, the domesticated 
industry. 
 
But you can’t forget SERM’s responsibility. And they won’t 
forget their responsibility because it’s incumbent upon them to 
look after the wild. But if there was a disease problem from an 
intruder, I mean, what is worse? An intruder coming in with 
disease or an escape that might disease the wild population. 
They’re equally as bad. We all have responsibility to make sure 
the regulations are there to cover that. So I’m not arguing with 
you. I think we shouldn’t put onerous financial responsibilities 
on producers, but that discussion paper has not said that that’s 
what’s going to happen. And we will continue to work with the 
industry. 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess being as I am a 
farmer, I have some issues that I really must bring forward 
regarding a lot of the legislation and regulations that place 
financial burdens on the farmers. 
 
What I would like to refer to right now is the Act that has come 
forward in the legislature respecting deductions made from the 
marketing of cattle. Now from my understanding of this, the 
purpose of having these deductions is to encourage research and 
development. I say that the farmers should have a small part in 
this but I think that it’s also incumbent upon all of society to 
recognize that they benefit from research and development. 
 
The end result of research and development is good for every 
person in Saskatchewan and in Canada. And I see that farmers 
are having more and more to take on the financial burden and 
responsibility of seeing that these dollars come forward. Is there 
not another attitude that maybe we could incorporate here by 
maybe looking at processors, at everyone putting money into 
research and development. Why does it have to be solely the 
farmers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — All I can say to that answer is is it’s a 
right question, is we have letters from farm organizations who 
requested this Act to come forward; who are satisfied, who are 
satisfied with the changes we’re making because they asked for 
it. And in terms of financial responsibilities to the producer, 
producers understand. In fact many of them ask for check-offs 
to fund their own research and development, to fund their own 
programs. 
 
Government are partners through the extension divisions, 
through our specialists. So again it’s a partnership that we’re 
trying to develop in this province. But with this particular Act, 
all I can say is that they asked for it, we accommodated their 
wishes. So I don’t know, if you think there’s a problem or you 
know something that I don’t, please tell me. 
 
Ms. Julé: — I don’t think it’s a matter, Mr. Minister, of 
anybody knowing more or less than the other person. I think it’s 
a matter of clarification of who really did ask for this Act. You 
say farm organizations. Could you please specify which 
organizations those were. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Rather than guess exactly . . . We don’t 
have letters with us, but I’ll tell you I will get them very 
quickly. I will get them to you as soon as possible, and for sure 
before these Agriculture estimates are done so that you can 
continue your line of questioning. 
 
But we . . . all I can say is that whenever we put forward 
legislation, I’ve been around this House for a few years and I 
know what happens if you don’t consult and don’t make sure 
the industry is satisfied. It is my belief, through the consultation 
and the letters that we have received — and as I say, we’ll 
supply those letters to you — that the industry is very happy 
and very satisfied with this legislation and we’re simply 
accommodating them. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, I’ll be looking forward 
to receiving a list of those organizations. 
 
I’d like to just switch my line of questioning over to crop 



636 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 1998 

insurance. Could you tell me how many applications there were 
for crop insurance in the last fiscal year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — I’m sorry, we had some confusion in 
numbers, but the confusion was that we didn’t, I didn’t add the 
livestock feed in here. But the total contracts . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . What was that? 
 
An Hon. Member: — You took your math education in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — I took my math education from the 
member for Cannington, I guess. 
 
The total contracts were 37,000, 1997 — 37,490. I could break 
those down if you like. There was 36,098 crop insurance and 
1,392 livestock feed. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you. I would like to just zero in on the crop, 
the insurance for crops so forget about the livestock for the 
moment. I want to know how that number compares with the 
previous year’s numbers. 
 
(1645) 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Total contract holders, 1993 — 52,029; 
1994 — 46,922; ’95 — 42,777; ’96 — 339,764; ’97 — 37,490. 
Now . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . ’96 was 39,764; 1997, as I 
said earlier, 37,490. 
 
Now I know what your next question is going to be, so I’ll 
answer it. If you look at the acres, which is the important thing 
to look at and not the number of participants because what’s 
happening as in all of western Canada, the farms are getting 
larger. The acres actually increased under the program from, 
let’s see here — 18,000 in 1994 to 20,000, just over 20,000, 
1997. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s million. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Or sorry, 20 million . . . 18 million to 20 
million. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, you were 
wrong — that wasn’t going to be my next question, but anyway 
that’s all right. 
 
Mr. Minister, aside from the facts, the figures, the acres, the 
acres, etc., what I want to say to you is a commentary that 
comes directly from many farmers. They say that your 
government is making crop insurance look very, very attractive 
because you say the premiums are down. They say that in fact 
the premiums are down but so is the return. They say that if you 
want a decent sort of coverage you’re going to have to pay a 
great deal of money as compared to the return they’re getting. 
So they are also saying, please ask them to get a better crop 
insurance program in place so that it pays for us to get into it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — I appreciate you asking that question 
because that is a question that’s often asked and there’s a bit of 
misunderstanding because we have reduced the premiums of 
crop insurance by 33 per cent over the last two years. That is 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . yes, I’ll get to the returns. That is 

a savings of $35 million approximately annually to producers. 
That is a long-term sustainable drop in input costs, in input cost 
for farm management that this government has done. And I’ll 
tell you any other input costs that are out there — fuel, 
fertilizer, whatever chemical — while they bounce up and 
down, they don’t go down like this 33 per cent and stay down. 
 
Now your point about the returns is a very important one. I 
want to be very clear with you so that you can tell those people 
out there who are concerned about the return rather than 
reiterate their concern is this. The coverage was down slightly 
this year but the coverage moves up and down every year by a 
formula that has not changed over the past number of years, that 
has included in that formula the price of grain. 
 
So when I see people and hear people like you say, well yes 
you’ve dropped the premiums but you’ve also dropped the 
coverage, well we didn’t drop the coverage. The coverage is set 
by formula. The coverage would have dropped this year but 
because of the price of grain, no matter what the premium was. 
And let’s be very clear on that. 
 
And the real problem with crop insurance, the perception of 
crop insurance is that because of the cash/price squeeze out 
there that 70 per cent coverage for crop insurance, or 80 per 
cent, where many years ago would have been sufficient to take 
a year’s . . . a hit for a year, and cover that hit, today because 
the margins are so slim, it is ever more difficult for people who 
need crop insurance coverage for that to cover the loss because 
why? The inputs are so much greater — fertilizer is so much 
greater, chemicals are so much greater than it has been over the 
past number of years. So you can’t relate the crop insurance 
program. 
 
We’ve improved that program dramatically, if you look at it, 
and I really appreciated that question because there’s a 
misconception that we also dropped the coverage. But that’s not 
true; the coverage goes up and down every year by prescribed 
formula. All I want to reiterate is that this government in the 
last two years have saved the farmers of this province $35 
million annually by reducing a very important input cost to 
them. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Just a final comment, Mr. Minister. Certainly it 
sounds as though you have reduced the cost. The end result is 
it’s no benefit to the farmer. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Chairperson, without getting angry, 
I’ll respond to this. She just said that a reduction of 33 per cent 
of a cost to the producer is of no benefit. It’s that kind of 
attitude, Mr. Chairperson, that really makes me wonder how she 
can sit there and be elected in this House. Because $35 million a 
year is no benefit? All I ask you to be is honest — be honest 
with the people out there. 
 
That reduction is a benefit to producers. It’s a benefit this year 
and next year and the year after and the year after. And for you 
to stand in this House, as a democratically elected 
representative, and say that’s no benefit, I’ll tell you is, is . . . 
Well I don’t know what it is but it’s not very good, I don’t 
think. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. My first 



April 16, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 637 

start, I’d like to go from where the member from Humboldt left 
off, Mr. Minister, and I don’t believe you actually really heard 
or understood what she was trying to say to you. I’m hearing 
exactly the same thing from my farmers. Yes, you dropped the 
price 33 per cent, and me, as a farmer, definitely it helps. But it 
helps about that much. 
 
When you look at the overall price, our inputs have gone up, 
and you look at where our grain prices have gone and you look 
at where the final coverage . . . yes, your formula dictates what 
the prices are. So grain prices have gone down so your coverage 
goes down — and you can correct me if I’m wrong. But that 
doesn’t help when our fertilizer prices are higher than they’ve 
been for I don’t know how many years, our chemicals prices 
just keep rising, fuel costs, taxes on fuel . . . you’ll know a lot 
about that. Machinery — go back to 1970, Mr. Minister, when 
you could buy say a tractor for $10,000, a hundred-horse 
tractor, and that same tractor right now probably cost you 
anywhere from 100 to $140,000. 
 
And I’m sure you know. You farm, Mr. Minister, so you know 
exactly what I’m talking about. And I’m glad the member for 
Humboldt brought up the issue of inputs and cost of crop 
insurance, because my farmers are saying exactly what her 
farmers are saying, is that the final line is how much coverage 
they have for what they’re paying for. And you’ve heard me say 
this to you before. And I agree, you’ve put the premiums down 
a wee bit. 
 
But this year, above all years, I have never seen the concern in 
the agriculture industry out there, and with all my farmers and 
every farmer in every corner of this province that I’ve talked to 
since probably January, the concern out there is greater than it’s 
ever been. And I believe the potential for disaster in our 
agriculture sector is greater this year than we’ve ever seen. 
 
We had a rash of farmers that went under a number of years ago 
and kept on for about three or four years, and then it slowed 
down a bit. Should we, Mr. Minister, have a drought this year, 
as it looks like we may have in many corners of this province, 
the crop insurance is not going to bail these farmers out, let me 
tell you, and I think you know that. And the potential for it to 
happen is very great. My own farmers at home, you go to coffee 
row and you check on the Easter weekend, and the concern out 
there is far greater than I’ve ever seen it before. 
 
Part of the problem being that a lot of the farmers, as you know, 
are bigger and bigger and bigger. And their debt loads are 
getting higher but their input costs, just to put this crop in this 
spring, are astronomical. Some of them are a quarter of a 
million to a half a million dollars just to put the crop in the 
ground. 
 
So I guess my question is, Mr. Minister, are you getting that 
same feeling out there as I am that the concern is greater in 
agriculture possibly this spring than we’ve ever seen it for 
approximately the last 20, 30 years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Well the short answer is yes. I know 
there’s a concern. I know the cash crisis on the crunch on the 
grain side. When you say agriculture, let’s be specific, because 
there are very exciting things happening in the hog industry and 
the beef industry. The poultry people are working, the dairy 

people are working, to improve their industry. The specialized 
livestock people, herbs and spices, all those things are moving 
along very, very healthily. But unfortunately, as we’ve seen 
many years, over the years, the grain side has a problem. 
 
What you explain, I don’t disagree with you. The input costs are 
the problem. And as I explained to the member from Humboldt, 
the reason the people say without, like you say, without 
thinking much about, well crop insurance isn’t a help . . . Well 
it is a help. But it can’t help you from the, from the rising input 
costs that you can’t control. 
 
Here’s what we’ve done. Here’s what we contribute to the 
agriculture economy. Besides the reduction of 33 per cent in 
crop insurance and making it more flexible so that you can get 
50 per cent coverage if you’re short of cash some year, at least 
covering, you know, some of your, some of your costs for a 
buck an acre, thereabouts — that’s a benefit — but here’s what 
we’ve put in. We put into this, taxpayers’ contribution, because 
of exemptions and fuel tax, $120 million roughly a year and it’s 
going to be up this year we predict. About 130 or $40 million in 
E&H (education and health) exemptions for fuel, fertilizer, bins, 
seed, and other inputs. We put in a total of $149 million from 
crop insurance and NISA (Net Income Stabilization Account), 
into our share of the premium on top of reducing the farmers’ 
share. We contribute without add . . . with those four things, 
$435 million annually to rural Saskatchewan. Annually. 
 
And you can holler at me all you like about the crisis out there 
and I’m not doing anything about it. But I’ll tell you, numbers 
talk. We broadened the tax exemption base annually pretty well 
in this province. Last year we broadened it to ILOs (intensive 
livestock operation). You don’t pay any tax on almost all the 
inputs for your farm. That’s what we’re doing. 
 
I’ve also taken to the federal table two years ago — and this is 
frustrating and slow — but the fact that inputs are the major 
problem in this province. And we’re having a report from our 
deputies this year as to help describe some options that we 
might look at. 
 
We can’t control the price of inputs as far as price controls. The 
federal government won’t do that. We can’t control the price of 
grain because it’s an international price. And they won’t do 
that. We can’t be subsidizing any more because farmers don’t 
want to be subsidized. But what they want is some watchdog 
for input prices and that’s what we’re attempting to do. This is a 
tough job. 
 
We as a province have done our job. It’s not ended but we’ve 
done our job of $435 million annually and we’re adding to that 
every year. The problem is the producers out there are having a 
terrible time to farm within the margin. And what you and I 
should be discussing in this House is how we help them do that. 
What are the options? Because the next time that you buy a 200 
or $250,000 combine for your farm — I’m not saying your 
farm; for a farm — is the time when you may be ending your 
career as a farmer. And that’s the problem out there because the 
cash flow isn’t there to sustain it. 
 
So I’ll be willing to talk about this and other things in this 
House because I think that’s the key. How do we farm within 
the margins that are available? We lobby and fight Ottawa on 



638 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 1998 

transportation to try to keep that cost down. We as a 
government reduce input costs for crop insurance. We are 
talking on the federal level to try to monitor all the input costs. 
We are talking to Ottawa. In fact I’ve written a letter, or almost 
written a letter, to make sure that we get a message to the 
Americans not to get into the subsidization war like the 
Europeans are starting to get back into again, to hurt. That’s 
what we’re doing. 
 
But let’s sit up — and I challenge you to sit up and stand in 
your place — let’s talk about how we help farmers farm within 
that margin that’s out there. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................609 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................609 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................609 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................609 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................609 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................609 
  Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................609 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................609 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................609 
  McPherson.................................................................................................................................................................................609 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................610 
  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................610 
  Goohsen .....................................................................................................................................................................................610 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ..........................................................................................................................................................................................610 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................610 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................610 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................610 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................610 
  Upshall .......................................................................................................................................................................................611 
  Goulet.........................................................................................................................................................................................611 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Toon Town Animation Studio 
  Whitmore...................................................................................................................................................................................611 
 Saskatchewan’s First Astronaut 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................611 
 A Guide to Historic Sites 
  Kasperski ...................................................................................................................................................................................611 
 Hospital Bed Shortages 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................612 
 Task Force on Balancing Work and Family 
  Lorje...........................................................................................................................................................................................612 
 Former MLA Voices Concern on Health Care 
  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................612 
 Tourism Industry Grows 
  Hamilton ....................................................................................................................................................................................612 
 Educational Success of Northern School 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................613 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Prosecutions Branch Decision 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................613 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................613 
 Inquiry Into Channel Lake 
  Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................614 
  Lingenfelter ...............................................................................................................................................................................614 
 Hospital Bed Reductions in Swift Current 
  McPherson.................................................................................................................................................................................615 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................615 
 Inquiry into Channel Lake 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................616 
  Romanow ...................................................................................................................................................................................616 
 Local Telephone Service Subsidization 
  Goohsen .....................................................................................................................................................................................617 
  Lingenfelter ...............................................................................................................................................................................617 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 6 — The Cattle Marketing Deductions Act, 1998 



 

  Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................617 
 Bill No. 5 — The Animal Products Amendment Act, 1998 
  Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................618 
 Bill No. 7 — The Pastures Act 
  Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................619 
 Bill No. 8 — The Stray Animals Amendment Act, 1998 
  Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................619 
 Bill No. 10 — The Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation Amendment Act, 1998 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................620 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 18 — The Pharmacy Amendment Act, 1998 
  MacKinnon................................................................................................................................................................................621 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................622 
 Bill No. 19 — The Physical Therapists Act, 1998 
  MacKinnon................................................................................................................................................................................622 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................622 
 Bill No. 15  The Gas Inspection Amendment Act, 1998 
  MacKinnon................................................................................................................................................................................623 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................623 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund 
 Agriculture and Food — Vote 1 
  Upshall .......................................................................................................................................................................................624 
  Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................624 
  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................634 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................636 
 
 


