





























































Hansard: April 29, 1998


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 839 
 April 29, 1998 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have 
a petition to present on behalf of residents of Saskatchewan. 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures to this are from the communities of 
Arcola and some here in Regina. I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions come from the Sedley, Creelman, and Regina 
areas, Mr. Speaker. I so present. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As well to present 
petitions and reading the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this petition is signed by individuals from the Radville, 
Ceylon, Weyburn areas of the province. I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
Plains Health Centre petition to present. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 
 

The communities involved, Mr. Speaker, are Radville and 
Weyburn. I so present. 
 

Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
a petition, and I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And these are signed by the people from Carlyle, Wawota, 
Manor, Maryfield, and all across the province. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well on 
behalf of citizens concerned about the impending closure of the 
Plains hospital. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 

 
Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
communities of Arcola, Creelman, Kisbey, and Carlyle. I so 
present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
today regarding Channel Lake: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
People that have signed this petition are from Spalding. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I as well have a petition 
to present to the Assembly this afternoon. This one deals with 
the issue of the Plains Health Centre and the impending closure. 
I’m pleased to present on behalf of Saskatchewan residents 
from primarily the Radville area of the province. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise on behalf of 
people concerned about the closure of the Plains Health Centre: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the signatures on the petition, Mr. Speaker, are all from 
Yorkton. 
 



840 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1998 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present petitions 
this afternoon from people of Saskatchewan concerned about 
our crumbling health care system and specifically about the 
impending closure of the Plains Health Centre. 
 
Your petitioners this afternoon come from the cities of Yorkton 
and Melville. I so present. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also bring 
forward petitions from people wanting to stop the closure of the 
Plains hospital. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these petitions are all from the community of 
Assiniboia, and I so present. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
petitions on behalf of citizens concerned about the closure of 
the Plains hospital. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Those who’ve signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are all from the 
city of Regina. Many of these people we’re looking forward to 
seeing tonight at 7:30 . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The hon. member of course will want 
to avoid entering into debate while presenting petitions. 
Continuing with presentation of petitions. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud to rise 
today to bring the voice of Saskatchewan people to this 
legislature through this petition, which reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition come from the 
communities of Yellow Grass and Weyburn. I so present. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to present petitions on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan 
concerned about the widows and widowers of those killed in 
work-related accidents. 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to have The Workers’ 
Compensation Board Act amended for the disenfranchised 
widows, widowers of Saskatchewan whereby the pensions 
are reinstated and the revoked pensions reimbursed to them 
retroactively and with interest, as requested by the 
statement of entitlement presented to the Workers’ 
Compensation Board on October 27, 1997. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

These signatories are from the Regina district, Mr. Speaker. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly on the 
following matters: to save the Plains Health Centre; to call 
an independent public inquiry into the Channel Lake issue; 
to put a moratorium on the closure of the Plains Health 
Centre; and to have the Workers’ Compensation Board 
reinstate pensions for disenfranchised widows and 
widowers. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. McLane: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on 
Friday next move first reading of a Bill, the hepatitis C 
compensation commission Act. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — Now, hon. members, earlier today at 
Government House tribute was paid to 18 Saskatchewan 
recipients of national and provincial honours. And these 18 
recipients and their guests are seated at this moment in the 
Speaker’s gallery. We want to recognize them in the Legislative 
Assembly chambers today. And in just a moment I’ll invite the 
Premier, the Leader of the Opposition, and the Leader of the 
Third Party to bring brief remarks. MLAs (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly) will then have an opportunity to 
introduce their constituents to the members of the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, members of the Legislative Assembly, as has been 
indicated, earlier today I had the pleasure, as did my colleagues 
from both sides of the House, to help recognize and celebrate 
the 19 Saskatchewan citizens who have been awarded national 
and provincial honours in the past year. And, Mr. Speaker, 
those citizens, as you have noted, have graced this House today 
to be with us in the Chamber in your gallery. 
 
Colleagues, the poet Longfellow once observed that a good life, 
quote: “consists not in seeing visions and dreaming dreams, but 
in acts of charity and in willing service.” Now, Mr. Speaker, in 
a few moments we are going to hear about some truly good 
lives, of acts of charity and willing service. We’re going to hear 
some truly remarkable stories about some truly remarkable 
people. And through these stories, these lives, we see much 
reflection of Saskatchewan and Canada at large. 



April 29, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 841 

And though these stories and these lives may seem broadly 
diverse, they are by themselves a cause of celebration in the 
diversity. And though they may be diverse, there is a common 
thread which runs through them; a common theme that units 
them. That theme is commitment. Many of our citizens are 
involved in the community today, but we honour these people 
here today for going the extra step to commitment. And 
commitment means giving it your all. And these 19 
Saskatchewan people have given it their all over a lifetime of 
volunteering, of entrepreneurship, of building, or in a dramatic 
moment, of selfless bravery and heroism. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it strikes me also that there is another theme in 
addition to commitment — another thread running through this 
colourful tapestry of excellence. The theme, as I’ve noted, of 
service. Whether in teaching or in sports or in business or in 
broadcasting or in risking their lives to save someone in trouble, 
all of these honourees have distinguished themselves by serving 
others. And ultimately these two ideals — commitment and 
service — combine to define our community, to define a 
community, to define a nation, and to make our place the finest 
place in the entire world in which to live. 
 
I close with an observation by the humanitarian, Albert 
Schweitzer. Schweitzer once said the following: 
 

The ones among you who will be really happy are those 
who have sought and found how to serve. 
 

Who have sought and found how to serve, will be really happy. 
Well by that standard we have with us, I’m sure today, 19 very 
happy people, and deservedly so. And I think we should all be 
so happy, Mr. Speaker, and all so proud that we can count such 
people among our neighbours, our colleagues, our friends, our 
nation builders. 
 
And so on behalf of the government and the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan, I’m privileged to honour, to 
welcome, and to thank these people for their great contribution. 
Thank you and God bless. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
official opposition I too would like to extend our 
congratulations to all the men and women who were honoured 
earlier today at Government House and who now join us in the 
Assembly. 
 
We are extremely pleased to see 19 recipients out of the total of 
30 honourees that were honoured in Saskatchewan throughout 
the year. These are men and women that have not only made 
great contributions to our province but, in some cases, also to 
our country and the entire world. 
 
As I said during the ceremony at Government House, these men 
and women are a testament to how much Saskatchewan has to 
offer. I think we should all take pride that we have people in our 
province, and from our province, who have made such great 
contributions to their communities in their fields of expertise, 
and in some special cases, simply through their act of bravery. 
And I think it is highly appropriate that in this Assembly, where 
we represent all the people of Saskatchewan, we take time out 

of our schedule to simply say thank you to these men and 
women of distinction. 
 
On behalf of the official opposition once again, thank you to all 
of you and congratulations on the honours that have been 
bestowed upon you this year. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m please to be 
allowed the privilege of adding my voice to that of the Premier 
and the Leader of the Opposition. On behalf of the Liberal 
caucus, I would like to add . . . echo those words of 
congratulations and commendation. 
 
And as I said earlier, it’s a privilege to address the hon. citizens 
of this great province of Saskatchewan on this day. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. Congratulations. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Hon. members, in just a moment I’ll be 
asking you to introduce your constituents to the Assembly. And 
to the honours recipients, I ask that you stand while being 
introduced by your Member of the Legislative Assembly and 
then remain standing for the applause that I know that you are 
going to receive. 
 
We’ll now begin with the introductions. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure 
to introduce to the Assembly, Mr. Claude Petit, Member of the 
Order of Canada. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure to 
introduce to the Assembly a gentleman, and I know we’re not 
supposed to read biographies, but I do want to just say that this 
gentleman could be introduced in two ways: he is both a 
Member of the Order of Canada and a former member of this 
Legislative Assembly. So I would call now on Mr. Herbert 
Pinder, Member of the Order of Canada, to please stand and be 
introduced. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As was the 
case this morning, with the number of introductions you may 
tire of me before I’m finished. It is a great privilege, Mr. 
Speaker, to introduce to the Assembly, Mr. John Sandison, 
Member of the Order of Canada. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to 
introduce to the members, Mr. George Terry, Member of the 
Order of Canada. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Hon. members, it is my pleasure to 
introduce to the Assembly a constituent in Moose Jaw North, 



842 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1998 

Master Warrant Officer Daniel Maltais, recipient of the Order 
of Military Merit. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my 
pleasure to introduce to the Assembly, Mr. Frank Larson, 
recipient of the Medal of Bravery. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to 
introduce to the Assembly, Amanda Patenaude, recipient of the 
Medal of Bravery. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure 
to introduce to the Assembly, Mr. Clayton Rousseau, recipient 
of the Medal of Bravery, represented by his brother, Tyson 
Rousseau. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure 
indeed to introduce to this Assembly, Mr. Derek Russell, 
recipient of the Medal of Bravery. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you again, Mr. Speaker. It is an 
equal pleasure for me to introduce to this Assembly, Mr. 
Thomas Taylor, recipient of the Medal of Bravery. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure 
once again to introduce to the Assembly, Mr. Boyd Anderson, 
Member of the Saskatchewan Order of Merit. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you again, Mr. Speaker. It is my 
pleasure to introduce to the Assembly, Ms. Carol Gay Bell, 
Member of the Saskatchewan Order of Merit. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure and 
privilege to introduce to the Assembly, Dr. Stirling McDowell, 
Member of the Saskatchewan Order of Merit. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again on behalf of the 
member for Saskatoon Idylwyld, it is my pleasure to introduce 
to the Assembly, Mr. Ross Pinder, Member of the 
Saskatchewan Order of Merit. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to introduce 
to this Assembly, Mr. Ralph Hjertaas, recipient of the 

Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce to the Assembly, Dr. James Hunter, recipient of the 
Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and to the 
Assembly, I’d like to introduce Mrs. Violet Pyett, recipient of 
the Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you. I take pride and pleasure in 
introducing to the House this afternoon, Mr. Doug Steele of 
North Battleford, recipient of the Saskatchewan Volunteer 
Medal. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

New Chief of Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations 
 
Mr. Flavel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on behalf 
of the government and with your permission, I would like to 
congratulate the new chief of the Federation of Saskatchewan 
Indian Nations, Mr. Perry Bellegarde, who was elected 
yesterday. 
 
Chief Bellegarde leaves the position of chief of the Touchwood 
File Hills-Qu’Appelle Tribal Council to assume his new 
position. He has been involved in a number of Saskatchewan 
first nation initiatives and projects, including the issues of 
aboriginal and youth employment as well as issues that affect 
off-reserve and urban aboriginal people. 
 
Chief Bellegarde captured the support of nearly two-thirds of 
the voting delegates on the first ballot. This indicates the strong 
support for Chief Bellegarde in this leadership role. 
 
We are proud of our position and our positive working 
relationship with the FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 
Nations), and look forward to the same productive association 
under Chief Bellegarde. 
 
Again, our congratulations to Chief Perry Bellegarde. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with great 
pleasure that I also rise in the Assembly today to recognize 
Saskatchewan’s newest political leader. As you all know, 
yesterday the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations 
elected a new chief to lead their people into the next 
millennium. 
 
I would like to congratulate Perry Bellegarde, who is a former 
chief of the Touchwood File Hills-Qu’Appelle Tribal Council, 
and the new chief of FSIN. I’m certain that he will represent his 



April 29, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 843 

people well. 
 
I would like to say, Mr. Speaker, that all of us in this Assembly 
recognize the importance of the political and democratic 
process and sometimes the difficulty it brings. I would like to 
commend Mr. Bellegarde for his commitment to his people and 
willingness to serve them at the highest level. 
 
As we enter into the year 2000, elected leaders in Saskatchewan 
and all of Canada must face some very serious challenges. But 
it is also a time of great opportunity. The same is true in the first 
nations community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to wish Mr. Bellegarde the best of luck in 
his role as leader and invite him to meet with the Saskatchewan 
Party caucus at any time. As I have said, we face many 
challenges in the upcoming years, but if we approach them 
together we can turn these challenges into opportunities — 
opportunities for all people of Saskatchewan to reach their 
fullest potential. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Comments on Health Care in Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Jess: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. One year ago to the day 
in this Assembly the hon. member from Arm River made the 
following statement and I quote: “The minister has stated on 
many occasions that there is no better health system than here in 
Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, we agree with that.” 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Jess: — This rare occasion on which the member spoke 
with such simple, truthful eloquence, should not go 
uncelebrated. We agreed with the member from Arm River a 
year ago and we agree with him now. I want to extend best 
wishes for a happy anniversary to the hon. member from Arm 
River on that accurate statement about Saskatchewan health 
care, outstanding health care that stands the test of time. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Miracles at the Plains Health Centre 
 

Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Obviously if you 
torture the facts long enough, they’ll tell some truth. Thank you. 
 
Saskatchewan has had many miracles in its history, Mr. 
Speaker. This week there is a film crew from British 
Broadcasting Corporation here in Regina. They’re here to do a 
story about a miracle that we have recently witnessed here in 
Saskatchewan. Kenji Chan was miraculously brought back from 
the verge of death after a tragic accident. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, he is not alone. There was another miracle 
some four years ago when Karlee Kosolofski was brought back 
to life from severe hypothermia. What do these two miracles 
have in common, Mr. Speaker? They both happened here at the 
Plains hospital; the same Plains hospital that this government is 
determined to close. They just don’t care. 
 

Martin O’Collins, the British director of the film crew, said that 
Regina gained an international reputation following the 
successful treatment of Kenji Chan and Karlee Kosolofski — 
and it all happened here at the Plains hospital. 
 
In the face of this international recognition, what do the NDP 
(New Democratic Party) do? They want to close down one of 
Saskatchewan’s newest, largest, and most accessible hospitals. 
Mr. Speaker, they just don’t care. 
 
We had over 300 people out in Assiniboia, 400 people out in 
Indian Head, 550 people out in Weyburn, 200 in Redvers; and 
they were there, Mr. Speaker, to save the Plains. Mr. Premier, 
there is a rally . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. The hon. member’s time 
has expired. I also remind the hon. member that in bringing 
remarks in members’ statements, they are to be directed through 
the Chair. Continue members’ statements. 
 

Prince Albert Women of Distinction 
 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last night, to mark 
their 85th anniversary in Prince Albert, the YWCA held its 
ninth annual Women of Distinction banquet. The event was 
held, as the program said, and I quote: 
 

In celebration of women who have made significant 
contributions to our community. In honouring them, we 
weave their names into the fabric of history that informs 
our lives and marks our progress together as we work to 
make our city a better place in which to live. 
 

The proceeds from the Women of Distinction night go to 
support the Y’s residence for women and children, as well as 
the many other programs delivered to Prince Albert women and 
children by the YWCA. 
 
Here are the P.A. (Prince Albert) Women of Distinction for 
1998: the Young Woman of Distinction in Science and 
Technology is Alissa Poulin; the Community Enhancement 
category was won by Donna Christopherson; Shirley Gange 
won the Business and Professional Award; Health and Sports 
and Fitness Award went to Mamie E. Bailey. The Arts and 
Culture winner was Lorna Gibson. 
 
My congratulations to all the Prince Albert women of 
distinction and then to the YWCA. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last night the guest speaker was Nancy Green 
Raine, and all of us will remember her from the Olympics of 
1968. I want to tell all members, Nancy “Green ski” has not 
changed one bit. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Highway Upgrades for the Battlefords and Area 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, the people of the Battlefords are 
aghast. Last week the hon. member from Lloydminster sent my 
constituents an open letter telling them to quit bellyaching 
because there was no help for the Battlefords in this year’s 
provincial budget. Instead, they should be grateful because the 



844 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1998 

NDP is spending lots of money in Lloydminster. She then 
proceeded to list all the wonderful projects being sponsored by 
the NDP in tax-free Lloydminster. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, at the risk of sounding like an ingrate, I 
have to report that as I went around my community, I detected 
none of the outpouring of rejoicing that the MLA from 
Lloydminster confidently expects. I heard not so much as a 
single hallelujah chorus. 
 
I say to our lady of the deck chair, if you really care about the 
future of the Battlefords, join with your colleague from 
Redberry in supporting my petition for upgrades to the 
Yellowhead and the entrance to the city of North Battleford. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Construction of Saw Mill 
 
Mr. Johnson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have good 
economic news regarding value added activity in the forest 
sector. 
 
Three first nation bands have signed a deal with Weyerhaeuser 
to build a small . . . a saw mill north of P.A. Construction of this 
Wapa Weeka mill will start in May and is expected to be 
operational by next March. Forty new, long-term jobs will be 
created at the mill. This is not including the many spin-off jobs 
in harvesting and transportation that will be created by the 
$22.5 million project. Weyerhaeuser has partnered with the 
Peter Ballantyne Cree Nation, the Lac La Ronge Band, and the 
Montreal Band in what they all agree is a historical venture. 
 
This new partnership between the pulp and paper company and 
the bands will give the bands a chance to compete in a major 
industry and to continue contributing to the economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan we are moving to better utilize 
the forest by first of all sawing it into lumber, and then using 
the waste to produce fibre for pulp and paper. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

SaskPower Proposed Investment in Guyana 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question this 
afternoon is for the minister responsible for CIC (Crown 
Investments Corporation). 
 
Mr. Minister, yesterday Jack Messer testified under oath that 
the NDP had a legal opinion that says you could be sued for 
pulling out of Guyana. Given your spectacular failure to 
manage SaskPower and Channel Lake, maybe I could explain 
what this means to the minister. 
 
It means that after you’ve decided investing 30 million of 
taxpayers’ dollars into a third-world power company was such a 
great idea; and then after spending $2 million of taxpayers’ 
money to find out investing in Guyana was actually a very bad 
idea; and after the public outcry surrounding the whole Guyana 
affair got very, very loud, you pulled out of the Guyana deal. 

The only problem with SaskPower is, the SaskPower’s lawyers 
are telling you, the government, that you could be on the hook 
for millions of dollars. Mr. Minister, will you come clean today 
and immediately table that legal opinion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, as I’ve reported to the 
House on numerous occasions, we withdrew after the analysis 
on the letter of intent in dealing with Guyana as to whether or 
not to invest there. And having brought it to the Crown 
Corporations Committee where your members had a chance to 
speak to the issue, never raised all of the concerns you’re 
raising now. In fact the member from Melfort I think, believed 
it was a good arrangement. 
 
But I say to the members opposite, when we withdrew after we 
found that the research we had done and the due diligence that it 
was not a good economic deal, we received legal opinions and 
we were reported to CIC that in fact we were on strong ground 
in withdrawing from the proposal. And to this point in time that 
remains the case and no one has started any legal action to this 
date. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — The last thing we need is more of your NDP 
rhetoric on your management of the Channel Lake scandal, and 
we don’t need any more NDP doublespeak about your disaster 
in Guyana. What the people of Saskatchewan are looking for is 
the truth. 
 
Mr. Minister, you should never have been in Guyana in the first 
place, and for the price of a cup of coffee, anybody in 
Saskatchewan could have told you that. But you decided to 
spend a couple million dollars of taxpayers’ money instead, and 
then conclude that the Guyana deal was a bad one in the first 
place. 
 
Mr. Minister, Jack Messer testified under oath, you got a legal 
opinion that says you could get sued by the Government of 
Guyana for pulling out. You didn’t like that legal opinion so 
you went shopping for another legal opinion that said you could 
win in court. It sounds a lot familiar doesn’t it. Duelling legal 
opinions, just like the one you dredged up for Channel Lake. 
 
Mr. Minister, it’s time to come clean on this whole thing 
surrounding . . . like you did on Channel Lake to a certain 
extent — now it’s time to come clean on Guyana. Will you 
table those duelling legal opinions? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: —Mr. Speaker, what we won’t do . . . 
And if you can imagine the logic — he says we’re going to be 
sued and then table the legal opinions. 
 
Now that is a bright person and you can obviously see that he 
was part of the Devine administration that ran the debt up to 
$15 billion. He says you’re going to be sued, table your legal 
opinions, and show it to the people who are going to sue you. 
What kind of logic is that from the member opposite? 
 



April 29, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 845 

But I will say to you, the member opposite, that we have had 
many meetings in the last three weeks in rural Saskatchewan 
and the issue of consulting and project management and 
international investment, far from where you are coming from, 
is well accepted in the public in Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to say that I was in Swift Current . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Now the Chair is having some 
difficulty being able to hear the answer provided. Order. I ask 
for the cooperation of all members in the House, all members in 
the House. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I say to the members 
opposite that we’re fortunate that the public of Saskatchewan 
are a bit more sophisticated and understand business a little 
more than the old Tories, the old Tories who ran the debt in this 
province up to $15 billion. I’ll tell you it’s going to be a long 
time, a long time before you are ever given again the reins of 
power to do what you did to the economy during the 1980s. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well that’s nice to 
know, Mr. Minister, that you have confirmed that you are 
anticipating being sued. And we also, the people of 
Saskatchewan, also understand a little bit about business 
acumen and they understand that you lost money on Channel 
Lake, you lost money on Guyana, you lost money on NST. 
Virtually everything you touch you lose money on, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
This doesn’t have to be a real complicated process, Mr. 
Minister. We ask questions. You’re to provide the answers. You 
have legal opinions that say the government could be sued for 
pulling out of Guyana — one opinion says that you’ll lose; one 
opinion says that you’ll win. 
 
Will you admit that you did go and get a legal opinion that says 
if you pull out of Guyana you could be sued by them and 
there’ll be a substantial cost to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 
Will you also admit that you further went shopping to find one 
that said you would win that kind of suit? 
 
And will you stop the cover-up and immediately table both 
legal opinions? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 
seems to have selective amnesia when it comes to the fact that 
the books of the province have been balanced now for five 
budgets. The fact of the matter is that we have the lowest utility 
rates in Canada, and I might add that that member can run but 
he can’t hide from the fact that he’s a Tory. 
 
One other suggestion I might make is that you fire your 
researcher, Mr. Hermanson, who has his numbers all wrong 
about privatization and support from the public of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Plains Health Centre Closure 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
questions today are for the Premier. Mr. Premier, it was 
extremely disappointing yesterday to watch you whip your 
members into line and force them to vote down compensation 
to hepatitis C victims. It was a heartless, spineless act, Mr. 
Premier. 
 
Still, Mr. Premier, we remain hopeful that one of these days you 
will come to your senses and allow your MLAs to vote freely 
and represent their constituents’ views. Mr. Premier, your 
decision to close the Plains hospital has never come to a vote in 
this legislature. Instead you hide behind the Regina Health 
Board to do the work for you. 
 
Today the Saskatchewan Party is calling for a free vote on the 
future of the Plains hospital. We are calling for that vote to be 
held this Tuesday, May 5. Mr. Premier, we are calling on you to 
allow your MLAs to represent the people they serve and to vote 
to keep the Plains hospital open. 
 
Mr. Premier, will you allow that free vote to happen? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the Minister of 
Health, the Saskatchewan Party, the Conservative Party in this 
legislature, stands now on an almost daily basis calling for free 
votes, free votes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I can name a number of those members who were elected as 
Liberals to this House who did not go back to their constituents 
for free votes. I can name a number of members who were 
elected in this Assembly as Conservatives who now won’t go to 
their people for a free vote. Now they stand unanimously as the 
new Tories, voting as a block. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is a vote coming up. There will be a vote in 
Saskatoon. I would challenge the leader of that party to subject 
himself to the vote of the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, first the 
Premier and his ministers and his members hide behind the 
Regina Health District Board; now they want to hide behind a 
by-election. 
 
The fact is, Mr. Speaker, that people across this province are 
concerned about the closure of the Plains Health Centre. And, 
Mr. Speaker, as I’ve asked, I’ve asked the Premier, Mr. 
Premier, you’ve heard people; you’ve read the petitions; you’ve 
had . . . I’m sure you’ve got numerous letters even on your desk 
from people across this province who are concerned about the 
closure of the Plains health care centre. 
 
Mr. Premier, it’s a simple question. Will you allow a free vote 
on the closure of the Plains health care centre or are you going 
to hide behind every other issue and not allow your members to 
vote freely? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have to smile at the 



846 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1998 

question, especially at the answer given by my colleague the 
Minister of Social Services. I want to come back to the point 
that the Minister of Social Services made, talking about votes. 
 
I don’t think he’s a researcher. I think Mr. Elwin Hermanson is 
a policy consultant at $24,000 taxpayers’ expenses on top of the 
Official Leader of the Opposition’s pay. When it comes to vote, 
let the Tory Party put their actions and their mouths into 
coordination. Let Mr. Elwin Pederson get up and test his . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Pederson, Hermanson, Elwin, it 
doesn’t matter. They’re all the Tories, all the same — Pederson 
or Hermanson, they’re all Tories. Get up there for a vote. 
 
Now as to the Plains hospital, I want to tell you this. Don’t ever 
forget this. When the Plains is closed in October and we are 
consolidating into the General and Pasqua, there will be not one 
bed closed or lost in Regina — not one bed closed or lost in 
Regina. 
 
We’re going to have the best in renal care, the best in cardiac 
care, the best care that Saskatchewan and the South has ever 
had. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, it’s obvious the Premier and his 
colleagues are not listening to the people of Saskatchewan. In 
fact, Mr. Premier, at the meeting in Weyburn, and not just 
Weyburn, many other meetings, if you were to call an election 
today you would hear in spades as the people went to the polls 
to vote. As many individuals have said, they said, call an 
election. If you don’t change your mind, you will find out — 
you will hear from us as we go to the polls. 
 
Mr. Premier, people of . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order, order. Order on 
both sides of the House. Order. Order, order. The hon. member 
is quite capable of asking the question without support from his 
colleagues. And the minister will be able to provide the 
response without support from his or her colleagues. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, you’ve 
been hearing from people; your colleagues have been hearing 
from people across this province. When are you going to listen. 
 
Mr. Premier, we’re asking people, if you’re not going to listen 
to them at public meetings, we’re asking people to call your 
office at 787-9433 and demand a free vote. We’re asking people 
to call their MLAs — which I’m sure they already are — and 
ask for a free vote. Mr. Premier, when will you begin to listen 
to the public, such as they’ve been asking, and allow not only a 
free vote in this Assembly but allow for that free vote to take 
place throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, in this Assembly every 
vote, I like to think, is a free vote because MLAs contribute 
their vote of conscience and their vote of minds to the issues of 
the day through a kind of free vote we saw from the Tory Party 
yesterday on the hepatitis debate, where they unanimously 
stood up — unanimously — because the whip was put on them, 

and the same thing with the Liberals. 
 
There’s going to be a vote all right. And I’ll tell you when 
there’s going to be a vote. There’s going to be a vote sooner 
than later in Saskatoon, and you challenge me to a vote? I 
challenge you to put up Elwin Hermanson or Eldon Pederson or 
any of those sons. Put up your policy research guy at $24,000 a 
year of taxpayers’ bucks — $24,000 a year of taxpayers’ dollars 
— for not a penny of work being done. Put them up in 
Saskatoon. Stop hollering here; put them up and see if you get 
the approval of the voters. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, the Liberals will again be 
hosting another Save the Plains meeting tonight . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Now let’s give the hon. member 
from Thunder Creek a chance to be heard from the very 
beginning. And I'll ask — order — I’ll ask for cooperation of 
members on both sides of the House. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, the Liberals will again be 
hosting another Save the Plains meeting tonight in Regina at the 
Plains hospital auditorium. We expect that people will raise 
serious concerns, just as they have at forums which we’ve 
already held. We have also received more than 5,000 letters of 
support. Many of those are NDP supporters who know the NDP 
is making a major mistake. One Morse resident says, and I 
quote: 
 

Dear Mr. Premier: My father devoted much time and effort 
in getting the Tommy Douglas government elected. I and 
countless others spent years supporting the CCF and then 
the NDP. You jeopardize your and the party’s future if you 
don’t listen. 
 

A Moose Jaw couple write and I quote: 
 

We have voted for the NDP all our lives but if you close 
the Plains that will cease. 
 

Mr. Premier, why do you refuse to listen? Even lifetime 
supporters of your party know that you’ve crossed the line. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I want to first of all 
thank the hon. member for all the testimonials about the NDP, 
which testimonials are still true. Also I want to remind the 
House, Mr. Speaker, that the announcement respecting the 
Plains was made prior to the 1995 general provincial election. It 
was made at the time that we’re involved in renewal. There 
were people who didn’t like that decision at the time and they 
exercised their democratic right. 
 
The member calls that . . . he describes this as a meeting hosted 
by the Liberal Party. Make no mistake about it, lock, stock, and 
barrel, the meetings are hosted by the Liberal Party for political 
purposes. They don’t tell the people the facts. I totally 
understand why the people come there and express their 
concern. I totally understand the attachment to the Plains 
hospital. I totally understand many of the issues that they raise, 
but why don’t those men and women of that third party start 
telling the people the truth? 



April 29, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 847 

Not one hospital bed will be lost in Regina — the best renal 
care, the best cardiac care, the best care for all of Regina and 
southern Saskatchewan, come October 1998. That’s the truth. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll give this government a taste 
of what people are expressing in further letters to the Liberals. 
A Strasbourg resident says and I quote, “The Premier and his 
government are making the worst mistake of their lives.” That 
doesn’t sound like a testimonial. It sounds more like we’re 
starting to eulogize here. 
 
A husband and wife from Estevan put it in this way, and I 
quote, “Let common sense prevail.” A Kisbey couple says, and 
I quote, “You obviously are a government that won’t listen. I 
think it’s time for the government to use common sense and 
work for the good of everyone.” And a resident of Wolseley 
says, “Please listen to the voters. Swallow your pride and admit 
you made a mistake.” 
 
What about it, Mr. Premier. Will you swallow your pride and 
admit you’ve made a mistake? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member is 
quoting for me letters which he receives. Well let me quote for 
him letters which all of the people of southern Saskatchewan 
received. Leader-Post of March 13, 1998, quote, the letter 
writer says: 
 

I am confident, that when the process is complete we will 
have the best acute-care services in the province. These 
services will benefit not only those who live in the Regina 
Health District but all the residents of southern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
No services will be lost, closed or downgraded with the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre. 
 

Who is that letter-writer? A member of the Regina District 
Health Board and a former Liberal candidate for that party in 
1995, Pat Edenoste, who supports the decision, as does the 
former president of the Saskatchewan Liberal Party, who 
supports that decision. 
 
And why do they support that decision? They support that 
decision because they know that there will be no beds lost when 
this is completed. They will have the best renal, the best 
cardiac, and the best health care, as Ms. Edenoste said, in all of 
southern Saskatchewan. That’s why they’re there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Before the hon. member is recognized, I want 
to remind him there is protocol for being recognized in the 
House. If it’s not honoured by members, members will not be 
recognized in the House. 
 
Next question. Recognize . . . Order. Next question. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, the people of southern 

Saskatchewan know that this government’s priorities are totally 
screwed up. And it’s because they’ve lost their ability to care. 
 
A husband and wife from Weyburn suggests in a message to the 
Premier, and I quote: “We thought the PCs were bad, but you 
take the cake for stupid policies.” 
 
A gentleman from Zehner states, and I quote: 
 

It’s ridiculous that a government loses millions on foreign 
ventures like Guyana or domestic ventures like Channel 
Lake or spends $37 million on a casino and then closes 
vital hospitals. 

 
A Moosomin man puts in this way, and I quote: “Roy, you 
already know you and the NDP are out next . . .” 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Now the hon. member 
will be aware that in the House, unless quoting from a tabled or 
public document, not to be using the proper names of members 
of the Assembly. I’ll remind the hon. member of that and I’ll 
ask him to wrap up his question and get on. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — A Moosomin man put it this way, and I 
quote: “Roy, you already know you and the NDP are out the 
next election, but why torch the place on the way out?” 
 
Mr. Premier, surely you don’t want to end your political career 
this way. Will you give the people a say by placing a 
moratorium on the closure of the Plains until the next provincial 
election? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the policy of the 
government, when we announced health care renewal back in 
1991-92, is clear. We are renewing health care to save medicare 
and health care. 
 
We have taken huge steps forward in this regard. We are 
leading the provinces of Canada in this regard. We announced 
prior to the 1995 general election, the Plains was going to be 
closed as part of a consolidation and an enhancement — an 
enhancement — of the health care services. 
 
What’s important in this debate, Mr. Speaker, is what today’s 
letter-writer writes in the Regina Leader-Post in the headline: 
“Facts, not emotion, important in Plains decision.” That’s what 
she writes, “Facts, not emotion, important in Plains decision.” 
 
And the facts are we’ll have the best renal care, the best cardiac 
care. We’ll have no bed loss. We’ll have the units modern and 
up-to-date. We’ll have an MRI (magnetic resonance imaging). 
We’ll have new technology. We will have the finest in Regina 
and in southern Saskatchewan that we’ve ever had. 
 
And what the people of Saskatchewan will decide, they will 
decide in due course at election time. But I’m sure of one thing: 
whatever happens to me and to my government, they will never 
ever, ever, ever elect the Liberals or the Conservatives, those 
men and women who fought medicare tooth and nail then and 
who still fight medicare tooth and nail now. Never. 
 



848 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1998 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskPower President’s Resignation 
 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, the movie industry in 
Saskatchewan is taking off. Yesterday we had The Godfather 
part IV. You’ll recall the Deputy Premier told us sometime ago 
that Mr. Messer resigned by mutual consent. Well John Wright, 
the President of CIC, says that’s nonsense. He agrees with Mr. 
Messer, that the truth is Mr. Messer was given an offer he 
couldn’t refuse — resign in three hours or be fired. 
 
Well if that’s what the Deputy Premier calls mutual consent, 
then if he hasn’t massacred the truth, he certainly massacred the 
English language. 
 
My question for the Deputy Premier: is he sticking to his story 
that that’s mutual consent, or does he now admit he misled this 
House on at least five occasions on this crucial issue? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I refer the member to 
the interview that Mr. Messer gave after he resigned. And he 
was being asked and he was asked, what about political 
pressure to resign. He said no. He was then asked: the 
government didn’t ask you to resign? He said, and I quote: “No, 
I mean I had no conversation with or direct representation from 
the government.” 
 
I say to the member opposite, as Mr. Priel said, and I quote 
from his document which he tabled in the committee yesterday, 
April 27 or the day before, and he said and I quote: 
 

Further, it would be inappropriate, in my opinion, if not 
irresponsible, for the committee or any members to draw 
conclusions on matters the committee is investigating 
without first having heard all of the evidence. 
 

And I keep going back to that, to the member from the 
Battlefords. The issue here is, and you know, that you should 
not jump to conclusions about this issue before the hearing is 
completed. And over and over again you’re told this by Mr. 
Priel, and then you jump out of your seats and you run back in 
here and ask all of the questions, having assumedly come to 
conclusions about the inquiry results. 
 
Be patient, listen to the questions and the answers, and then, as 
he says, I would suggest . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Next question. 
 

Vehicle Insurance Deductible Increases 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the minister 
responsible for SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance). 
Mr. Minister, Ken McQuarrie of Melfort has launched a class 
action lawsuit against your government for breach of contract. 
He says, and the Saskatchewan Party agrees, that you had no 
right to unilaterally jack up deductibles from $500 to $700 on 
January 1 for persons whose registrations had not yet expired. 
 
We believe this is a clear breach of contract, something the 

NDP does on a regular basis. Mr. Minister, we’ve received 
SGI’s statement of defence prepared by — guess who — 
lawyers at MLT (MacPherson Leslie & Tyerman). It says, and I 
quote: 
 

SGI specifically denies that a contract was formed between 
SGI and the plaintiff. SGI’s position is that SGI vehicle 
insurance is not a contract (believe it or not). 

 
Mr. Minister, do you agree with this position? Do you believe 
that the SGI vehicle insurance is not a contract? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I say to the member opposite, this is 
an issue that has been raised before and I can tell you that the 
board of directors have checked this out thoroughly. It’s a legal 
opinion that has come to the board that in fact they are on . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Table it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Oh, table these legal documents 
you say. I mean you’ve got to get some new lines when you ask 
questions. 
 
The fact of the matter is that this is an issue that will be dealt 
with by the management and the board of directors of SGI and 
they will come to the conclusions as to what is in the best 
interests of the shareholders and the user of the service. And I 
say to the member opposite, if the individual is suing, that is a 
format that they can use. But the issue will be dealt with in the 
normal manner. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 35  The On-farm Quality Assurance 
Programs Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 35, 
The On-farm Quality Assurance Programs Act be now 
introduced and read for the very first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 36 — The Vital Statistics Amendment Act, 1998/ 
Loi de 1998 modifiant la Loi sur les services de l’état civil 

 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
36, The Vital Statistics Amendment Act, 1998 be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
(1430) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I ask leave of the 
House to introduce a guest. 
 
Leave granted. 



April 29, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 849 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I’d like to introduce to you and through you to 
members of the Assembly, a former member of this Chamber 
who I am told, although I didn’t sit with him, brought a lot of 
colour to the Chamber in the years that he spent here as a 
member of the legislature. 
 
Subsequent years brought him, Mr. Speaker, to Prince Albert, 
which created another challenge, and I guess that would be for 
his new tailor in Prince Albert, who managed to accomplish the 
needs of the former member I’m about to introduce. 
 
I’d like to introduce to you and through you to all members of 
the legislature, Mayor Don Cody from Prince Albert. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to submit the 
answers to written question 55 and, by leave of the Assembly 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As further 
evidence of this being an open and accountable government, by 
leave of the Assembly, I want to submit the answers to question 
56, 57, and 58. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip requests leave to 
simultaneously respond to all questions. Is leave granted? Leave 
is granted and the answers to questions 55, 56, 57, and 58 are 
tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 20 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Mitchell that Bill No. 20 — The 
Election Amendment Act, 1998 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I want 
to add a number of comments today to the comments already 
that have been made by the member from Melfort-Tisdale a few 
days ago regarding Bill No. 20. I think he hit the nail right on 
the head when he spoke of the need for an electoral system 
that’s not only fair but is also perceived to be fair by the 
residents of this province. 
 
The main purpose of this Bill is long overdue. The Office of the 
Chief Electoral Officer must be perceived always to be fair and 
impartial to everyone involved in the electoral system — to all 
the voters, to all the candidates, and all the parties. So rightly or 

wrongly, up to this point there has been a certain taint 
surrounding the Office of the Chief Electoral Officer, not 
because of the people who have held the post, but because of 
the circumstances surrounding the position. 
 
To this day the Office of the Chief Electoral Officer is under the 
auspices of the Premier’s office. It’s not an independent 
position like the one of the Legislative Counsel or the Clerk of 
this Assembly. Rather, it is a position that has been appointed 
solely at the discretion of the government of the day. 
 
While the members opposite have constantly maintained that 
this has had no bearing on the decisions chief electoral officers 
have made in the past, obviously there will always be some 
questions about those decisions as long as the electoral officer 
is an employee of the Premier’s office. 
 
This Bill seeks to remedy this unacceptable situation by making 
the Chief Electoral Officer a fully independent officer of the 
legislature. This is the case in most, if not all, of the other 
provinces in this country. And it’s the case at the federal level, 
where the electoral officer answers to parliament and not to the 
government. And we are fully in support of this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill is timely now since the position of Chief 
Electoral Officer is currently vacant. I understand that once this 
Bill is passed by the legislature, members from the three parties 
will meet to discuss the qualifications necessary for this post 
and the search for the next Chief Electoral Officer and the first 
to be fully independent officer of the Legislative Assembly will 
begin. 
 
I believe this process, as suggested by the Minister of Labour, 
should be a good one if the government is truly interested in 
making this selection a non-partisan affair and I’ll be glad to 
participate in that process. 
 
However, as the member from Melfort-Tisdale suggested in his 
remarks on this Bill, I too have some concern that the process 
that we will undertake shortly will not be formalized here in the 
Legislative Assembly. There is no requirement on the 
government of the day to commit to such a process. In fact if 
the government simply wants to put a name in front of the 
Assembly to vote on under this legislation, they certainly could. 
 
And if this were to happen at some future date, Mr. Speaker, it 
will serve to thwart the spirit of the Bill. That circumstance 
would inject politics into the appointment of the Chief Electoral 
Officer all over again. So while I support this Bill, I think it 
could be made stronger and fairer on the whole if the process 
for selecting a new Chief Electoral Officer was put in writing in 
the legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the official opposition has another major concern 
about this Bill as well, and that is the appointment of returning 
officers. It makes little sense to me that these men and women 
will continue to be appointed by the cabinet. There is absolutely 
no justification for this. The Chief Electoral Officer will have 
the power to appoint the assistant chief electoral officer and his 
or her staff. Yet he or she will not have the power to appoint 
key deputies in each of the ridings, namely returning officers. 
 
What is the sense of this if we are trying to take the politics out 



850 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1998 

of the electoral system. Frankly it doesn’t make sense, Mr. 
Speaker. The returning officers should also be completely 
independent from the government of the day. They should be 
appointed by the electoral officer after a public search. 
 
No, Mr. Speaker, there aren’t lucrative patronage appointments 
like we see handed to presidents of certain Crown corporations, 
but as it stands now they are patronage appointments 
nevertheless. They are appointed by the government and they 
are not publicly advertised positions. Under the system as it 
now stands, and as it will continue to stand if the government 
doesn’t decide to do what’s right, they are appointed, more 
often than not, because of their loyalty and hard work for the 
party in power. 
 
This is obviously wrong, Mr. Speaker, and to be fair this 
practice also goes on elsewhere, including at the federal level. 
Before the last federal election, an overwhelming majority of 
those appointed by the federal Liberal cabinet as returning 
officers were loyal Liberal activists. But just because patronage 
in the electoral process goes on elsewhere, it doesn’t make it 
right here. And I think the members opposite know that. 
 
Don’t they have enough patronage tools at their disposal to 
reward their party faithful? Surely to goodness they can keep 
their hands off the returning officers who are in charge of 
ensuring elections are run fairly and honestly at the 
constituency level. 
 
In turn, Mr. Speaker, these returning officers appoint deputy 
returning officers and the poll clerks. As long as the cabinet has 
a firm control over who is appointed as a returning officer in 
each of the 58 constituencies, they have I believe, indirect 
control over all of the appointments made within those 
constituencies. 
 
This is wrong and I urge the government, I urge the minister, to 
change this if they want people to truly believe that they are 
honest in their attempts to depoliticize the electoral process in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today I also want to touch on another inequity in 
the current electoral system. Though it’s an area that isn’t 
addressed in the legislation we have before us in this session, it 
is the subject that we addressed two years ago when this Act 
was first passed. And that is the whole issue of political tax 
credits. 
 
As all members of this legislature know, fund-raising is vitally 
important to all political parties. And in this area, as in all 
others, all parties should be allowed to operate on a level 
playing-field. 
 
But that’s not the case today, Mr. Speaker. Because while two 
parties in this province, the NDP and the Liberals, are allowed 
to offer their contributors tax credits, all other parties that are 
currently registered or will be registered in the future cannot 
offer such tax credit. This is because Saskatchewan is only one 
of two provinces in Canada that does not have a provincial tax 
credit. Instead the two old parties filter their contributions 
through their political cousins in Ottawa who then send it back. 
 
Through this practice, contributors are technically giving to the 

federal party and therefore receive the federal tax credit. Of 
course any party which doesn’t want to be beholden to a federal 
party is out of luck. And therefore we see a huge disparity in the 
system between the old parties and the new parties. 
 
As I said, two years ago we passed legislation that did contain a 
section that in fact put into place a provincial tax credit. And 
while every single section of that Act has been proclaimed by 
the government, this one strangely has not. And I can’t think of 
another reason why this wouldn’t have been proclaimed other 
than the current government likes playing with its current 
advantage. They see no reason to make the system fair when 
it’s tilted in their favour. 
 
Issue of tax credits aside, Mr. Speaker, there is another worry. 
In this legislature we pass legislation in its entirety. The 
opposition might be against the particular Bill but in the end 
Bills pass this Assembly in their entirety — pass with the 
support of the majority. 
 
Why then does our system allow the government to then turn 
around and pick and choose what parts of the Act are 
proclaimed into law and which aren’t? These decisions aren’t 
made here on the floor of the legislature. They are made in the 
cabinet room behind closed doors away from the glare of 
scrutiny. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it seems to me that Bills passed in this legislature 
are passed as a whole and do anything . . . and to do anything 
but proclaim the entire Bill as passed is breaking of faith with 
the members of this House. It is in fact putting into place an 
adulterated version of the Bills passed by this legislature. 
 
Once again the voices of the members elected to represent the 
people of this province are silenced, just as is the case when the 
government does most of the actual governing of this province 
through regulation. We are getting to a point when the actual 
Bills we debate in this legislature are becoming less and less 
relevant. More power is slowly being handed over to the 
cabinet. At a time when most of the world has become more 
democratic, it seems to me Saskatchewan is becoming less so as 
more decisions are being made away from this House and 
behind closed doors. 
 
Yesterday in fact we saw the spectacle of back-benchers, 
obviously in discomfort, voting against compensating victims 
of hepatitis C. There is no room, according to this government, 
for MLAs to vote with their conscience at any time. It’s 
shameful, and the sooner we put more power and authority back 
into the hands of those who are elected to this House, instead of 
a small clique of cabinet, the better off this province will be. 
However, as it stands now if the government doesn’t want to 
proclaim a certain part of The Elections Act, that is their 
prerogative. 
 
However in order to make the federal system fair for all parties, 
then we should pass legislation to ensure that no party gets to 
take advantage of tax credits unless they all do. We should 
disallow the practice of filtering donations through federal 
parties. By doing this, no party in Saskatchewan would be able 
to offer tax credits, and then every party — current and future 
— will be playing by the same rules. 
 



April 29, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 851 

And as a fringe benefit, we could avoid the unseemly practice 
used by the NDP and the Liberals, including the member from 
Melville, of hiding the identity of their donors — a clear 
contravention of the spirit of The Election Act. 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. Speaker, if this government was really interested in taking 
the politics entirely out of the electoral system in Saskatchewan, 
they would do all of these things. And I am confident . . . Am I 
confident they will do this? Unfortunately I’m not confident at 
all. 
 
However, these are some of the issues we will be questioning 
the government on in great detail . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order, order. Now it does not 
serve the purpose of the Assembly to have debate coming from 
three different caucuses at the same time. And all hon. members 
will be given opportunity to enter into debate if they wish to put 
their remarks on the record. I would urge them to do it that way. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In closing I’d like to 
repeat that I said, as I said, that there are . . . these are some of 
the issues that I have identified which we will be questioning 
the government on . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Now I just asked the hon. 
members to come to order. And within feet of the member 
who’s speaking, one of his own colleagues and a member from 
another caucus are carrying on their fairly loud debate. And I 
will ask the order of the House to allow the member who is 
speaking to be heard. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We will be 
questioning the government on a number of the issues as I’ve 
raised. Not only here in the House, but with the minister on Bill 
No. 20, but we will be doing that in Committee of the Whole. 
And I look forward to the opportunity for the minister to 
evaluate some of the concerns we have raised, to maybe even 
suggest some alternatives to the Bill to improve the Bill for all 
the people of Saskatchewan. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 29 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Mitchell that Bill No. 29, The 
Workers’ Compensation Amendment Act, 1998 be now read 
a second time. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I made a 
few comments regarding Bill No. 14 . . . or Bill No. 29 pardon 
me, when it was first in for second readings a few days ago in 
this Assembly. And a couple comments that . . . and a couple 
thoughts I’d like to bring into the debate/discussion as well, as 
we look at The Workers’ Compensation Act. I think as I 
indicated the other day, it appeared from what I was hearing 
from the minister that there were attempts certainly to make the 
Act more responsible, make the board, the Workers’ 

Compensation Board, more responsible to injured workers in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
However, we’ve had individuals who have called us, Mr. 
Speaker . . . and yesterday we gave . . . we took time to 
recognize the problems of injured workers and recognize the 
fact there are injured workers, and in some cases, unfortunately, 
workers have lost their lives at the workplace . . . yesterday in 
this Assembly on a day commemorating injured workers. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, as I look at this piece of legislation, 
there are still a number of injured workers, workers who were 
injured at a major project in south-eastern Saskatchewan, at 
Shand, who have some major concerns. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, whether or not this piece of legislation 
would have addressed those concerns, I don’t know. I don’t 
know whether or not the workers who were injured and 
certainly the families who lost loved ones in that disaster, 
whether or not that would certainly offer opportunities down the 
road to make sure people don’t face the same situations or 
circumstances. I don’t know. 
 
We’ll certainly want to look forward to raising those concerns 
with the minister. Because, Mr. Minister, when you look at — 
or, Mr. Speaker — when you look at The Workers’ 
Compensation Act and when people look at Workers’ 
Compensation, they come to us, we find on so many occasions, 
in many cases, Mr. Speaker, situations where there just seems to 
be a lack of understanding between the board and between the 
workers. And I believe the minister talked about that the other 
day and tried to cover that area of discrepancy and the problems 
that arise. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important . . . and we hope that 
this piece of legislation, as the minister was talking about the 
other day, indeed makes the board more responsible and it 
addresses concerns of injured workers. And as I indicated 
earlier, whether the Shand workers would have been affected, 
whether they would have be helped, whether or not this piece of 
legislation is something they can look at to address some of the 
ongoing problems, is something that we would certainly look 
forward to addressing with the minister. 
 
Because I think that’s important. It’s important for us to 
recognize the fact that when someone’s injured on the job and 
they’ve been paying into a compensation program, that that 
program acts responsibly and certainly meets the needs they’re 
now facing as a result of the injury and ongoing injury, whether 
it’s a worker at Shand or whether it’s a worker on an oil rig in 
this province or working in a manufacturing . . . for a 
manufacturing firm in the province of Saskatchewan, or even 
just a worker who’s involved on the floor of a store, in many of 
the stores across the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
This is a very important piece of legislation because there are a 
number of concerns that are out there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’m sure, Mr. Speaker, in your role as a MLA you’ve probably 
had a number of these concerns that have been brought to your 
attention. So we look forward to addressing this piece of 
legislation even more as we get into it. 
 



852 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1998 

I wholeheartedly agree with the minister in his closing 
comments. He said: 
 

Preventing accidents before they happen is better than even 
the most perfect compensation program. Even one death in 
the Saskatchewan workplace is one too many and even one 
injury too grievous. 
 

We certainly agree with that, Mr. Speaker. And I’m sure that 
you would agree with that as well. This is something we need to 
all recognize. Unfortunately, despite all the efforts that we as 
legislators would like to see and all the safety precautions that 
are put in place — we can do everything within our power to 
make sure the workplace is safe to work in — we do not have 
control over sometimes the little mishaps that may take place as 
a result of individuals who maybe were not as careful on the job 
site. 
 
But I think we need to make every effort to make sure the job 
site not only is safe but the workers recognize how important it 
is for them to act and work responsibly and make sure that they 
are taking precautionary procedures to protect themselves, 
especially if they’re working in an environment where there’s 
loud noises, or an environment where there may be heat-related 
problems that may arise, of protecting themselves, or whatever 
the environment. It’s certainly important, and I believe the 
minister talked about that when he talked about funding for 
prevention units, basically a unit to talk about educating 
individuals. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, with those few comments, I would like to 
allow other members to have an opportunity to speak to this Bill 
as well and I look forward to further discussion on The 
Workers’ Compensation Act as we get into Committee of the 
Whole at a later date. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m also happy today 
to take my place and speak for a few minutes about the 
proposed changes to The Workers’ Compensation Act. Our 
caucus will need more time to study the proposed changes and 
to consult with some interested parties before moving it ahead. 
 
When we’re dealing with Workers’ Compensation, I feel it is 
necessary to take time and care in studying all changes because 
of the number of people this Act affects. Obviously workers 
who are injured on the job are affected by the Act. And I can’t 
think of another subject area, besides perhaps Channel Lake, 
that we deal with as an opposition that elicits as many phone 
calls on a weekly basis as does Workers’ Compensation. 
 
Many of these calls are from people who have been fighting 
with the Workers’ Compensation Board for years, if not 
decades. Like any compensation program, or any government 
program for that matter, people do fall through the cracks of the 
Workers’ Compensation system, just as they do with the current 
health care system and just as they do with the government’s 
no-fault insurance system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just over a year ago the government unveiled the 
latest review of the Workers’ Compensation Board, which I 
believe contains some 52 recommendations. Obviously the Bill 
before us in this session deals with only a very few of these 
recommendations. Some of the recommendations made in their 

report are not subject to changes in the legislation itself, as they 
are really just changes in policy for the board, but others do 
indeed require changes to legislation. 
 
While the minister informs us that other recommendations are 
still subject to consultation with stakeholders, I think he owes 
the Assembly a better explanation of that. I think at some point 
in this debate he must tell which of the recommendations he 
plans to implement and when, and which recommendations he 
has no intentions of implementing. There are a good many 
people in this province who want to know this government’s 
future plans with Workers’ Compensation. It’s not just injured 
workers who want to know the direction this board plans to go. 
 
Employers in the province are also waiting and watching very 
carefully for the actions of this government opposite, because it 
is the employers who pay the full cost of Workers’ 
Compensation. And employers, like some of the people injured 
on the job, haven't always felt that the government or the 
Workers’ Compensation Board has been willing to listen to 
their concerns over the past few years. 
 
Business people, many of whom view Workers’ Compensation 
premiums as a payroll tax, cannot be expected to pay more and 
more into a system. As with any tax, there’s a limit to how 
much a single individual or a single business or a group of 
businesses can be expected to pay. And with any changes to 
The Workers’ Compensation Act, we have to be concerned 
about whether it will be an added cost to doing business in this 
province. 
 
Yes, we have to be concerned that the injured workers are taken 
care of by Workers’ Compensation for the time they’re unable 
to hold down jobs, but we also have to be ever concerned about 
cost to businesses. Because we all know, or else we should 
know, with each cost incurred by businesses or any employer, 
there is less money to hire staff and this hurts every person in 
Saskatchewan. It hurts people who are able to work but unable 
to find jobs because businesses are unable to hire. 
 
Late last year employers in Saskatchewan did receive some 
relief from their Workers’ Compensation bill when the rates fell 
for about three-quarters of those businesses who pay premiums. 
However this decrease came on the heels of an increase for 
most employers just two years ago. So while employers 
welcome this decrease in doing business, as they welcome any 
decrease, many are asking whether the drop should have been 
more. 
 
You look at Workers’ Compensation Board’s projections for a 
$60 million surplus and see $60 million that would otherwise be 
in the economy and working for people in this province. As 
well, not all businesses and organizations were fortunate 
enough to see their Workers’ Compensation premiums actually 
drop. Retail operations, newspapers, print shops, light 
manufacturing, charities, and non-profit organizations, and 
financial institutions were hit with further increases. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, employers are watching all changes made by 
this government very carefully to make sure they’re not going 
to end up costing them more money. The minister says the cost 
for the proposed amendment will be just under $5 million. One 
would hope that he sticks to his word and that this cost will be 



April 29, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 853 

covered by the Workers’ Compensation to current rates and that 
not that we have to expect another increase. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another area that is a concern for those who are 
paying bills for Workers’ Comp are the definitions of injury and 
occupational disease. Many feel the definitions as proposed are 
simply too open-ended, and could potentially include many 
ailments or disabilities that are not currently part of the plan, 
and could end up covering diseases or other ailments not 
directly attributable to the workplace. 
 
Let’s remember that the Workers’ Compensation Board is a 
place as a provider of no-fault income replacement benefits for 
people who are clearly injured on the job. It is never intended as 
income replacement for those who come down with conditions 
that cannot be directly linked to the workplace or to their job. 
 
Some injuries and illnesses are common to everyday life, not 
just to the workplace. If more and more conditions are covered 
that are not directly attributable to the workplace, I think the 
Workers’ Compensation Board is beginning a journey down a 
very dangerous road, and in the end it’ll be the employers who 
pay directly and the employees who pay indirectly. It’ll be the 
workers who pay indirectly since fewer people will be hired as 
employers face high costs once again. 
 
Another concern for employers is the certain grey areas that 
we’ve seen pop up in Workers’ Comp in the last few years — 
grey areas such as stress. Again there is stress in everyone’s 
lives — at work and at home. I believe it must be very difficult 
to determine that a person suffering from too much stress in 
their life can attribute it directly to the work environment. 
 
(1500) 
 
I believe provisions such as stress, as injury or occupational 
disease, is going to prove very, very costly down the road. 
Other provinces, such as New Brunswick, Manitoba, and Nova 
Scotia put specific limitations on costly claims such as stress, 
chronic pain, and the ordinary diseases of life. Perhaps the same 
should be done here so everyone, workers and employers both, 
have a clearer understanding of what is covered and what isn’t, 
and what may be covered down the road. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m also concerned that when we’re talking about 
occupational diseases we may travel down the road taken by 
some other provinces and appoint an occupational disease panel 
outside the auspices of the Workers’ Compensation Board. 
While I am pleased that there is nothing in this legislation 
regarding such a panel, I know as well that the government was 
seriously considering this at one point. 
 
One need only look at the experiences faced in other provinces 
such as Ontario, which did strike up an occupational disease 
panel to determine what was and was not covered under 
Workers’ Comp. Eventually it fell prey to many different 
interest groups, and it ended up costing millions of dollars and 
was eventually scrapped. I would hate to see the same thing 
happen here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in talking to those involved in the Workers’ 
Compensation system, I am of the opinion that much more has 
to be done in the terms of bureaucracy surrounding the board. 

Some people are involved in struggles with the board for years 
before their cases are finally settled. This goes against the very 
nature of the no-fault insurance that is supposed to prevent 
lengthy delays from occurring. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Workers’ Compensation is a very emotional issue 
for many people in this province judging from the phone calls 
and letters that come into our offices. Some advocates of 
injured workers see so many problems, in fact, that I understand 
they’re staging a five-day rally in front of the legislature next 
month. I’m sure all MLAs have been invited to this rally. 
 
And as I said, we as legislators must always remember there are 
two sides to this coin — employers as well as the employees. 
And I’ll be very interested to hear what the people who show up 
for this week-long rally will have to say, not only about 
Workers’ Comp but also about SGI no-fault insurance and 
long-term disability. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the end, after all the fixing that is to be done on 
Workers’ Compensation Act, our ultimate goal must be fairness 
— fairness for the injured workers of course. They must be deal 
with in a manner that allows them to retain their dignity. It must 
also be a system that helps them to recuperate from their 
injuries fully and sufficiently, in order to get back to work. 
That, I believe, is what most men and women want. And they 
are entitled to that, just as employers are entitled to be treated 
fairly by Workers’ Compensation in terms of the rates they pay. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ll have much more to say on this Bill at a later 
date, but we do need to look at it a little more closely and 
consult with stakeholders. So at this time I move we adjourn 
debate on Bill 29. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 30 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 30 — The Tobacco 
Tax Act, 1998 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I don’t think there’s 
too many of us in this Assembly that would disagree with the 
intent of this particular Bill. Whether we’re talking about 
smokers or non-smokers, most people are very well aware of, 
and very concerned as well, about the effects of smoking on the 
health of Canadians, and especially young Canadians. 
 
On the whole I would have to agree with the minister, that the 
federal government’s move in 1994 to reduce tobacco taxes and 
to match provincial tobacco tax cuts was a very backward 
move. Not only did this make tobacco cheaper and more 
accessible in the provinces that chose to participate, but it also 
created an open invitation to smuggling into provinces like ours 
that have decided to continue the high tobacco taxes. 
 
As much as the members of our caucus ordinarily hate anything 
to do with taxes, every reasonable person has to hate more what 
tobacco is doing to the health of our young people. It is 
therefore quite appropriate that we in Saskatchewan should 
continue to take a hard line on smoking and on tobacco sales. 
On this score, I would like to state for the record some of the 



854 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1998 

facts about smoking that justify legislation like the one that 
we’re discussing today. 
 
By now almost everyone knows that smoking and other tobacco 
use causes cancer, heart disease, and emphysema. In fact 
smoking is the main cause of preventable death in Canada. A 
cocktail of more than 4,000 substances, more than 50 of them 
cancer causing, hits your lungs. Poisonous compounds like 
carbon monoxide, hydrogen cyanide, and ammonia gas enter 
your bloodstream. Meanwhile nicotine begins to feed the cycle 
of addiction. 
 
If you’re allergic to smoke or susceptible to asthma, and if you 
smoke, the chances of developing asthma rise sharply. 
Flare-ups and chest spasms can begin quickly. And over the 
medium term, you become much more susceptible to cold, to 
flu, and to pneumonia. 
 
Physically fit smokers broke bones and sprained ankles more 
often than similarly fit non-smokers. And the more the soldiers 
smoked, the more likely they were to develop blisters on the 
160 kilometre marches. 
 
Even adolescent smokers develop more respiratory problems 
like shortness of breath and wheezing, and suffer more severely 
from the symptoms. Young tobacco users have, and we’ll list a 
few; abnormally high heart beats, low tolerance for exercise, 
lower lung capacity, worse asthma, and an increased risk of 
damaging arteries from fatty build-ups associated with heart 
disease. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, every 13 seconds, someone in the world 
dies from a tobacco-related illness. And every year tobacco kills 
45,000 Canadians, 418,000 Americans, and 2.5 million people 
worldwide. A member of the World Health Organization says 
we’ll go to 4 million by the year 2000, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Even though more than 90 per cent of youth know that smoking 
is addictive, most children under 10 believe that if they were to 
start smoking they could stop at any time. In fact, although only 
5 per cent of high school seniors believe they would still be 
smoking two years after graduation, 75 per cent were still 
smoking eight years later. 
 
Here is some other smoking assumptions, attitudes, and 
behaviours of Canada’s young people. And the source is the 
Ottawa Citizen, November, 1996. Twenty-nine per cent of 15- 
to 19-year-olds and 14 per cent of 10- to 14-year-olds are 
current smokers. Smoking among teens 15 to 19 years of age 
has increased 25 per cent since 1991. About 85 per cent of 
smokers began before the age of 16. The most common reason 
cited for starting is the influence of friends. 
 
Eighty per cent of current smokers have seriously thought of 
quitting. And 80 per cent of those have made at least one 
attempt. 
 
Corner stores are the number one source for cigarettes. In 1994 
about half of 10- to 14-year-olds who tried to buy cigarettes in a 
store were never asked their age and were never refused when 
trying to buy cigarettes. Ninety-one per cent of youth believe 
tobacco is addictive. Eighty-three per cent who have seen 
tobacco company sponsorship advertisements feel that this is 

really brand advertising. 
 
The earlier people start smoking, the harder it is to quit when 
they are older. People who start smoking in their teenage years 
run the risk of becoming lifelong smokers. One-third to 
one-half of young people who try cigarettes go on to be daily 
smokers. Every 5 per cent of teenagers who smoke two or more 
cigarettes completely and overcome the initial discomforts of 
smoking, overcome the initial discomforts of smoking, will 
become regular smokers. 
 
It takes an average of five attempts for an adult to successfully 
quit smoking. Nicotine addiction is a most widespread example 
of drug dependence in our country. In 1989 about 64 per cent of 
teenagers who are current smokers had made at least one 
serious attempt to quit and could not. 
 
Clearly I could go on for a long time citing these sorts of 
statistics, Mr. Speaker, but underneath all the numbers is one 
simple truth, and that is something we are very well aware of 
but needs to be underlined. And that is that smoking kills. 
 
So for these and many other reasons, we believe that this Bill is 
generally positive. We are therefore satisfied, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, at this time, to see this Bill pass to second reading. 
Thank you. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With leave, to introduce 
guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we’ve just 
been joined by a group of students from Wolseley, Dr. Isman 
School, grade 4 students. They’re accompanied by Loretta 
Kaczmarski, I believe — I hope I’ve got that right — and Stan 
Magel. And, Mr. Speaker, they’ve joined us this afternoon to 
observe the proceedings in the Assembly. 
 
I’ll look forward a little later on to meeting with the group. 
Unfortunately due to some of the responsibilities in the 
Assembly, will not be able to be with you for the whole 
process, but I’ve invited my colleague, the member from 
Cannington, to meet as well. But we look forward to meeting 
with you and talking about what you’ve observed as you sit 
here and observe the workings of the Assembly, and even as 
you tour the Legislative Building shortly. 
 
So I’d like to invite the members to join with me in welcoming 
the students from Dr. Isman School in Wolseley. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 14  The Adoption Amendment Act, 1998 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I’ll invite the minister to introduce his 



April 29, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 855 

officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. With us today we 
have Ms. Bonnie Durnford, seated at my side, who is the 
assistant deputy minister of Department of Social Services; and 
directly behind us, Ms. Lynn Allan, who is our director of child 
welfare. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair, and to the minister 
and his officials, welcome. 
 
Mr. Minister, a few questions regarding the Bill before us, Bill 
No. 14, An Act to amend The Adoption Act. And as you recall 
from your comments about the reasons for The Adoption Act 
before this Assembly, some of the comments I made in second 
reading debate regarding the Act. 
 
And certainly, Mr. Speaker, you’re aware of the fact that I’ve 
suggested some of the . . . a number of the changes that you’re 
making, they’re certainly welcome changes. And they’re 
changes that I think will address some of the concerns that are 
there. 
 
But I’d like to bring some questions forward that maybe you 
and I have already talked about and in some ways agreed or 
agreed upon or do tend to agree. But just for the sake of even 
the viewing public so that they can have a better understanding 
of what this piece of legislation is going to do, and how it’s 
going to address some of the concerns that they may face or the 
questions that they have. 
 
And in section 2 I understand the amendment to the Act 
recognizes the birth father in the adoption process. And as I 
indicated the other day, I applaud the change, as I’ve been 
informed by many people that the adoption process, indeed the 
custody process, does not recognize the rights of the father. And 
we’ve certainly had this and I’m sure that even in your office 
and your position as an MLA, that’s been brought to your 
attention. 
 
Have there in the past been any inquiries to the Department of 
Social Services by birth fathers wanting to contact their 
adoptive children? 
 
(1515) 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, certainly there have been 
requests from birth fathers. And we don’t have a tally of exact 
numbers, but there certainly have been requests. We have the 
post-adoption program by which birth fathers can make 
inquiries. Of course we would check with the adoption records 
and so on to see if in fact the person who’s making the inquiry 
is indeed the birth father. 
 
And that is why we believe that the amendments we’re making 
now will provide even a better opportunity for birth fathers in 
the future to make that kind of contact by including this 
information on the adoption order. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. As well, conversely it 
would appear, and we’ve heard it on many occasions, where 

children have looked up and as they’ve become older and 
certainly reached adulthood, on many occasions they have 
desired to certainly look up who the birth mother may have 
been, and seek that information. I would take it and I ask the 
question, have you had that same type of inquiry from children 
regarding who the birth father may have been? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Yes, Mr. Chair, that’s true. There would 
be inquiries from those who have been adopted in regard to 
their birth mother but equally in terms of their birth father; 
that’s true. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Thank you, Mr. 
Minister. Mr. Minister, you’re saying that this amendment 
marks a new philosophy or way of looking at the process of 
including the birth father. Quite clearly this shows the former 
process was discriminatory towards the birth father and that’s 
the way a lot of fathers that I’ve chatted with have talked about 
it. 
 
And will this privilege, Mr. Minister, be extended to fathers and 
adopted children involved in the adoption process prior to 1998 
after this Act comes into force? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chairman, I’m reminded by my 
officials that changes that were actually made to The Adoption 
Act in 1990 did open many doors for birth fathers formerly. 
These changes will not significantly address those who have 
been birth fathers. We believe that the changes in 1990 made 
some change that opened the doors for those birth fathers. 
 
What the changes we make today will ensure in future, even 
more so, that birth fathers have the opportunity to be involved 
in that open adoption process at time of adoption. That there be 
clear record keeping and that in future, as those who are now 
being adopted may grow into adult years and wish to make 
contact with birth parents, that the process is even better. 
 
Mr. Toth: — So, Mr. Minister, while you’re suggesting what 
this piece of legislation is doing will make the process, I guess 
I’ll use the words flow more smoothly, work in a more 
cooperative manner with birth parents and certainly in 
recognizing birth fathers as well, what you’re also saying is it 
doesn’t change it a lot for birth fathers prior to even the changes 
in 1990. Is that what you’re indicating? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, the 1990 changes did open 
the doors for birth fathers. With this piece of legislation we’re 
essentially defining the birth father; to broaden that, to clarify 
that, to make certain in most circumstances — there will be 
circumstances that will vary from this — but in most 
circumstances that the birth father, as defined and identified by 
the birth mother, and as admitted by the birth father, that they 
can be part of that adoption process. And then, to some future 
time where through the open adoption process, the individuals 
who’ve been adopted may want to have that contact, that it be 
available to them. 
 
So it is defining and broadening the ability for birth fathers to 
be involved right at the beginning. The actual access and so on 
is defined and available now through the change in 1990. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, if I could 



856 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1998 

use a bit of an example as well — and correct me if I’m maybe 
wrong in using this example or the way I’m bringing it out — 
but I understand that in order for a birth mother to contact her 
adoptive child, if no access agreement has been made, she must 
submit a request with the department. Further, the adoptive 
child must submit a request to the department as well. So that 
indicates to me a willingness on behalf of both parties to seek 
this adoption. Can a birth father also make the same request? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, yes, the answer is yes. The 
birth father may make the very same request. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, as we look at the changes that are 
being brought forward in this Act, was the child advocate 
involved in the drafting of these amendments, and if so, how 
much was . . . or how much of the involvement was the child 
advocate involved in? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, the child advocate will be 
aware of the changes that we’re proposing. She was not part of 
the drafting of this particular piece of legislation, although there 
was a great deal of consultation done with adoptive parents and 
their representative organizations, and if I may say, with the 
legal community, because we are here dealing with legal 
matters. So there was a wide consultation. 
 
The child advocate was not involved in the actual drafting but 
she is aware of what’s happening. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, in section 5(4)(b) you state that the 
section is amended to ensure that birth parents are informed of 
their rights prior to the signing of the agreement. I’m wondering 
if you can clearly detail the rights of the birth parents and the 
problems with the system before this amendment, in detailing 
these rights. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, over the last number of years 
we have been working on the process of adoption to ensure that 
it is the very best process that we can provide. And so in terms 
of the actual adoption process now, there is home study 
required for all the independent adoptions that works very, very 
closely with the adoptive parents so that they fully understand 
the implications of adoption. 
 
An issue that has arisen through this is the matter of access to 
birth parents. There has been some interpretation or some 
suggestion that access to birth parents should be guaranteed by 
law. We do not believe that that in fact represents what we 
believe is the true principle of adoption — so that the adoptive 
parents may adopt and with all confidence raise the adoptive 
child as their own. 
 
Now we encourage the open adoption process where there is 
involvement of birth parents, but we maintain that that should 
be a privilege and not a legal right. And so what we are doing 
here in this section is making it very clear in law that access is 
not part of the adoption order, to give the adoptive parents the 
confidence that they may raise the child as their own. 
 
But again, that said, we are very anxious to encourage the open 
adoption process and to involve both birth mother and birth 
father, and so the amendments around birth father to more 
facilitate the birth father . . . as not particularly as a result of 

these amendments but through the process that has evolved over 
the last number of years. We worked very hard with adoptive 
parents and with birth parents; so that at the very outset 
everyone understands as clearly as possible all the implications, 
all the ramifications, and all the rights and privileges of 
adoption. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And that leads to a 
further question in section 16(1). And it talks about . . . you 
talked just a moment ago in response to the last question about 
access and communication. And as you’re aware or will recall, I 
did make some comments in regards to that and I appreciate the 
comments you’re making as well in response. The fact that for 
adoptive parents they need to know, and certainly begin to 
realize, that first of all when they are bringing their names 
forward for adoption, there are a number of responsibilities. 
They’ve got a responsibility to provide a good home 
atmosphere and raise the child to the best of their ability. 
 
And I’m sure that many parents who do come forward for 
adoption do have some . . . I guess maybe may draw back a 
little bit and may reflect a little bit, and some concern as well in 
the areas where they might be concerned about the fact: will 
they be allowed the ability to indeed have full control in raising 
that child without fear of manipulation by the birth parents. 
 
And from your comments, I understand that’s where you’re 
heading. And I take it that basically that’s where subsection 16 
is going as well. 
 
And when you talk about . . . I think under an explanation, it 
mentions about clarifies the communication access agreements 
are not part of the adoption order, but it also talks that they’re 
not enforceable. And I’m wondering what you mean by that 
term “not enforceable” as well, Mr. Minister. While we’re 
thinking of addressing it so that there aren’t interferences, is it 
even if there were communication access agreements; are you 
basically saying by law they really wouldn’t be enforceable? 
That it would be difficult to enforce them? That they would 
create a problem so let’s just address it and not have them as 
part of the new Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Yes, Mr. Chair, the member from 
Moosomin has it correct, that what this is saying is that these 
are not legally binding and that there would not be an option for 
someone then to sort of go back to the courts and demand more 
access. And it is to guarantee to those parents who are willing to 
take a child into their family and into their home under the 
process of adoption, that they in fact can be assured of the rights 
that would be enjoyed by any parents in our society. 
 
It is again, I repeat, that we do encourage that open adoption 
process and encourage the communication agreements, because 
we think in the long run that is the most healthy relationship. 
But we do want to provide that solid assurance to adoptive 
parents that they can raise that child or those children in the 
competence of any other parent in the province. 
 
Mr. Toth: — I thank you, Mr. Minister, and appreciate the fact 
that your officials have recognized this and recognized the need 
and have addressed it. Because it certainly would be 
unfortunate if we had to come back here next spring because we 
found that there was an area, especially when it comes to access 



April 29, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 857 

and communication, that was creating a problem and hadn’t 
addressed it while we were doing a number of changes, major 
changes, to the Act. 
 
Section 18(12) talks about . . . amendments to section 18(12) 
clarify that an adoption is revoked where there is a subsequent 
amendment. This seems to make sense, but I wonder if the 
minister can clarify whether this might have a serious impact if, 
for example, a child was adopted by a loving family who was to 
suddenly die without making provisions for the custody of their 
adopted child. If the child was subsequently adopted, my 
understanding of this clause is that the first adoption would be 
revoked. 
 
And while it may be a simple house-cleaning matter, I think we 
need to ensure the integrity of the relationship between the first 
adoptive family and the child is not damaged. Will it also have 
an effect on the line of succession of property for that adopted 
child? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, the member raises I think, a 
very good question, a very significant point. And we’re 
discussing it as we speak. So we may want to have some more, 
yet more dialogue. 
 
In the circumstance where an adopted child’s adoptive parents 
are both tragically killed, that adopted child does not lose any 
inheritance rights; that’s clear. We expect that the circumstance 
that might be reflected in this, where an adoption would be 
revoked, our sort of only sense of where that might happen is if 
in fact — and I don’t know if it’s ever happened and for sure it 
would be a very rare occurrence — but if the adoptive parents, 
for some reason, turned out not to be appropriate parents or in 
fact abusive in some way. 
 
And we would address that situation as we would in any other 
family, by in fact removing the child and placing it in foster 
care. That could be the circumstance where an adoption would 
be revoked. But in terms of the death of adoptive parents, all 
legal rights which would belong to a natural born child of those 
parents would remain with the adopted child. 
 
(1530) 
 
Mr. Toth: — I guess the other question that comes to the 
forefront, and maybe we missed it and I may have missed how I 
placed it as well, is if provisions haven’t been made by the 
adoptive parents for custody of the child, who then takes 
charge? Like I would, I would assume that most adoptive 
parents just like . . . would treat this in much the same way as 
birth parents. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Minister, I think many parents feel they’re 
going to live for a long time and kind of put off making sure 
that there’s some provisions in case something tragic like this 
happens. But in this case, what happens if there isn’t anything 
done that really provides for the custody of that adoptive child, 
should the adoptive parents tragically be removed from the 
scene? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I do want to reflect to the 
member — he might agree with me on this — that all parents 
feel like they’re going to live for ever, until they get teenagers 

and then they feel they gain some years. 
 
Mr. Chair, we would . . . in the case of adoptive parents, it 
would be as in natural parents. That the parenting responsibility 
would be to discuss or put in place in a will or in some other 
form, intentions for children if in the tragic circumstance, both 
parents are taken. 
 
If that is not the case, either with adoptive parents or natural 
parents, if that indication is not provided, likely what would 
happen is that the family of the adoptive parents, as in natural 
parents, would group around and maybe make some decisions 
or take some responsibility. 
 
If ultimately there were no family or other kin that could be 
available, it would fall to the Department of Social Services to 
arrange for the care of the child or children, which would be 
exactly the same in a family where the parents are natural to the 
children. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and I think that’s a 
point well taken. It certainly needs just to bring forward just for 
clarification, because as a natural parent you’re right, most of us 
I think . . . in fact I’d be surprised if there aren’t parents who 
have not taken the time to discuss with exactly next-of-kin, if 
certain things should happen, will you see to it that our children 
are looked after or parented or whatever. 
 
And I think that in the adoptive-parent situation as well it’s 
important, because it’s not just the adoptive parents but 
certainly it’s the extended family — it’s the grandparents who 
. . . I think you will all note the fact that whether it’s the 
adoptive parent or the grandparent or aunts and uncles — you 
all become very attached to a child. So I think it’s just a normal 
process to allow this to happen. 
 
The fact that if the only other option, if there aren’t extended 
family members, then the department certainly feels that, and I 
understand would feel, would be responsible to take . . . and 
obligated to make sure that child is provided for. So I think 
that’s an important thing for people to understand. 
 
In section 21(4) I note the section as amended to clarify that if 
there is a conflict or any conflict between this Act and The 
Child and Family Services, this Act takes precedence. And I’m 
wondering, Mr. Minister, if you can give me an example of how 
or where this provision might come into place. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Again this would be in that extremely 
rare situation and I am not aware of it happening. But in that 
extremely rare situation where the adoptive parents, it is 
subsequently determined, are not suitable or fit for parenting of 
that child and the department would have to intervene to 
remove that child, who then may become a permanent ward of 
the department, this amendment then allows the department to 
share with that child information about their own personal 
history, i.e., their natural parents and the process of adoption. 
So it provides the legal right then for the department to act as 
the parents would, have the same right to provide that 
information. 
 
This is a very rare circumstance, but we want to protect against 
every circumstance. 



858 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1998 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. In section 23(1), and 
I’m not sure if I totally understand the section, the section refers 
to a situation where a child is living with only one of his or her 
parents, birth parents, presumably because of divorce, death, or 
because a parent was not married in the first place. This section 
discusses the process by which the new spouse of the custodial 
parent can adopt the child. 
 
I’m interested in the situation where the birth parents are 
divorced and the non-custodial parent is still living. In the 
amendment it states that the non-custodial birth parent must be 
given notice of the application within a 30-day period or a 
period determined by the judge. The amendment says nothing 
about the need for agreement by the non-custodial parent. 
 
Can the minister explain this exclusion and the impact this has 
on the rights of the non-custodial parent? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I want to be as precise as I 
can about this. There’s many definitions here. 
 
Currently the Act allows the non-custodial parent to provide 
consent for the adoption; that’s at the outset of the adoption 
process. What this amendment wants to do is sort of simplify 
the process by simply saying then that the consent for the 
adoption equals the notice. So consent represents the notice. 
 
So when the non-custodial parent consents to the adoption, that 
will be considered also the notice to the non-custodial parent, 
the very same person who is giving consent for the adoption. 
 
Mr. Toth: — So would this . . . when you’re talking of consent 
being given, when would consent be sought or be looked into? 
Would that be before notice is given? I guess that’s where the 
question arises as well, is how does a non-custodial parent 
become aware of this adoptive procedure or process? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, that is assured by the court 
process itself. The court must ensure that the non-custodial 
parent has provided consent. 
 
Now in the circumstance where that consent, at the end of the 
day, may not be forthcoming for the non-custodial parent, the 
court can supersede and still proceed with the adoption. But it is 
the responsibility of the court, through The Adoption Act, to 
seek the consent of the non-custodial parent. 
 
So consent of course precedes the notice. We’re trying to 
technically smooth this out so the consent becomes the notice. 
Having consented, one has been notified. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, as well, does this apply equally to 
common law spouses as it does to . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — It would apply, Mr. Chair, to a common 
law spouse who is the natural parent or custodial parent. It 
might not apply if in fact the parents who are placing the child 
for adoption, the child is the natural child of one of those 
parents but the common law spouse has no relationship with the 
child. But in the circumstance where it’s common law and they 
are the natural parents, then yes it would apply. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. As well in this 

legislation we talk about international adoptions. And I think 
we’re all aware of the fact that adoption is clearly a very 
complicated process, and it becomes even more complicated 
when we start talking about not only provincial boundaries, but 
international boundaries and international adoptions. 
 
While I’m not disputing that some of these complexities are not 
warranted, because we must make sure that we protect the 
rights of all parties involved, especially the child, you’ve 
provided some explanation regarding the amendments being 
made regarding international adoptions in reference to the 
Hague Convention. 
 
Mr. Minister, it appears to me that your intention is consistent 
with these principles, but I want to note that even in the recent 
past, there have been incidents where the international adoption 
process is highly bureaucratic and it results in delays of up to 
one year, as we’ve seen just by . . . just after . . . not in this past 
year, but certainly last year a number of cases that hit the media. 
 
This has a dramatic and I might say negative impact on all 
parties. And my heart goes out to adoptive parents who take a 
child into their house without even meeting them, only to be 
disappointed time and time again because of bureaucratic 
delays. 
 
Mr. Minister, there’s no doubt that for parents who wait for a 
year or two years, this is the longest period of their lives, and 
certainly this is not good for the child. First of all they are being 
adopted because they are not in an optimal situation, to say the 
least. And secondly, we all know how important it is for a child 
to be with loving parents in the early parts of their life. Not only 
does it promote the bonding process, but also it is important for 
the child’s emotional, social, and intellectual development. 
 
Mr. Minister, what do these changes do to ensure that 
bureaucratic delays are lessened while maintaining the integrity 
of the process of international adoption? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — This, and I, with the member from 
Moosomin, I think we would . . . we really do feel for those 
parents who are adopting internationally and face some of the, 
as the member describes them, the bureaucratic delays. 
 
I believe the member would admit that most of those delays will 
be occurring in the country of origin, in the country of birth of 
the child. And we have little, or very little, mechanisms by 
which to deal with the bureaucracies at that end. We try to 
ensure that our own processes are as smooth and as flowing as 
possible. 
 
Now I recognize the dilemma here, because we do want to 
protect parents and children from any unscrupulous activities 
that may be occurring in those international circumstances. We 
want the protections to be there, and some of those protections 
will create some processes delay. There’s no doubt about that. 
 
Directly to your question, our ability to organize outside of our 
own boundaries is extremely limited. I think worldwide, I 
believe we are benefiting by The Hague Convention so that 
jurisdictions around the world are now beginning to put their, as 
we are with this, put their processes and their regulations and 
their law into a harmonized situation; so at least we’re all 



April 29, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 859 

dealing from the same set of rules. 
 
We know and we hear, particularly from parents who are 
involved in Romania, that there have been some delays which, 
as you point out, are not just frustrating but may in fact not be 
providing to the children and the parents the best circumstance 
that we desire. But our ability at that end is pretty limited. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And I certainly would 
encourage the department to continue to work and to see how 
we can facilitate the international adoption process even more. I 
think and believe, Mr. Minister, that other countries, while I 
guess we have to recognize the fact that countries in many cases 
just feel very strongly about themselves as well and don’t really 
want to see children leaving their country . . . 
 
Because I think as you have mentioned, certainly in Romania 
the problems that were rising out of the civil disobedience — I 
guess if I can use the term — and the atrocities that were taking 
place, by having and allowing adoptions, it was a recognition 
by the government of a problem that they were having difficulty 
in addressing even themselves, and so they were willing to 
allow this to happen. 
 
But I think at the same time we’re all — if I can use the word 
— proud, we’re all proud people. And we don’t want to 
acknowledge, by allowing adoptions and having people coming 
in and recognizing that there are a lot of little children that 
really don’t have parents and whom haven’t a place to go to . . . 
It doesn’t speak well of your nation. 
 
So I can appreciate the fact that there will be some difficulties 
in trying to put together the processes that will be needed to 
certainly allow for a smooth flow. 
 
But I would certainly encourage your department, even working 
together with federal departments, to address some of these 
concerns, and to, I guess if you will, help other countries to 
realize that this isn’t a slam on your nation, but certainly there 
are homes in this province that . . . our province or our country 
of Canada that are willing to open up their homes, families that 
are willing to open up their homes. 
 
So I would say, let’s continue to work towards building a 
smoother process that allows for the international adoptions. 
And I want to say to you and your staff who have joined you 
today, I commend you for the work that has been done in the 
area of adoption and addressing the number of the concerns. I 
thank you for your responses to the questions that I posed this 
afternoon. 
 
(1545) 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 12 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, just before I make that 
motion, I too would want to join with the member from 
Moosomin in thanking the officials who have joined us here 
this afternoon — Bonnie Durnford and Lynn Allan — not just 
for the contribution they’ve made to our discussion today, but 
as the member pointed out, for the good work that they have 

been doing over the last number of years around all of the 
adoption issues and processes in our province and far beyond it. 
 
And so with that, Mr. Chair, I would like to move the Bill 
without amendment. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 14 — The Adoption Amendment Act, 1998 
 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move that this 
Bill now be read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Social Services 

Vote 36 
 
The Deputy Chair: — As we begin, I’ll invite the minister to 
introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Seated at my side 
is Ms. Glenda Yeates, deputy minister of the Department of 
Social Services. Just behind Glenda, Ms. Bonnie Durnford, 
assistant deputy minister. Directly behind me, Mr. Bob 
Wihlidal, executive director of our financial management 
division. Beside the deputy of Social Services, Mr. Phil Walsh, 
who is the executive director of our income security division. 
And just behind Phil, Mr. Richard Hazel, who is the executive 
director of family and youth services division. And I welcome 
our officials to these deliberations. 
 
Subvote (SS01) 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Welcome, Mr. 
Minister, and welcome to your officials. My colleague has 
allowed me to start this afternoon asking questions. And I first 
of all want to start by saying I think your department is such an 
important one in our government because there’s so many 
children and people that are counting on you that are . . . 
probably the people in our province that need some looking 
after and need some help. So I understand that you’re probably 
very busy and you have tremendous responsibility. 
 
I’m going to talk mostly about one area that I’ve had 
questioning on, and maybe you’ll have an opportunity to go 
further with. My colleague hasn’t returned. I wanted to ask you 
about the community development unit. I understand that there 
are workers in probably each of the regions, but I’m not sure 
what the purpose or the mission of this program is, and maybe 
you could outline that for me. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, our community development 
unit is essentially a small — in terms of the relative size of the 
Department of Social Services, which is a large department in 
terms of its personnel and responsibilities and budget — it is 
relatively a small unit. 



860 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1998 

We do not have exact numbers here, although we can get them. 
Well maybe we do now. We have . . . the unit at the provincial 
level is a unit of three people, three full-time equivalents in any 
event, so three positions at the provincial level. And then in our 
regions we may have workers who are doing this more or less 
on a full-time basis or on a part-time circumstance. So the scope 
of the department is relatively small. 
 
But that, I hope, is not to minimize some of the importance of 
the work that the community development unit we know is 
doing and we hope can do even more in the future, which is to 
essentially work with local communities and to work with 
agencies within local communities, recognizing that in this vast 
province with its geography and its various . . . just the variety 
of communities in this province, that needs in an individual 
community and resources in an individual community may vary 
a great deal. 
 
And we hope that we’re tying the kind of programing that we’re 
able to do and that we’re able to support, as closely as we can 
with the real needs and the real resources within that 
community. 
 
And so what we describe as our community development unit is 
really our mechanism for trying to relate with communities and 
with the resources that exist there, to be sure that if there’s 
opportunities for us to partner or team with community-based 
organizations, that we’re doing that as much as we can. If there 
are small economic development efforts that we might be a part 
of as a department, working with, again, community-based 
organizations, this is the sense of the community development 
unit. It is small, but I’m hoping — and know it is effective — 
and I’m hoping it can have even greater effect in the future. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, I was wondering when this 
program was actually developed, when you started, when there 
was actually employees in this area. And I was wondering if the 
program has actually been evaluated to determine its 
effectiveness. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, the unit is two years . . . two 
years ago was established as a provincial unit. We have not 
done a formal evaluation of that unit, but what we have been 
doing are evaluations of each and every of the initiatives that 
the community development unit has brought forward and is 
involved with. And so we are evaluating on a project-by-project 
or an example-by-example basis. 
 
Two of the community development projects or initiatives now 
that I have been able to see firsthand — I choose two from the 
city of Saskatoon — one is something called Quint 
Development, which is a community-based organization that 
works very closely with the Department of Social Services to 
provide opportunities for men and women who may today or 
have been receiving social assistance but can, through some of 
their own initiative and perhaps with some community 
development support, in fact become small entrepreneurs. 
 
And so for example, I met a man who’s been assisted by the 
Quint organization in Saskatoon. He was on welfare. Through 
the Quint organization, he was provided some basic tools, some 
basic carpentry tools. That individual now is independent of 
social assistance, has his own small contracting business and is 

doing very well. 
 
What he required was the support of some of the business skills 
that Quint can provide — some initial capital, small, but to 
provide him some tools — and that has given him the ability. 
That’s one initiative that the community development unit has 
been involved in. 
 
Another in Saskatoon which I believe has been extremely 
successful is an organization that I believe the member will be 
aware of. It’s described as the Saskatoon Communities for 
Children, and working with a wide number of community-based 
organizations, organizations at the municipal level like the 
Saskatoon City Police department for instance, the 
Communities for Children have brought a large group of people 
together who all have the interests of children at heart and find 
now that they’re working together, they in fact can achieve 
more by working together than by working independently. 
 
Again, that’s been another initiative of our community 
development unit, one that I think as our evaluations have 
shown us, is doing some very good work and of which we’re 
quite proud. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, you used the word we a couple 
of times when it comes to evaluation. Does that mean that the 
evaluation is done directly in your department or is it done in 
each region where there is workers taking on a certain 
initiative? 
 
(1600) 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — As we move ahead, Mr. Chair . . . in fact 
we’re evolving and learning as we go. The evaluation process 
now is a project through the community development initiative 
is going to be established. It must have built within it an 
evaluation process. So there is, on a project-by-project level, an 
evaluation process. 
 
That will generally be done at the regional level but of course 
all the information is shared with the central office of the 
department. We have not . . . As we go, we’re ensuring as best 
we can — of course we do with every program and every dollar 
that we spend — that we’re getting the maximum return or 
benefit for the program and for the dollars expended. 
 
We will, as . . . Now because I say the unit is two years old and 
we’re only now sort of beginning to see some of the, some of 
the fruits of the labours of the unit, what we have seen thus far, 
I at least as minister am feeling relatively confident about, that 
will serve, will serve the people we are destined to serve — that 
is the citizens of our province. 
 
And first of all this effort . . . these programs and initiatives will 
serve them well. But I think equally this unit will serve the 
communities in which we’re a part well, and will in fact serve 
the department well. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, you said that the evaluation 
process is actually built into the project itself, so as they go 
along they . . . it’s probably like a cash flow projection where 
you can see if you meet your own. And that’s where my 
background is from, I guess that’s what I’ll relate it to. 



April 29, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 861 

But what I’m wondering is, they’ve basically evaluating 
themselves then. Who is looking at it overall to determine if this 
is . . . if it’s a really good use of money? Because just because 
the criteria says within their own evaluation this is working, 
what I’m wondering is if the project itself are looked at by your 
department to determine is this a really good use of Social 
Services money. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Just to be clear I think with the member, 
the evaluation process will not be . . . While it is engaged in 
consultation with the project, it’s not the project evaluating 
itself. But it will be officials and staff of Social Services that 
will be doing sort of the outside evaluation. 
 
Now we don’t contract evaluations from outside of our own 
department, but we do the evaluation. But it’s not being done by 
the participants although they’re certainly involved; you can’t 
do a fair evaluation without involving them. But there will be 
officials within the department or within the region that will be 
doing the evaluation. Any project that will be funded through 
dollars provided through Social Services — any project — is on 
an annual basis to provide some evaluation because we budget 
annually for each of our expenditures. 
 
In terms of the community development unit, why we believe 
this is effective, is now, and can be more effective. What is 
happening here actually is that this very small unit that has a 
very, relatively very small budget allocation is able to work 
with communities and in fact can lever funding in communities 
into something better. And so we believe this is a wise use of 
the tax dollar that we begin to work with communities. Not only 
working with communities, but we’re able to lever some other 
sources of funding often to benefit the very people that we and 
the community agencies together are desiring to serve. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, does this mean now that Social 
Services can look at, and each region look at, individuals or 
individual concerns within a region and make decisions based 
on a certain area rather than trying to make them across the 
whole length and breadth of the province? Meaning that the 
special needs that may be happening in North Battleford 
compared to Watson, being that it’s an entirely different area, 
they’d be able to have different types of programs in those two 
areas. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — On the very specific of the community 
development initiatives and projects — again it’s a three-person 
unit province-wide with assistance by workers in regions — but 
in that specific, yes. That in fact is the goal, that we look for 
some unique opportunities community by community. 
 
There are other programs of which the department is involved 
with under the child action plan. For instance we’re involved 
with the prevention and support grants. Now that would draw in 
seven other departments. But in terms of the approval for 
projects under prevention and support grants, again there will 
be local decision-making committees that will tailor and 
approve projects on a more local basis. 
 
However in some of our other programing there is a desire for 
much more consistency in terms of our social assistance rates. 
For instance we do take into account some local circumstances, 
housing costs, and so on. But generally there will be a 

consistent application of programing across the province so that 
we have a fairness. It wouldn’t matter therefore if you lived in 
Watson or you lived in North Battleford, you could expect a 
similar level of income support under social assistance. 
 
But when we’re talking about the community development unit, 
which we are, that unit in fact seeks local uniqueness. So what 
works in Saskatoon for instance, the Saskatoon Communities 
for Children, or Quint organization may not work at all in the 
city of Moose Jaw. Something quite different might work in the 
city of Moose Jaw. 
 
And so that unit does in fact look for what makes situations 
unique and what resources may be unique to the community 
and how can we work together. 
 
Ms. Draude: — I understand that there are three full-time 
employees and I’m wondering if you can tell me what the 
budget allocation for this community development unit is 
including these three full-time employees. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, in this budget the total 
allocation is $205,390 — $205,390 — and that will provide for 
salary and related office expense and so on. 
 
Ms. Draude: — One of the people that was last year I think 
working in that department, I understand from a press release, is 
now working with the Department of Labour under their new 
balancing work and family program. I’m wondering if this 
person has been replaced in this unit, or if wages are paid, 
which department is paying the wages? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, the officials advise me that 
Ms. Martin has been seconded to the Department of Labour up 
until September of this year to do this important work of 
balancing work and family. That in fact she is still receiving her 
salary from the Department of Social Services, but because she 
is seconded by Labour, when her term there is finished, that we 
will receive, the Department of Social Services will receive 
from the Department of Labour a lump-sum payment to make 
up for the time that she has provided service to the Department 
of Labour. And in the interim, we have not filled her position 
knowing that she will return to that work in September. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Can you give me an idea of how many 
community development staff are spending time assisting or 
writing grant proposals for these community-based 
organizations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, the member may have a more 
specific concern or question; we welcome it. There will be, 
we’re confident, there will be circumstances where the 
community development folks will assist community-based 
organizations in preparing grant requests, for instance, under 
prevention of support grant work or in some other program. I 
personally would not see that as inappropriate. That’s part of 
their task to work with community-based organizations. And 
those organizations would look to these professionals to say, 
could you give us a hand, give us some pointers, and that sort of 
thing. 
 
We’re not aware of any that we could sort of document as 
having received specific help from the community development 



862 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1998 

unit, but they may well exist. If the member has a more specific 
question, we’d be sure happy to try and answer it. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess I’m 
wondering if in each division where there are . . . somebody 
isn’t hired specifically for this job and they were asked to take 
time away from doing their job, whether it’s a mental health job 
and they want to write a proposal, is their wages allocated or is 
it changed at all? Is it given to this program or are they . . . is it 
understood in your department that they spent some time doing 
work on the community development program rather than their 
normal job? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I hope I understand the 
member’s question, and I would respond in the following way. 
That we have a variety of professionals who provide services 
through the Department of Social Services and so we will have 
income workers who will deal primarily with the distribution of 
social assistance, and intake and so on, with our social 
assistance clientele. 
 
We will have child and family protection workers who work 
with children and families. We will have verification workers 
who work to ensure that benefits and so on are being 
appropriately provided. We have some small group of people 
who work in community development. We have some people 
within the department who work in policy areas, some who 
work in financial management, and so on. 
 
Now generally, generally, those who are at work in the 
Department of Social Services will be nine out of ten, or more 
than that, focused exactly on their work. 
 
This is not to say that our workers are not involved in 
community as well. I mean obviously that which brings people 
to devote their life to the work of social work gives them a vent 
to be involved in their communities. 
 
I know in my own community — social workers that I see 
employed in the department — I see many times after hours 
involved in all sorts of community organizations and 
fund-raising projects and other contemporary political activities. 
So they may in those community contexts be offering some of 
their own expertise and experience to assist groups. 
 
It would be rare that anybody on their sort of working hours 
would be working at grant applications on behalf of a 
community-based group. It may occur, and with our community 
development unit that may in fact be a part of what they see as 
their role within the community, and I would not particularly 
disagree in that regard. 
 
So again I ask the member if there’s a more specific 
circumstance that she would seek information about, we’d be 
pleased to try and answer. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, welcome to 
you and your officials again. And dealing with Social Services, 
an area I want to raise a few questions in regards to the recent 
release of the, what you call the most significant social program 
in 30 years, and some of the changes and the actions you are 
taking — talking about social assistance and trying to make it 
more responsive, I guess if I can use the word, if I can use that 

word, to the needs of Saskatchewan people. 
 
It’s one of the things that I’ve talked about, talked about in the 
past — we’ve talked about for a number of years — is 
recognizing the fact that there are individuals in this province 
who don’t necessarily enjoy being on social assistance, find 
themselves and have a found themselves in the past where even 
if they did take some partial employment opportunity that might 
be available, it was like they were being penalized for having 
taken that employment opportunity because they would 
basically lose any assistance if there was any substantial income 
from the employment opportunity to the point that they would 
say, well, why bother working. 
 
And I think that’s one of the comments you mentioned when 
you were talking about the changes to the social program, and 
some of the changes that you’re talking about in regards to how 
we address social assistance and how we look at individuals and 
how we help them to feel good about themselves and feel that 
they are contributors to society rather than just taking from 
society. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, what I would like first of all is just a few 
comments from you in regards as to how you see this program 
working. And I understand as well, it’s just nicely coming into 
effect. When do you anticipate that this program will be fully 
up and running and what has been done to date to indeed 
implement the intents of the program that you just announced. 
 
(1615) 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the member’s 
comments. I appreciate his . . . And we have not simply in 
public debates within this Chamber but in more private and 
behind the bar kind of conversations, we’ve talked about many 
of the challenges that exist within our current social assistance 
program and how we might be able to improve that program to, 
as the member indicates, to make it more responsive to people 
who find themselves in that circumstance of low income. 
 
And the member, I can repeat, is absolutely correct when he 
says that a significant number of people who today will be 
receiving support from social assistance, from welfare, in our 
province do not wish . . . If they could be off that system 
tomorrow, they’d be gone. 
 
Unfortunately, and sometimes with the best of intentions, we 
have in my view over the past 30 years in social assistance 
created a system — and again I say: with some of the best 
intentions — we have created a system which has an ability to 
entrap people within that very system. 
 
Sometimes it’s described as the welfare wall, where once in the 
system it is very, very difficult for some families to ascend that 
wall and find the security that lets them move beyond that wall. 
We’ve built that wall, Mr. Chair, and through these programs 
and initiatives we’re trying to bring that wall down. We’re 
trying to tear that welfare wall down. 
 
Because you see, Mr. Chair, we take the view that you want to 
be absolutely sure that the families can be better off working 
than receiving social assistance. We just want to make sure that 
that’s the case. It is not the case today. 



April 29, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 863 

In fact under the current system, if you’re a family and you are 
able to secure some working income, we allow that family to 
keep only a very, very small portion of that income before we 
then begin to deduct from their welfare benefits. And so as you 
earn more from your work we in fact lower your benefits. 
 
Now at the end of the month of course you have the same 
amount of disposable income, even though you’ve been 
significantly contributing to your own income through your 
own work. That’s a disincentive, Mr. Chair, it’s a real 
disincentive. 
 
Equally a disincentive for families with children — particularly 
single mothers and we know that a significant number of those 
who must have some financial support will be single mothers 
with children in their care. Once you are receiving social 
assistance benefits, we — through the department, through the 
Department of Health — provide the full range of health 
coverage for those children. 
 
But under the current system the moment that that young, single 
mother is able to access enough employment income or 
maintenance income from a former spouse or the parent of the 
children, the father of the children, as soon as she is able to 
secure enough of her own income to move beyond the welfare 
cut-off, at that moment she’s also lost all of her health benefits 
for the children, which for a single parent can be a very 
significant deterrent to moving beyond social assistance. Those 
are but two examples and there’s many more. 
 
So what we are trying to do is bring down that welfare wall of 
the programs which we have described as our building 
independence strategy and investment in families and investing 
in people; that we have described, as the member says, one of 
the most significant reforms of the welfare system that we’ve 
seen in our province for 30 years. We want to bring that wall 
down. 
 
And so a key component, two of the key components here of 
the new initiatives, is something we describe as the 
Saskatchewan employment supplement, where as opposed to 
the current circumstance where someone on welfare who is able 
to access some earned income will see that income deducted 
from their cheque, what we intend to do, Mr. Chair, is to 
provide in fact an incentive — an employment supplement. We 
in fact will supplement those wages. And based on the numbers 
of children and the amount of wage, we will supplement those 
wages to encourage people, to encourage that independence that 
comes from work and that pride of daily activity and so on. 
That’s the employment supplement program. 
 
We are also putting in place under this set of initiatives 
something we call the family benefits plan. And so those health 
benefits which are now provided to children on welfare, to the 
children of families who are receiving social assistance, will be 
now provided to children of low-income families well, well 
beyond what is today the welfare cut-off line — well beyond. 
We expect that these benefits will now be available to some 
80,000 children in 40,000 households across the province. 
 
And so that single parent or those dual parents who today are on 
social assistance, who are beginning to see their way into more 
employment income and moving beyond social assistance will 

be able to leave social assistance without fear of losing the 
health benefits for their children. We want to erase that as a 
deterrent; we want to invest in those children and in their 
health. 
 
Equally, Mr. Speaker, or Mr. Chair, we have been working with 
the federal government in the creation of what is now widely 
described as the child benefit. The federal government has 
agreed to contribute now $850 million to this national program, 
another 850 in upcoming budgets. We are contributing — 
unlike most other provinces — we are contributing to create a 
child benefit for the children of Saskatchewan which will lift all 
children in this province off of welfare; that we will be 
providing for all children, for their basic needs, not in the 
traditional welfare system but through the child benefit. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, is an important, important change of 
philosophy as well as an injection of new monies. Because the 
child benefit again will not just go to those on welfare, but it 
will be available to a broader range, a much broader range of 
families that are sometimes described as the working poor, 
whose incomes are very low but not falling into that category 
which would provide them a welfare benefit. So the child 
benefit again will be extended to a much broader range of 
families in our province. 
 
We’re very excited about these programs. We firmly believe 
that while we don’t look for immediate turnarounds, that we are 
setting the stage here for a significant change both in the 
numbers of people who’d be receiving social assistance but the 
whole philosophy of social assistance. 
 
I believe the member asked when the programs, when we 
expect to have them fully up and running. The target start date 
is officially July 1 of this year. They will then . . . it will take 
through the month of July to have the programs up and fully 
functioning, and so in essence it will be August 1 or the end of 
July when the programs really begin to flow. 
 
I do want to take this opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to say that 
because these programs will be available to a broad range of 
families who live in low income circumstances not just those 
who today are receiving social assistance but a broad range of 
families across our province, we are taking what steps we can in 
this intervening period leading up to July to try and inform 
those families of these benefits which will be available. 
 
Some of those benefits will be available simply as a result of 
having filed an income tax report. Incomes of the appropriate 
levels filed in income tax will immediately qualify them for the 
child benefit. We will immediately then qualify those families 
for their family health benefits. We do want those families to 
know that those benefits, family health will be there. 
 
The child benefit cheques, of course, they will see appear in 
their direct deposit bank accounts or in mailings. But the 
employment supplement program it’s going to be a matter of a 
phone application for that program. 
 
We want families to know about these projects and programs. 
And so we’re taking this period of time between announcement 
in the spring to the summer months when they will begin in 
July to try and inform families. And I just encourage anyone 



864 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1998 

who may be following the legislative debates to know that 
information about all of these programs is available through a 
1-800 or a 1-888 line, a 1-888 line. The number is 
1-888-488-6385 — 1-888-488-6385. 
 
We’ve been doing . . . trying to publicize this number through 
some print ads. We’ve had some — a few radio ads — and 
we’ve been taking out some ads in the larger urban centres that 
have the buses and the bus little billboards up in the buses. 
We’re providing these brochures to as many facilities, offices, 
places, all of our housing units, medical offices, churches to try 
and get this information into the hands of families because we 
believe that these programs are an exciting beginning. And we 
want all the families who are eligible for them to begin to enjoy 
those benefits. 
 
So I thank the member for his question. I look forward to any 
. . . the specific questions he may have about the programs. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, you 
talked about employment supplement, child benefit. I heard you 
make a comment in regards to the fact that people will just see 
the cheques automatically appear in the mail. You made some 
comments in regards to the income tax return. 
 
I guess a couple questions I would have, first of all, Mr. 
Minister, what criteria when you look at the income tax return? 
Are you just going to look at income tax returns? And if it falls, 
if the income, net income, falls below a certain level you’re 
going to automatically spit out child benefits or supplement 
cheques? 
 
What are the criteria you’re setting up? Because I’m afraid, Mr. 
Minister, you’ll be aware of it as well as I will that you may be 
. . . it’s possible that if you just go with income tax returns a 
person’s net income may be very low but they may have had a 
fair, substantial amount of change has moved through their 
hands with expenses and everything. It may cut back on it. That 
doesn’t necessarily say that they’re in a low-income bracket. 
 
So I guess what I would like to know, number one, as you look 
at the income tax returns, do they just automatically . . . does 
the department just automatically take these returns, review 
them, or is this in consultation with the federal department in 
addressing this concern? And as well, it almost sounds to me 
like there is, would be no request for assistance from parents. Is 
that what I’m hearing, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, the child benefit, because we 
have — we and other provinces but Saskatchewan in the lead 
actually — have been able to move the federal government and 
all provinces into support for a national program, which we 
believe is a better — it’s a better program because it can offer 
the resources of the federal government; it will be a national, a 
unifying kind of a program and so on.  
 
We have been able to move the federal government into this 
kind of program. Therefore we are working with the federal 
government for the delivery of the program. 
 
Now you will know that currently the federal government does 
provide the CCTB — the Canadian Child Tax Benefit. This 
program will exactly parallel the current CCTB, so all of the 

checks and balances that the federal government now use to 
provide those benefits to low income Canadian families will be 
the same. 
 
We’re appreciative of this in many ways because it can 
therefore provide that benefit with absolutely no administrative 
cost, new administrative cost for us, for the provinces. It will be 
delivered through Revenue Canada through the existing 
mechanisms that the federal government now have. 
 
Now I think the member makes a significant and important 
point that no one desires to see benefits to circumstances where 
benefits are not desired. Equally, we don’t want to see a 
circumstance where conditions may change for a family since 
the last time we filed anything. We want to also have the ability 
to ensure the families that, whose circumstances may change 
for the worst, we’re able to support them as well. 
 
But we have adopted this mechanism of using the income tax 
filing which I think essentially has served well in providing the 
current federal benefits to low income families. I think 
essentially it has worked well. We’ve opted to do that to avoid 
the necessity of creating an entire administration new and 
separate and apart, provincially, to administer that benefit. That 
would be a large cost to us to do that. 
 
We’re making administrative changes obviously for these 
programs, but if we had to start actually mailing out the cheques 
and doing all the direct deposits and everything else, that would 
be a large, another large administrative task, and so we’re 
pleased to work with the federal government on this. 
 
We also believe it simplifies it for families. It simplifies it for 
families. It essentially requires that the filling out of the income 
tax form which we are obliged by law to fill out accurately and 
truthfully, that then will through Revenue Canada be assessed 
to whether benefits can be triggered or not. We will then have 
the ability through Revenue Canada to receive that list of names 
who are receiving benefits, then we can provide the families 
health benefits that we will provide through the Department of 
Health to that same group of family. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess the question 
does come up as well is what if a family does find themselves in 
a situation whereby their employment opportunities changes 
dramatically in the fiscal year, and you’ve used the last taxation 
year and the information off of the income tax. 
 
Is there a process in place whereby families who may find 
themselves in a difficult situation just immediately, that they 
weren’t expecting, can certainly apply for? Or what is the 
process that is involved? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve been cognizant of 
that. And I spoke moments ago about the benefits of working 
with the federal government, well there are drawbacks. And 
some of the . . . I mean, they have rules and policies which we 
may — may or may not adhere to. And on occasion we’ve run 
into situations where we don’t like what they’re doing. 
 
The federal government has made it very clear that through 
Revenue Canada they will not, mid-year, accept new entrants 
for . . . that it has to be done on the annual income tax filing. So 



April 29, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 865 

cognizant of that, whether we like it or not, that’s the rule they 
set. 
 
So cognizant of that, what we have determined is this. If a 
family in our province has a significant change in their financial 
status . . . And you’re right. I mean, hardly a family in 
Saskatchewan in this decade of the 20th century, some of the 
securities that we knew many years ago are not there. We do 
see workplaces all of a sudden decide to move or close or 
something, and there can be a big change in circumstance. 
 
(1630) 
 
So what we will do in that situation where a family finds itself 
in financial need for their children, we would encourage that 
family, as we do today, to approach the Department of Social 
Services. If in fact their income levels have fallen below what 
the basic needs of their family is, then we will provide to that 
family, benefits. And we will provide for the children of that 
family, benefits that will equal the child benefit until such time 
as that family can qualify for the child benefit. 
 
And so we will, the Department of Social Services, through the 
process that we use now with families in social assistance, be 
sure that those children will receive, if they qualify, will receive 
the benefits and will not be left in any way destitute. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well, Mr. Minister, I’d certainly like to follow up 
on this a bit more but I have a couple people waiting for me as 
well. So I’m pleased to allow the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena to follow up with some more questions. 
Thank you for your responses today. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I’d like to 
follow up on some of the questioning from the member from 
Moosomin. I’m wondering, there are young, usually young 
mothers who may have been on social services and then started 
going to university which meant that they actually are then 
looked after under Department of Education rather than Social 
Services. And I’m wondering if the child benefit is something 
that they’re going to be able to obtain as well and how it’s 
going work specifically for them. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I regretfully did not bring 
with me today . . . The Department of Post-Secondary 
Education has put together some information that will describe 
precisely the circumstances which will face a whole variety of 
those who will be students under the new programs. And of 
course because the programs . . . these programs apply to 
parents with children, they would not apply to the single 
individual at university or in post-secondary training. But with 
that student be it single or . . . be the person single or married 
with family, these are family programs. 
 
And I will ask . . . I will get from the Minister of 
Post-Secondary a copy of this and provide it to the member 
because it was very helpful for me to see in very detailed form 
exactly how these programs will impact on students with 
children, particularly single moms who made it . . . desiring to 
get some further education — post-secondary high school or 
post-secondary SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 
Science and Technology) or university or other training 
opportunities. 

What I was pleased to see in the detail that had been laid out 
was the dramatic improvement in circumstance that this will 
offer to that young mom with children going back to school. 
With the combination of the provincial training allowance and 
supports there, with the change in the student loan provisions 
which will move some of that loan, traditional loan money 
which has become debt on students now, to a bursary program 
which is a great support, with the addition of the child benefit 
supports and the family health supports, the difference has been 
detailed by the Department of Post-Secondary Education for 
students is in fact dramatic. 
 
And my belief is this will encourage, really encourage young 
single parents or young married parents or parents of any age 
for that matter, to seek that education that can give them the 
step up to independence. I will just ensure that we get that 
information and can provide you the very specific implications. 
All I know is that it’s very, very positive. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and I’m sure that 
there are a lot of young people out there really looking forward 
to this information because it will be a benefit for them. 
 
I’m wondering if you could address the issue of child care costs 
as covered under the new program. Just give us an outline of 
how child care costs will be covered now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — What we’re endeavouring to do, Mr. 
Chair, through the child benefit and the other benefits that we’re 
trying to bring to low income families, is to provide for that 
family a stronger base of income, some of which can be 
available for child care, whatever the arrangement they may 
have. 
 
Now low income families typically will qualify for the subsidy, 
the subsidized child care spaces. Not all low income families 
may desire to utilize a subsidized child care facility; they may 
have more personal or private arrangements. What we’re 
endeavouring to do is put more financial resources in the hands 
of those families to better meet their child care needs. 
 
We fully recognize that as we encourage people to seek 
employment for instance, and in fact will provide that 
maintenance . . . or the employment supplement, often with 
employment comes new costs, again particularly for single 
moms. There will be perhaps some new child care costs; there 
may be other work-related costs in terms of uniforms or other 
equipment needs and so on. 
 
So again, as we build the child benefit and as we provide a 
supplement to that working income, we’re hoping that those 
new income additions will assist that parent or those parents in 
meeting some of the new costs of work which . . . or for that 
matter an education, where there may be new child care costs. 
 
So what we’re trying to do is maintain our child care network of 
subsidized spaces. We’d like to be building that, perhaps even 
building it more than we have been able to, but to maintain of 
course the subsidized child care operations across the province. 
But at the same time to provide more benefits to individual 
families, that they can make their own child care choices. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. In rural 



866 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1998 

Saskatchewan, there is . . . I guess I can’t give you . . . I don’t 
know how many subsidized spaces there are in rural 
Saskatchewan. I know in my area there aren’t very many at all. 
Maybe you could give me an idea of how many there are and if 
you’re looking at the possibility of increasing the number of 
subsidized spaces. Because even with this new, with the new 
plan, if there isn’t spaces available, it’s going to be very tough 
on, again, low income families or young mothers, and it’s one 
area that I feel we should be addressing. 
 
Rural Saskatchewan has very distinct problems when it comes 
to issues of child care and I would appreciate your telling me 
what your government intends to do to address some of these 
problems. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, we do not have, at least with 
us today, a strict breakdown of what would be described as 
urban or rural child care spaces. I can tell the member that we 
have, province-wide in child care centres and in family child 
care homes, a total of 6,980 subsidized spaces — 6,980. And 
these will include our infant teen centres in the schools, in some 
of the schools of our province. So the total number of spaces is 
6,980. 
 
But I think the member raises a very important and significant 
issue in this province. That the needs of child care in rural 
Saskatchewan can be quite different, quite different than the 
needs in urban Saskatchewan, particularly in a farming 
community, where the need for child care may not be a — well 
it would be in some circumstances but it may not be in all 
circumstances — a 12-month need, where we have the intensive 
period of spring seeding, we have harvest in the fall, and in 
some farming communities, that’s when the family may require 
or need some exceptional child care services. 
 
So in 1995-96 we began in some small ways, but made a 
beginning and it has grown, to fund some pilot projects in 
northern and rural communities to look at some different 
operating models that might better meet the needs of rural 
communities. And I can illustrate for the member one or two 
examples of those. 
 
We are developing what’s described as a rural extended family 
child care model. Now this would extend some hours or a 
weekly service for up to 12 children in a provider’s home if 
there’s a second care-giver there. We currently have five such 
homes operational, and the indication that I have is that they’re 
showing some very positive results in relieving some of those 
seasonal child care pressures that happen, particularly in 
farming communities. 
 
We’ve got now rural . . . child care centre pilot projects going 
on in Dundurn, in Moosomin, in Shaunavon, and in Redvers. 
And again these are offering extended hours of operation during 
the peak farming seasons. And they’re also offering some 
special transportation to and from the farm, not unlike the 
traditional school bus for public and high school children. 
 
In the Outlook area, what they have done there — I’ve spoken 
to people involved in this; it too is proving some success — 
they’re developing a registry of child care opportunities in the 
community; which registry again will be available to farm 
families and rural families in some of those peak needs so that 

they can know who might be available within the community to 
provide child care on a more short-term basis. And I’m told by 
the information here — and I didn’t know this — that there’s a 
similar project now being developed in and around Yorkton. 
 
In Zenon Park we’ve made some particular arrangements 
around staffing ratios for special ages of children, again to 
allow a little more flexibility, knowing that the needs will be . . . 
need to be a little more flexible in the rural community. 
 
So there are a number of initiatives going on. They are, as I say, 
beginning in 1995-96 so we’re still relatively new. But I think 
we’re again working with communities trying to find some 
unique solutions to some of the unique concerns that will exist 
in our . . . in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, I’m wondering if, for the 
subsidized day care spaces, if there’s actually . . . do you keep 
track of a waiting-list like you would a waiting-list in a 
hospital? And if you could tell me what the numbers are on that 
waiting-list and possibly compare . . . telling me if they’re 
going up or down in the last few years. 
 
(1645) 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, we do not have available to 
us exact numbers of the families or children who would be on 
waiting-lists. Because each of our centres, the centres are not 
operated by the department but they will receive funding from 
the department. We do know this; I can say this. There is a 
waiting-list; there’s no doubt about that. 
 
We have been working over the last number of years to try and 
build our number of subsidized bases. We were more than a 
little disappointed when the federal government announced to 
all Canadians — both politically, through political election 
campaigns and then even through more formal announcements 
— that they were undertaking a major new national child care 
initiative, and then it just disappeared. 
 
The whole nation was expecting a fair commitment from the 
federal government to creating new spaces. We were very 
hopeful that that would happen because we do have need in our 
province. There is no doubt about that. We’ve been trying to 
address it ourselves with increasing support to our child care 
branch but there’s still much work to be done. 
 
I do know this, there are in the province today 26 new groups 
who have requested funding for the establishment of a child 
care facility — 26 across the province. And we have 32 of our 
existing child care organizations either addressing, or 
requesting more spaces or a greater parent subsidy. I’m sorry I 
can’t give you any sort of exact numbers on the waiting-list. 
There is a waiting-list, there’s no doubt about that, indicative of 
the fact that we have 26 groups around the province seeking to 
begin child care, a new child care operation in their community, 
and another 32 of our existing services. And then we have some 
other examples too of more unique situations where there’s 
some requests before us for school-based services and so on. 
 
So we’ve made some steps forward; we have another growth 
within this budget of support to child care. We’ve been, over 
the last two years and again this year, been able to assist our 



April 29, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 867 

child care centres in providing a better wage level for the 
workers. This seemed to me was something very important that 
we should do, for people who work in our child care are caring 
for the most precious of our resources — our kids — and the 
levels of salary were extremely low in comparison to any other 
sector. And so we have devoted some resources to our child 
care budget that are very specifically directed to go to the salary 
and benefits of child care workers, because we do see these as 
very important players in the care of children. 
 
They’re really . . . I mean tragically in some ways, I think we 
have the vision, or some have the vision, that day care centres 
and child care centres are babysitting services. They do provide 
that care, but these are essentially early childhood education 
programs. These children are receiving early childhood 
education; they’re being shaped for a lifetime while they are 
there. And so we want to, as best we can, which may not get to 
be sufficient but as best we can, reflect what we believe are the 
value of those people who work within those centres. 
 
So we’ve got lots of work to do. We made . . . we’ve been able 
to take some steps forward but again we’ve got lots of work to 
do. And I’ll just say one more time, we and every province I 
think in Canada, was real disappointed when the federal 
government announced the national child care initiative and 
then it just disappeared and not one thin dime was ever spent. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. You’re preaching to 
the converted if you’re going to try and tell me the most 
important thing is our children because I agree with you. But I 
am wondering, can . . . you talked about building the number of 
subsidized spaces. Have you actually done that? What has been 
the increase in number of spaces in the last year? 
 
And is there . . . even though you don’t have the actual number 
on the waiting-list, can you tell me if the number of people that 
are on the waiting-list is increasing in the last few years? I 
would think that with the increase in job numbers that we’ve 
been talking about, there is probably a relative increase in the 
number of people looking for help to look after their children as 
well. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — We will provide . . . All we have —all I 
have — we have is this year’s budget stuff. So we’d know the 
spaces this year; we will get for the member a comparison over 
the last number of years. I can say to the member that in . . . 
since ’92-93, we’ve tracked sort of our budgetary expenditures 
in child care, and those expenditures have grown $3.7 million in 
that period of time and she’ll see this reflected in the numbers 
when we provide them. 
 
We’ve been able to double the number of teen-infant spaces. 
We’ve been able to begin two preschool support programs. 
Again we’ve increased its centre operating grants to enhance 
the wages. We’ve enhanced our infant-toddler subsidy rates. 
We’ve undertaken some education and information campaigns. 
We’ve increased the special needs grants. We’ve spent, of that 
money, 1.5 million on enhanced wages to our workers. And last 
year we were very pleased to be able to provide a million 
dollars in capital enhancements to our child care centres to 
ensure that all of the centres, every centre in Saskatchewan, 
now meets the standard codes of our child care facilities. 
 

I was able to tour a number of our centres last year under this 
program. Many of them installed new windows, natural 
lighting; some fire and safety issues were addressed. We have 
in this budget, as the member will know — she has studied the 
budget documents — again a million dollars within this budget 
for child care facilities and the child care programs. We want to 
work very, very closely with the Child Care Advisory Board on 
exactly where those funds will be best utilized. 
 
I as minister and we as a department, count very heavily on the 
advice and the consultation of the Child Care Advisory. And 
these are people who are child care operators. Some of them sit 
on boards, some of them are front-line workers — all of them 
deeply involved in the provision of child care. They come from 
every corner of our province. So we’ll want to work with them 
in terms of that million dollar allocation that’s in this year’s 
budget. 
 
Last year the bulk of that allocation did go to capital needs to 
bring the day care centres up to standard. Some of it this year 
might be appropriately spent there but there may be other areas 
of need. 
 
We will provide for the member the numbers of spaces over the 
last . . . tracking them back a number of years. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I am 
going to implore you to look very . . . to look at rural 
Saskatchewan, because I think that when it comes to the needs 
out there, I know that there’s needs right across this province. 
And you’ve addressed many of the issues in the last few years, 
but I haven’t seen a great change in what’s happening either in 
the day care facilities or the opportunities in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
It’s one of my areas of concern, that rural Saskatchewan is 
being ignored, and I think this is one area where again we 
haven’t seen any progress or any opportunity to keep the 
infrastructure. And I know people . . . usually when you talk 
about infrastructure you’re talking about roads and schools. But 
in order to create jobs, you’re going to have to have something 
to encourage families to live there. Young families are going to 
need some help the same way they need them in the cities, and I 
again ask that you look for something for the day cares in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, just a couple of more questions on the new 
programs. I know it’s a joint venture with the federal 
government. Are the cheques or the monies sent out from the 
federal government or the provincial government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — The Child Benefit is a joint initiative. 
Our family benefits program and our employment supplement, 
those are provincial programs solely. But the Child Benefit is a 
shared program, federal and provincial, and so we describe it as 
a national program. It’s neither federal nor provincial; it is a 
national program. 
 
The cheques — to your question — the cheques will be 
delivered by the federal government. Those cheques, when they 
. . . because Saskatchewan is teaming with our own Child 
Benefit, and investing significant resources there — other 
provinces are choosing not to do that — the cheque itself, when 



868 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1998 

it is delivered to the family in Saskatchewan, will indicate the 
Saskatchewan wheat sheaf and the Canadian flag. It will be 
clear on the cheque itself that this is a joint, federal-provincial 
— a national — program. 
 
But the administration of those cheques, the mailing and so on, 
will be provided by the federal government, for which we are 
grateful, believing that it’s better not to duplicate bureaucracies 
and administrations any more than we absolutely have to. 
 
I do want to say this though: the majority now — and I think 
this majority will grow over the next number of years — the 
majority of families now see those benefits brought to their 
home or to their family through a direct deposit in a banking 
account. This too is savings to the public purse, if we are not 
required to provide that postage and that envelope and that 
paper but can do that electronic transfer into a bank account. It 
increases security for that amount of money. It’s a sure deposit. 
It provides a more timely deposit. It saves administrative costs. 
 
And if there is any concern — if I may say it again — this is I 
think reflective of some of our more rural circumstances where, 
I know when I lived in a small community, I had a post office 
box. In fact I just used General Delivery. There has been I think 
on occasion, some concern that families are not particularly 
anxious for everyone in town to know that they may be of a 
circumstance where they are receiving a benefit. 
 
Again the benefit, direct deposit there, is of course, it is 
absolutely confidential. There can be no need to worry about 
any exposure or anything like that; so we encourage, both in 
terms of social assistance, and I would encourage families with 
the Child Benefit, that they set up the direct deposit mechanism. 
And in fact I’ve met with some individuals in the banking field, 
encouraging them to explain to their customers how easy it is to 
have a bank account, to deny no one a bank account, and to 
make that available for direct deposit. 
 
To your question along with it, yes, it’s the federal government 
who writes the cheques and will do the administration. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:58 p.m. 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................839 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................839 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................839 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................839 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................839 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................839 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................839 
  Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................839 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................839 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................840 
  McPherson.................................................................................................................................................................................840 
  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................840 
  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................840 
  Haverstock.................................................................................................................................................................................840 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ..........................................................................................................................................................................................840 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................840 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Romanow ...................................................................................................................................................................................840 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................841 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................841 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................841 
  Lorje...........................................................................................................................................................................................841 
  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................841 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................841 
  Hagel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................841 
  Tchorzewski ..............................................................................................................................................................................842 
  McPherson.................................................................................................................................................................................842 
  Haverstock.................................................................................................................................................................................842 
  Kowalsky ...................................................................................................................................................................................842 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................842 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................842 
  Lautermilch ...............................................................................................................................................................................849 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................854 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 New Chief of Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations 
  Flavel..........................................................................................................................................................................................842 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................842 
 Comments on Health Care in Saskatchewan 
  Jess .............................................................................................................................................................................................843 
 Miracles at the Plains Health Centre 
  McPherson.................................................................................................................................................................................843 
 Prince Albert Women of Distinction 
  Kowalsky ...................................................................................................................................................................................843 
 Highway Upgrades for the Battlefords and Area 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................843 
 Construction of Saw Mill 
  Johnson ......................................................................................................................................................................................844 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 SaskPower Proposed Investment in Guyana 
  Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................844 
  Lingenfelter ...............................................................................................................................................................................844 
 Plains Health Centre Closure 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................845 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................845 
  Romanow ...................................................................................................................................................................................845 
  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................846 
 SaskPower President’s Resignation 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................848 
  Lingenfelter ...............................................................................................................................................................................848 



 

 Vehicle Insurance Deductible Increases 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................848 
  Lingenfelter ...............................................................................................................................................................................848 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 35  The On-farm Quality Assurance Programs Act 
  Upshall .......................................................................................................................................................................................848 
 Bill No. 36 — The Vital Statistics Amendment Act, 1998/Loi de 1998 modifiant la Loi sur les services de l’état civil 
  MacKinnon................................................................................................................................................................................848 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Kowalsky ...................................................................................................................................................................................849 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 20 — The Election Amendment Act, 1998 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................849 
 Bill No. 29, The Workers’ Compensation Amendment Act, 1998 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................851 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................852 
 Bill No. 30 — The Tobacco Tax Act, 1998 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................853 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 Bill No. 14  The Adoption Amendment Act, 1998 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................855 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................855 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 14 — The Adoption Amendment Act, 1998 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................859 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund 
 Social Services — Vote 36 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................859 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................859 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................862 
 
 
 


