





























































Hansard: May 29, 1998


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1445 
 May 29, 1998 
 
The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I have a petition to present on behalf of residents in 
Saskatchewan. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action to ensure that the required level of 
service in radiology is maintained in the North Central 
Health District and the priorities of its board be adjusted 
accordingly. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the majority of the signatures to this petition are 
from Melfort, but they are also from Fairy Glen and Kinistino. 
 
I am pleased to present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action to ensure the required level of service in 
radiology is maintained in the North Central Health 
District and the priorities of its board be adjusted 
accordingly. 
 
As is in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

The communities involved in the petition, Mr. Speaker, are 
from Melfort and Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
a petition, and these are signed from people from various 
communities across Saskatchewan. And I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to put 
an immediate halt to all investments in foreign countries by 
all Saskatchewan Crown corporations, and invest Crown 
corporation profits in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

I so present. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise on 
behalf of citizens who are concerned that there is adequate 
funding to support a radiology service in Melfort. 
 
Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from of course the 
community of Melfort, but also Fairy Glen, Gronlid, Ridgedale, 
St. Brieux, Star City, and Arborfield, Mr. Speaker. 
 

I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
today that reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action to ensure the required level of service in 
radiology is maintained in the North Central Health 
District and the priorities of its board be adjusted 
accordingly. 
 
As is in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

The people that have signed this petition are all from Melfort. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — I am pleased to present a petition on behalf of 
Saskatchewan residents today dealing with the issue of the level 
of services in the North Central Health District, and the concern 
that people have in that district about those services. 
 
This petition comes from the Melfort-Tisdale areas of the 
province, and I’m pleased to present on their behalf. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud to rise 
again today on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan to present 
a petition. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are all from the fine 
constituency of Arm River, and namely the community of 
Bethune. I so present. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
petitions on behalf of citizens of the province concerned about 
the closure of the Plains hospital. The prayer reads as follows, 
Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And those petitioners signing these today are truly 
representative of a cross-section of the province, Mr. Speaker, 
communities of Oxbow, Carlyle, Alameda; we head over to the 
west side of the province — Abbey, Shackleton, Lancer, Cabri; 
and east-central area with Punnichy, Govan, Nokomis, and 
Semans, and also Raymore and Kelliher. I so present. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise on behalf of 
concerned citizens of Saskatchewan with respect to the closure 



1446 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 1998 

of the Plains Health Centre: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the good citizens who signed these petitions, Mr. Speaker, 
come from Ituna, Goodeve, Melville, and Kamsack. I so 
present. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present petitions 
this morning. The prayer of relief reads as follows: 
 

Your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. Assembly 
may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre by 
enacting legislation to prevent its closure, and providing 
adequate funding so that the essential services provided at 
the Plains may be continued. 

 
Your petitioners this morning come from Lipton and Ituna. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I join with my 
colleagues here today in bringing forward petitions which now 
bring it well over the 110,000 presented in people’s efforts to 
stop the closure of the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed the petitions here are 
from Coronach, Rockglen, and, Mr. Speaker, many others. 
 
The Speaker: — I’ll ask one of the pages to remove the 
exhibit. Order, order. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again to 
present petitions on behalf of citizens who are concerned with 
men and women who have lost spouses in work-related 
accidents. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to have The Workers’ 
Compensation Board Act amended for the disenfranchised 
widows and widowers of Saskatchewan whereby their 
pensions are reinstated and the revoked pensions 
reimbursed to them retroactively and with interest, as 
requested by the statement of entitlement presented to the 
Workers’ Compensation Board on October 27, 1997. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

The signatures today, Mr. Speaker, are all from Regina. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Good morning, Mr. Speaker. On this 
beautiful Friday morning, it is my duty to present the following 
prayer for relief on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reach necessary agreements with other levels of 
government to fund the twinning of the Trans-Canada 
Highway in Saskatchewan so that work can begin in 1998, 
and to set out a time frame for the ultimate completion of 
the project with or without federal assistance. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These folks all come from the towns, like Moose Jaw and 
Maple Creek, along the south-west side of the province. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order a petition regarding the Carrot 
River hospital presented on May 28 has been reviewed, and 
pursuant to rule 12(7) it is found to be irregular and therefore 
cannot be read and received. 
 
According to order the following petitions have been reviewed, 
and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and received. 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly on the 
following matters: the funding of the twinning of the 
Trans-Canada Highway; to save the Plains Health Centre; 
to halt all investments in foreign countries by 
Saskatchewan Crown corporations; and to ensure the 
required level of service in radiology is maintained in the 
North Central Health District. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Ms. Stanger: — Mr. Speaker, it is a great deal of pleasure to 
introduce to you and through you to the rest of the members of 
the Assembly, 30 grade 8 students from Turtleford. It isn’t often 
that we get visitors from the north-west, a very important part 
of the province. I’m so happy to have them here today. 
 
And with them are their teachers: Renee Hammer, Christie 
Kotzer-Milne; and the chaperons, Rose Lynn Gory, Debbie 
Rookes, Gene Rindero, Doug Maddaford, and Glen Chambers. 
 
I wish that they have a good tour of the legislature and Regina, 
and I hope they enjoy their stay. And I will be meeting with you 
at 10:30 for some drinks and discussion and a photo. 
 
And I’d like the members of the Legislative Assembly to 
welcome these folks to Regina. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me a great 
deal of privilege today to introduce to you and the other 
members of this legislature, a number of students from a fine, 
growing community of Osler, Saskatchewan — 36 students in 



May 29, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1447 

the east gallery, grades 8 and 9. And I’ll be meeting with them 
afterwards to answer some of the questions they have about the 
activities they see here today. 
 
And with them they have their teachers, Suzzane Clements, 
Michelle Lane, and Glen Osmond, and chaperon John Jasnoch. 
And we’re glad to have them here. So would you join with me 
and give them a real welcome to Regina and to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Jess: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to take this opportunity to 
introduce to you and to all members, 19 grade 5 and 6 students 
that are seated in your gallery from Mayfair Central School in 
Mayfair, Saskatchewan. 
 
And accompanying the Mayfair students are Tammy Jung and 
Lynn Martin, their teachers; and chaperons Doyle Saccucci, 
Oliver Lamontagne, Vivian Saccucci, Lorna Buziak, Elaine 
Woloshyn, Ester Huard, and Heather Buziak. 
 
I will be meeting with this group in about a half an hour and I 
ask all members here to help me welcome them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well you can tell 
how excited I am to have 39 grade 8 students from White City 
School visiting with us this morning. And to you and through 
you to all members of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
introduce them. They’re seated in the west gallery and they’re 
accompanied by teachers Geof Schick and Joyce Dudley. 
 
I’ve had an opportunity to tour White City School and I’ve been 
there for Optimist bicycle safety days and other fun events. And 
so I’m very glad they’re able to come today to tour and meet 
with me about 10:30 for a visit. 
 
I’d ask all members to join with me in welcoming the group 
from White City School. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
Assembly, a good friend of mine, Dr. Paul Nandi, who’s sitting 
in the east gallery. And he is an anesthetist and practises in 
London, England — I’m happy to say, with the national health 
service in that country, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And also here today in the east gallery is my wife Pauline, who 
has been visiting me in Regina for the past few days. And I 
would ask all members to join with me in welcoming my friend 
and my spouse to the legislature today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you to all members of the Assembly, I’m happy this morning to 
be able to introduce Mr. Paul Meid who is sitting over here in 
the government gallery. 
 
Mr. Meid had an illustrious career with one of the better ideas 

that the federal government had, which of course was the PFRA 
(Prairie Farm Rehabilitation Administration) which has brought 
an awful lot of good to Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Meid informed me earlier today that because he was born 
in Europe and has had a lot of experience in the world, he 
assures us that in spite of some of the problems that we have 
here, Canada and Saskatchewan is still the best place to live. 
 
Please welcome Mr. Meid today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Saskatchewan’s First Biopharmaceutical Company 
 

Ms. Lorje: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I heard 
the news announcement earlier this week about a licensing 
agreement between U of S (University of Saskatchewan) 
technologies and Alviva Biopharmaceutical with great interest 
because, Mr. Speaker, I have a bit of a personal connection with 
the principals of Alviva. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the ’70s I was very privileged to work with Dr. 
Alan Boulton when I was a young training psychologist and he 
was working on fantastic neuropsychiatric research. And I used 
to watch in amazement at his dedication and diligence as he put 
the rats through their paces and had all sorts of arcane machines 
that he was titrating various biochemical compounds. 
 
And I am so pleased that his research has now resulted in this 
new Saskatchewan-first company that will allow them to be 
able to actually reap the rewards of their research rather than 
having it exploited by multi-national drug companies. 
 
On a personal note, I have witnessed first-hand in my own 
family the tragedy caused by neurological diseases such as 
Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s so I’m very pleased to 
congratulate Alan Boulton, a fine Saskatchewan researcher. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatoon Eastview By-election 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, there have 
been some interesting developments in the Saskatoon Eastview 
by-election. It seems that NDP (New Democratic Party) 
candidate Judy Junor has taken her vows and become a nun, or 
it would seem so from the Saskatchewan Federation of 
Labour’s mass mail-out — to its entire membership that is. 
 
Allow me to share the letter to the Assembly that the SFL 
(Saskatchewan Federation of Labour) sent out: 
 

Dear Brothers and Sisters, 
 
As you may be aware, former Sun president Judy Junor has 
won the NDP nomination in Saskatoon Eastview. We write 
to request that you contribute to our political action fund so 
that we can assist in getting Judy elected. 
 
As well, if you know anyone who lives in Saskatoon 



1448 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 1998 

Eastview, please encourage them to vote for Judy. If at all 
possible, include your friends and other union members in 
Saskatoon to get out and work for Judy in the by-election. 
 
Every vote counts. 
 

And it’s signed, “In solidarity” by the Co-Chairs of the SFL 
political education committee. In conclusion the letter states, 
“Let’s do everything we can to get Sister Judy elected.” 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — The SFL is sending out the campaign requests 
for the NDP on SFL letterhead. Goodness sakes, Mr. Speaker, 
you’d think the union, after funnelling a chunk of their people’s 
money through mandatory union dues into NDP campaign 
chests, would have done enough already. 
 
We believe that the proper way to do this, Mr. Speaker, is 
through a democratic unionism Bill and we’ll be presenting that 
later today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Agriculture in Lloydminster Area 
 
Ms. Stanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Agriculture is the 
second largest industry . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Now the hon. member for 
Lloydminster has been recognized to make a statement and the 
Chair has not been able to hear a single word. And I will ask for 
the cooperation of — order — I’ll ask for the cooperation of all 
members to allow the member for Lloydminster to be heard. 
 
Ms. Stanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Agriculture is the 
second largest industry in the Lloydminster area. It has put over 
a billion dollars into our local economy and will continue to 
remain a strong indicator of the economic strength of the area. 
 
Agriculture in the Lloydminster area is primarily situated in the 
black soil zone with dark brown soils to the south and grey soils 
to the north. This enables area farmers to plant a diverse range 
of crops which include wheat, barley, oats, and rye. In addition, 
some oilseeds such as canola and flax, are planted. Field peas, 
lentils, grasses, and legumes can also be found in the area. 
 
The Lloydminster area is known as Canada’s canola capital, 
with Canada’s largest crushing plant. ADM (Archer Daniels 
Midland) Agra Industries alone contributes $300 million to the 
local economy. A $5 million, high through-put elevator and a 
2.1 million livestock marketing centre are also in my 
constituency. 
 
Along with the diversification in the crops planted in the area 
come a strong ranching sector. One-quarter of all the cattle 
raised in both Alberta and Saskatchewan are raised within a 
160-kilometre radius of Lloydminster. In addition one can find 
elk, bison, llama, emu, ostrich, wild boar, miniature horse, 
highland cattle, and Jacob’s sheep. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate and thank . . . 
 

The Speaker: — Order. The hon. member’s time has expired. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Proposed Emergency Motion on Plains Health Centre 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, by way 
of this member’s statement I am giving notice that today, 
immediately after question period, I will introduce on behalf of 
the Liberal caucus an emergency motion in our efforts to stop 
the closure of the Plains hospital. 
 
Mr. Speaker, procedurally this can only happen with the 
cooperation of the Tories by not ringing the bells, and I ask for 
their support. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Call for Free Vote on Plains Health Centre 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
bells continued to ring yesterday, and the bells continued to ring 
because this NDP government refused to allow a free vote on 
the future of the Plains. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP refuse to take responsibility for their 
decimation of the health care system. If the Premier believes he 
has made the right decision, why won’t he allow a free vote on 
the future of the Plains? 
 
It makes you wonder, Mr. Speaker, if he doesn’t trust his 
back-bench MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly). 
Does he think that, given the opportunity, they would stand up 
for their constituents? It is clear from the outcry across southern 
Saskatchewan that people don’t think the Premier has made the 
right decision. They have come here today to deliver that 
message and, Mr. Speaker, if the Premier doesn’t listen to that 
message today, rest assured that they will deliver it again in 
1999 when they cast their vote for the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people have come here today to fight for the 
Plains. They have come here in hopes that the Premier will 
allow a free vote. Mr. Speaker, will the Premier disappoint 
these people or will he allow a free vote on this issue today? 
Thank you very much. 
 

University Convocations 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week over a 
three-day period 2,460 degrees, diplomas, and certificates were 
granted to students of the University of Saskatchewan. Among 
the degrees was an honorary Doctor of Laws degree to Sharon 
Capeling-Alakija, a Moose Jaw native whose distinguished 
career has her now with the United Nations as the executive 
coordinator of all UN (United Nations) volunteers. 
 
This morning and this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, 1,237 students 
will convocate at my Alma Mater, the University of Regina. 
Among the recipients will be the Sandra Schmirler curling rink, 
and first nations painter, Allen Sapp — both receiving honorary 
degrees. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the University of Saskatchewan has been 



May 29, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1449 

graduating distinguished Canadians for close to a century — 
such as John Diefenbaker, Carlyle King, Emmett Hall, and our 
Premier. By contrast, Mr. Speaker, this is the 24th spring 
convocation for the University of Regina, which has already 
given us Pamela Wallin as well as our Minister of Highways 
and Transportation and our Minister of Social Services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a century in Saskatchewan means a venerable 
tradition. A quarter of a century suggests approaching maturity. 
Each of our two universities have their own strengths and their 
individual characteristics — academic and cultural traits that 
will be further enriched by the future accomplishments of these 
graduates. 
 
I’m sure all members will wish we could congratulate all 
graduates at the two universities. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Watrous and Arm River Hockey Players Draft Picks 
for Western Hockey League 

 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today I would like to acknowledge the outstanding athletic 
ability of two young men from the Watrous constituency and 
one from the Arm River Constituency. 
 
During the 1998 Western Hockey League bantam draft, Connor 
Lowe, a defenceman from Meacham, Saskatchewan was chosen 
by the Calgary Hitmen as their top pick and 12th overall. 
Nathan Paetsch from Leroy, another defenceman, was chosen 
fifth overall by the Moose Jaw Warriors. And I’m sure the 
member from Arm River will join me in congratulating 
defenceman Brendon Vanthuyne from Liberty as he was picked 
by the Swift Current Broncos in the third round. 
 
These three solid defencemen I’m sure will be welcome 
additions to their respective teams. The draft concentrated on 
first-year bantam players, that is 1983-born players who will be 
eligible to play in a full season in the 1999-2000 campaign. 
 
The WHL (Western Hockey League) is recognized as one of the 
top junior leagues in North America, if not the world, and many 
of their players move on to the ranks of the NHL (National 
Hockey League). 
 
I would like all people to help me congratulate Connor, Nathan, 
and Brendon on their achievements. I know their families and 
their communities are very proud of these young men and we 
wish them all the best in their future careers. Thank you very 
much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Filibuster in Legislature 
 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in a 
democracy we agree to settle our disputes through reasoned 
debate rather than through force. It is therefore sad when a 
group has so little confidence in the strength of its arguments 
that it resorts to either force or filibuster. A filibuster is nothing 
more than an attempt to compensate with noise what one lacks 
in wit. 

I’m proud of our Liberal members and our leader who have 
succeeded in highlighting for the people of Saskatchewan the 
issue of the closure of our hospitals, whether in Carrot River or 
Rabbit Lake or Regina. I’m proud that we have been able to ask 
the questions in the Channel Lake inquiry that need to be 
answered. 
 
My colleagues and I are prepared to meet the NDP on its own 
ground and we are confident that the strength of our arguments 
will prevail in any reasoned debate. We are saddened that the 
Saskatchewan Party has no such faith in its ability to probe and 
question and debate the issues of the day and must therefore 
resort to shutting down this House at a cost of 28,000 a day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we in the Liberal caucus will not abandon the 
struggle as the Tories have. Mr. Speaker, I warn the NDP in the 
words of Sir Winston Churchill: we will fight them on the 
beaches; we will fight them in the air; we will fight them on the 
land — but we will not ring the bells. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The hon. member’s time has expired. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Free Vote on Closure of Plains Health Centre 
 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, my question is for the Premier or the Deputy Premier. 
Mr. Deputy Premier, right now people are gathering in front of 
the legislature to protest your decision to close the Plains 
hospital. They are here because they know the only people with 
the power to reverse this terrible decision are the 57 members of 
this Assembly. That can only happen if you allow your 
members to vote freely and represent the wishes of their 
constituents. 
 
Mr. Deputy Premier, could you do that today? You could allow 
a free vote to happen and we could save the Plains hospital and 
then you could march out on the steps of the legislature and 
announce that the Plains hospital will remain open. Will you do 
that, Mr. Deputy Premier, or are you going to ignore 
Saskatchewan people once again? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, this vote has already occurred in this legislature. 
On December 17 there was a clear question on the Plains that 
was unequivocal. It was a recorded vote. Every member in the 
legislature stood up and said yes or no. So the vote has already 
occurred. 
 
What then is this about? It’s about competition between these 
two parties over ownership of this issue. And the hostages in 
the competition are the voters of Saskatchewan. I’d like to 
quote from the Leader-Post: 
 

So the Saskatchewan Party has taken the legislature 
hostage — at a cost of $56,000 and counting — for what? 
. . .to force a vote that had already been held . . . 
 



1450 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 1998 

Quite clearly, this has everything to do with politics and 
absolutely nothing to do with keeping the Plains Health 
Centre open. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I don’t 
know why they’re so afraid of a free vote. 
 
Madam Minister has indicated yesterday that all the members 
agree with this decision. We don’t really believe that. We still 
believe that somewhere in the benches on the NDP side there 
are people who are willing to stand up for the people they 
represent. Somewhere over there, there are members who still 
know how to listen and who could vote to save the Plains if 
they were given the chance. 
 
Madam Minister, Mr. Deputy Premier, if you’re so sure your 
members support the closure of the Plains hospital, why not 
allow a free vote? What are you afraid of? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, I say to the member 
opposite, that’s already been answered. We have voted in this 
legislature, on December 17; every member has recorded their 
vote. And since then we have had debates in this legislature in 
which our members have said what we are saying to the people 
of Saskatchewan. The Plains decision was a difficult decision, 
but it was the right decision if you believe in quality health care. 
 
So we are being accountable to the voters of this province for 
our action. What you folks have to do is you now have to be 
accountable to the people of this province for your action. And 
your action is to take petty politics to the point that you’re 
stalling the business of this province and costing taxpayers 
$28,000 a day. You’re accountable too. You have to explain 
that to the people of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday the House Leader said she was open to the idea of 
another vote on the future of the Plains hospital. She said, and I 
quote, “They haven’t asked us.” 
 
Of course that isn’t true. We’ve been asking for a vote for four 
weeks now. But nevertheless she went on to say, “If they . . . 
want another vote on private members’ day, that’s a different 
issue. We wouldn’t have any problem . . .” 
 
Well that’s exactly what we’re asking for here today. Will you 
allow a vote on the future of the Plains hospital this Tuesday as 
you have promised? And will you allow that vote to be a free 
vote? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, to the member 
opposite. My point was a simple one. These people do not have 
to be using this tactic to make their point on the Plains hospital. 
They have the capacity on private members’ day to bring 
forward any resolution that they want, and to debate it freely 

here as it has been debated several times since December. But I 
go back to my original point. 
 
My point is on December 17 a vote occurred in which 
members’ opinions were registered. We have had debate since 
in which we have defended our decision. What they have to 
defend and again I’ll go back to quoting the Leader Post, is 
their view of taxpayers’ dollars. For their own partisan, petty, 
political reasons, they are holding up the legislature and costing 
taxpayers $28,000 a day. I quote again: 
 

The Saskatchewan Party has spent most of this session 
decrying the wasteful expenditure of tax dollars to cover 
up the government’s political misadventures. Sadly, the 
Saskatchewan Party is now guilty of the same offence. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure that the member 
opposite, the minister, understands what the concept of the free 
vote is. According to Dr. Lewis Draper, the NDP believe that a 
free vote occurs when the Health minister or the Premier walk 
in and give the marching orders to the cabinet. The decision 
then is whether or not you want to stay or leave. That’s their 
definition of a free vote. 
 
If the minister is indicating that next Tuesday we will be able to 
have a free vote in this legislature, we would ask her to rise 
today and indicate to this Assembly that next Tuesday on 
private members’ day there will be the opportunity to vote 
freely on the issue of the closure of the Plains hospital. 
 
Will she stand today and indicate that for the record that there 
will be a free vote next Tuesday? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, I have no intention of 
doing that. The position of the government . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Now the question has been 
asked and I had no trouble hearing the question being put, and I 
am having some difficulty being able to hear the answer being 
provided. I ask for the cooperation of all members. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — I have no intention of doing that. 
My point to the opposition is simple. Tuesday, private 
members’ have the freedom to put on the order paper debates 
and debates will occur. 
 
And I go back to my central point. The legislature has voted on 
this. It has been a recorded vote. There have been members 
speaking on this defending our decision. 
 
What these people have to face, is this is about petty politics. 
It’s about competition with those folks. It’s not about the 
principle of quality health care. It’s not about the principle of 
the Plains hospital. 
 
And what they have to do is they have to explain to the people 
of this province why they are holding up the people’s business 
at a cost of $28,000 when this decision has been made. 
 



May 29, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1451 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Synchrotron Project in Saskatoon 
 

Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 
the Minister of Economic Development. Madam Minister, 
much of your economic strategy for Saskatoon over the next 
few years centres around the Synchrotron project. 
 
Now the future of that project appears to be in question if the 
federal government doesn’t come through with $14.5 million by 
Monday. A story in today’s Star-Phoenix says, at this point the 
political clout of Ralph Goodale appears to be key as to whether 
the money will be found by Monday. Madam Minister, if this 
project depends on Ralph Goodale, it’s in a lot of trouble. 
 
Madam Minister, what steps are you taking to ensure the future 
of the Synchrotron project? Is the federal government going to 
come through with its share of funding by the Monday 
deadline? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, I welcome this 
question. Saskatchewan people should be very proud of the fact 
that in a national competition the University of Saskatchewan 
was chosen as Canada’s only site for the Synchrotron. 
 
We have been working as a government with the collaborative 
committee headed by Bernard Michel representing the private 
sector. We’ve been working with the federal government. I’ve 
met with Mr. Manley; I’ve met several times with Ralph 
Goodale. We are very confident that this project will come to 
fruition, that the application will be ready for the CFI (Canadian 
Foundation for Innovation), and that in about a year from now 
the final decision will be made and this project will go ahead. 
 
But what I do want to say to the member opposite is, we wish 
you would join with us and take some pride in Saskatchewan 
accomplishments like this. We should all be very proud that the 
major scientific investment of this decade is going to be made 
in the province of Saskatchewan because of our record on 
innovation and research and development. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yes, we are proud 
of Saskatchewan, but we’re also concerned when we see some 
of the messes that your side of this House has got us into in the 
last little while. 
 
Madam Minister, this project is expected to create 80 to 200 
high-tech, high-paid jobs in Saskatoon. And we want to see 
those there. And now its future appears to be in doubt because 
of a lack of commitment for the federal government. It appears 
to be another example of the federal Liberals abandoning 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Madam Minister, you built a lot of your economic strategy for 
Saskatoon around this important project. Not only is it expected 
to create new jobs, but current jobs at the accelerator lab at the 
U of S could be in jeopardy if this project is kiboshed by 
Ottawa. 
 
Madam Minister, how confident are you that the Synchrotron 

Project will go ahead? And what plans do you have to deal with 
the lost jobs if this project is cancelled? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Well first of all, Mr. Speaker, I have 
no belief that the project is being . . . has been cancelled. I, and 
other people in this government, have worked very hard at a 
low-key level — not public; this is not something that’s going 
to be resolved publicly — to bring all of the players onside, 
working with the collaborative committee, which has been 
developing support in the private sector, working with key 
ministers, and the public service in Ottawa. 
 
All I want to say is we are confident that this project will be 
brought to fruition. We are confident that the federal 
government will live up to its obligations. And, I return to my 
central point, what we should all be doing is saying we should 
be very proud of our scientists in Saskatchewan and the 
University of Saskatchewan for winning this incredibly 
prestigious project because it will mean a lot to the future of 
this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hospital Bed Shortage 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker one 
of the major reasons the Liberals are fighting to save the Plains 
hospital is because Saskatchewan is in a health bed crisis. 
 
Last week Donald Jones of Coronach had a seizure. He fell, 
suffered a concussion, and was transported to the Coronach 
Health Centre by ambulance. His doctor phoned Regina but 
there were no available beds. So he was sent to Weyburn. From 
there he was sent on to Bengough and then told to try Regina 
again. 
 
On the way to Regina the ambulance driver was informed his 
patient would not be admitted because, you guessed it, Mr. 
Speaker, no beds available. Finally he was admitted to 
Assiniboia. From the time of his seizure to his admittance to 
hospital, nine hours went by — nine hours, Mr. Speaker. 
 
My question is to the Premier. How can you suggest that there 
is no bed crisis when people like Donald Jones are bounced 
around like hot potatoes in your health care system? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I 
want to say to the member opposite that I very much am 
concerned about the issue that he raises with me today in the 
House. I’ve had a discussion, Mr. Speaker, with my department, 
who in turn have had a discussion with the Weyburn health 
district, or the district of which Weyburn is served . . . 
(inaudible) . . . served 
 
And I want to say to the member opposite that we will continue 
to work fully to ensure that we get a full appreciation of what 
happened on this particular case. Because we, like the member 
opposite, are concerned that when someone has a particular 
need within the health care system, is exposed to the kind of 
distance and travel and not quick decision, it concerns me 
significantly. 
 
And so I’ve now heard from the Weyburn health district 



1452 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 1998 

who’ve apologized for the fact that there may have been an 
issue that could have been dealt with there . . . that have not. 
I’ve heard from the district CEO (chief executive officer), and 
say to the member opposite and to the House that we’ll have a 
full appreciation and understanding and report of what 
happened in this particular situation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Speaker. If the Premier had the guts, 
he’d be here today to answer that question. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Now the . . . Order, order, 
order. The hon. member will recognize immediately of course 
that he’s used language which is not acceptable parliamentary 
language, and I’ll ask him to simply withdraw his remark and 
then proceed with his question — to withdraw his remark 
unequivocally. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — I withdraw that remark, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the family of Donald Jones say they find what he 
went through unacceptable. And they say they’re disgusted that 
anyone should be turned away in Regina. And if there’s any 
apologizing to do, it should be the minister. These Regina cases 
have been raised too many times for you to let on this is a single 
case. 
 
Mr. Premier, the family of Mr. Jones have a pair of questions 
for you. How can you justify using lives as your margin of 
error? And what has to happen before you will listen to what 
the people need in the way of proper health care? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ve already indicated 
to the member opposite that in this particular case we do not 
take it lightly. And I’ve given the commitment to the member 
opposite, given the commitment to the member opposite, Mr. 
Speaker, that we would ensure that there’s a full analysis and 
appreciation of what’s happened here. But I say to the member 
opposite that in the case of this individual, just on periphery, 
there was a bed available for him at the end of the day — there 
was a bed available. 
 
But I say to the member opposite, say this to the member 
opposite, on the daily basis there are 35,000 people that are 
served by the health system — 35,000 people. And when the 
member opposite says that we’re not doing anything about 
health care and ensuring that we have quality health care 
services in the province, let’s look at the kinds of injections and 
innovations that have happened in the province in the last short 
little while. 
 
I say to the member opposite that there have been 200 
additional nurses that have been added to the system just 
recently; a brand-new CT scanner in Prince Albert, a new renal 
dialysis program for rural Saskatchewan, an increase in 
ambulatory services across the province, a new physician 
services in the province — a new contract that’s just been 
signed. 
 
And we’ll continue to ensure, Mr. Speaker, that we enrich the 
quality of health services in the province. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Health Care in Southern Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. McLane: — Mr. Speaker, we have received a number of 
letters and calls in recent days from physicians and other health 
care workers who wish they could attend today’s rally where 
there’s people at this moment gathering out front. But because 
of the shortage of front-line staff, I’m sure the Premier and his 
government will understand why many could not be here today. 
 
Dr. Julian Raphael of Shaunavon states, and I quote: 
 

Mr. Premier, this is not a bricks and mortar issue. The buck 
rests with you. You are accountable. You have the 
influence to reverse this madness. 

 
Carolee Zorn, a nurse from rural Saskatchewan, has concerns 
about access to the General Hospital. She says her biggest fear 
is hearing the following, and I quote, Mr. Speaker: 
 

If the patient had only gotten here just a few minutes 
sooner. All we needed was a few more minutes. 
 

Mr. Premier, who wants to take that chance? Who wants to take 
that kind of responsibility? Mr. Premier, do you want that 
responsibility to fall on your shoulders? 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I say to the member opposite 
and the people of Saskatchewan, particularly southern 
Saskatchewan . . . because the member opposite raises the issue 
about the value and quality of service in Regina into the future 
for the Regina residents and those of us who live in the southern 
part of the province. 
 
He and I . . . and we share exactly the same objectives. And 
that’s to ensure that we have the best quality health care 
services that serve us out of this community — for Regina and 
all of southern Saskatchewan. And that’s why, Mr. Speaker, we 
have enriched and enhanced our participation and contribution 
to the Regina health care district. 
 
We’ve added, Mr. Speaker, $84 million — which now has 
grown to $94 million — for services and equipment for Regina 
and for people in Saskatchewan, which means that there’s going 
to be improved equipment and specialty services for Regina, 
which we talked about, and are going to ensure that’s in place. 
 
We’re going to ensure, Mr. Speaker, that there are going to be 
no additional bed losses in this community. We’re going to 
ensure, Mr. Speaker, that there’ll be no specialist losses in this 
community serving southern Saskatchewan. And with the 
doctors, we’ve got a contract today that will see more itinerant 
services practising in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
We have a plan, not only for Regina and southern 
Saskatchewan, but for the province. And we’re going to 
continue to advance that in the best interests of the people 
across the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



May 29, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1453 

Closure of Plains Health Centre 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, people are assembling outside 
the legislature today hoping that this NDP government will 
come to its senses and cancel plans to close the Plains hospital. 
 
For the past few months the Liberal opposition has staged Save 
the Plains meetings across southern Saskatchewan. We’ve 
attracted more than 3,000 people to these meetings. Another 
8,000 people have sent letters of support and more than 100,000 
people now have signed petitions opposing the closure. 
 
Mr. Premier, you like to paint yourself as a saviour of medicare. 
You say you’re trying to carry on the work of the late Tommy 
Douglas. Everyone knows Mr. Douglas was never afraid to 
address a crowd. Will you be addressing the rally here today or 
are you going to continue to hide behind your minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, first and foremost I want to 
say that I have been now at almost all of the rallies across the 
province and have had an opportunity to speak. And I 
appreciate the opportunity that the Liberal Party has provided 
for me to stand up and be able to share the views of our 
government in terms of the direction that health care is moving 
in. 
 
And I say to the member opposite that there is no question in 
my mind that the people who’ve attended the public rallies 
around the province have a sincere commitment to ensure that 
quality health services are sustained in Regina and for southern 
Saskatchewan. And I share the same view. Which is not the 
same reason for why, in particular, the Liberal Party has been 
part of that campaign. Clearly a large part of their association 
with it is strictly political. 
 
And I say to the members opposite that like you, like you, we’re 
concerned about the future of health care in Saskatchewan and 
are making an inserted and assured investment that people in 
Regina are well served, that people in southern Saskatchewan 
are well served — by more physicians, by more nurses, by no 
additional bed closures to Regina. 
 
And I say to the member opposite, that’s the commitment that 
this government makes — to ensure that the people of Regina 
and southern Saskatchewan continue to be well served by the 
best health care service anywhere in the country. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, we’ve had the opportunity to review the motion that 
the third party wishes to put forward today in emergency 
debate. And I know that the House Leader, I’m sure, has also 
had that opportunity. 
 
I want to indicate that we agree with the context of the motion 
in terms of the call for a moratorium on the closure of the Plains 
hospital, and the kinds of clauses that it does contain are very 
relevant to the issue of the day. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, my question to the Minister of Economic 
Development, the Government House Leader, would be, is that 
is she prepared to allow this emergency debate to take place 

today based on this question, and will she allow a vote today to 
take place in this legislature on the resolution that will be put 
forward by the third party? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, what I would say to 
the member opposite is, this vote has occurred. December 17 
we had a vote on a very clear question. It was a recorded vote. 
Every person stood up, recorded their vote. We have had 
debates since then, private members’ debates. They have the 
option in the future to have private members’ debates on this 
issue if they so wish. 
 
From our point of view, this decision is made. It was a difficult 
decision. We sincerely believe that the health care system in 
southern Saskatchewan will be better off in the long term 
because of this decision. We’re prepared to defend that to the 
people of this province. What they have to defend, as well, are 
their actions, to the people of the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, recognizing the fact that the 
Minister of Health has attended our meetings, and with all due 
respect to him, but like it or not, the Premier is the only person 
who has the power to save the Plains at this late stage. 
 
Mr. Premier, we’ve asked and asked you to reconsider your 
decision, and to this point you’ve refused. If you truly believe 
that closing the Plains is the right decision, do you have the 
courage to attend today’s rally and face the people. Will you tell 
them to their face why you refuse to listen to them and tell them 
why you are allowing Tommy Douglas’s dream to die? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the member 
opposite first and foremost that I will be addressing the crowds 
that are there today. I’ll be addressing the crowd. 
 
But the member opposite should also have an appreciation on a 
daily basis that this question’s been raised in the House. On a 
number of occasions the Premier has stood and the Premier has 
responded on the issue of the future of the Plains. 
 
And the Premier has unequivocally stated on every occasion 
that he’s spoken that the decision on the Plains Health Centre 
was made in 1993; that the decision was made by the district 
health board after long deliberation and consultation; that the 
Premier supports the democratic process of decision making in 
this province and the decision of the closure of the Plains 
Health Centre, of the moving of those services from the Plains 
to the other two facilities — it’s been made and that it’s final. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Before proceeding, the 
Chair would like to ask leave of the House to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Hagel: — I would ask for order of members of the 



1454 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 1998 

House, please. 
 
I would like to introduce to members of the Assembly, 50 grade 
3 and 4 students from Sunningdale School in Moose Jaw in my 
constituency that are visiting us here today and are seated at this 
moment in the Speaker’s gallery. They are accompanied by 
their teachers, Mrs. Kathy Sudom-Young and Mrs. Linda Kerr, 
both of whom have been here with students from Sunningdale 
School before. 
 
I’m looking forward to — after their departure from the gallery 
in just a moment, after their taking a tour of the building, I 
understand — to joining with them for photos and refreshments 
and a visit and opportunity to answer their questions. And with 
the assistance of the Deputy Speaker, I’m sure that I’ll be able 
to join with them in doing that. 
 
This has always been an enthusiastic school for visits to the 
legislature, and I ask all hon. members to join me in extending a 
welcome to these students from Sunningdale School. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 218  The Saskatchewan Right to Work Act 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I move 
first reading of a Bill, Bill No. 218, The Saskatchewan Right to 
Work Act. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 219 — The Democratic Unionism Act 
 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I move 
first reading of a Bill, Bill No. 219, The Democratic Unionism 
Act be now read a first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 463 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act 
(Town of Duck Lake) 

 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of Bill No. 
463, The Channel Lake Indemnification Act for the town of 
Duck Lake. 
 
The division bells rang from 10:55 a.m. until 11:05 a.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 5 
 
Krawetz Bjornerud Draude 
Gantefoer Goohsen  

 
Nays — 17 

 
Flavel Van Mulligen MacKinnon 
Shillington Johnson Goulet 

Lautermilch Calvert Trew 
Scott Cline Kasperski 
Ward Murray Langford 
Murrell Thomson  
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I would ask leave to 
introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thanks to the 
members. I would like the members in the House at this 
moment to welcome eight individuals — ten actually — from 
the mental health clinic in Moose Jaw. They are here to tour the 
legislature, to watch some of the proceedings in the House, to 
further understand our democratic process in Saskatchewan and 
Canada, and, I expect, to see some other sites in Regina while 
they’re here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they’re accompanied today by Fairlie Godin and 
Susan Howard-McLaren. And I’d invite all members to 
welcome them to the legislature this morning. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 464 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act 
(Village of Duff) 

 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of Bill No. 
464, The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Village of Duff). 
 
The division bells rang from 11:07 a.m. until 11:17 a.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 5 
 
Krawetz Bjornerud Toth 
Draude Gantefoer  
 

Nays — 19 
 
Van Mulligen MacKinnon Shillington 
Mitchell Johnson Lautermilch 
Calvert Trew Lorje 
Scott Cline Hamilton 
Stanger Jess Kasperski 
Ward Langford Murrell 
Thomson   
 

Bill No. 465 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act 
(Town of Dundurn) 

 
Ms. Draude: — I move first reading of a Bill No. 465, The 
Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Town of Dundurn). 
 
The division bells rang from 11:20 a.m. until 11:30 a.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 



May 29, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1455 

Yeas — 6 
 
Krawetz Bjornerud Toth 
Boyd Draude Gantefoer 
 

Nays — 17 
 
Van Mulligen MacKinnon Lingenfelter 
Shillington Mitchell Johnson 
Lautermilch Lorje Scott 
Cline Stanger Jess 
Kasperski Ward Murray 
Langford Murrell  
 

Bill No. 466 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act 
(Village of Duval) 

 
Ms. Draude: — I move first reading of the Bill 466, The 
Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Village of Duval). 
 
The division bells rang from 11:32 a.m. until 11:42 a.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 6 
 

Krawetz Bjornerud Boyd 
Draude Gantefoer Heppner 
 

Nays — 17 
 

Van Mulligen Shillington Mitchell 
Johnson Lautermilch Lorje 
Scott Cline Hamilton 
Stanger Jess Kasperski 
Ward Murray Langford 
Murrell Thomson  
 

Bill No. 467 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act 
(Village of Dysart) 

 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move first reading of 
Bill No. 467, The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Village 
of Dysart). 
 
The division bells rang from 11:44 a.m. until 11:54 a.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 5 
 
Krawetz Bjornerud Boyd 
Gantefoer Heppner  
 

Nays — 18 
 
Van Mulligen Lingenfelter Shillington 
Mitchell Johnson Lautermilch 
Lorje Scott Cline 
Hamilton Stanger Jess 
Kasperski Ward Murray 
Langford Murrell Thomson 
 

Bill No. 473 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act 
(Village of Edam) 

 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I’d like to move first reading of Bill No. 473, 
The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Village of Edam). 
 
The division bells rang from 11:57 a.m. until 12:07 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 6 
 
Krawetz Bjornerud Toth 
Boyd Gantefoer Heppner 
 

Nays — 18 
 
Van Mulligen Shillington Mitchell 
Johnson Calvert Trew 
Lorje Scott Cline 
Hamilton Stanger Jess 
Kasperski Ward Murray 
Langford Murrell Thomson 
 

Bill No. 474 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act 
(Village of Edenwold) 

 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I’d like to move first reading of Bill No. 474, 
The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Village of Edenwold). 
 
The division bells rang from 12:09 p.m. until 12:19 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recording division. 
 

Yeas — 6 
 
Krawetz Bjornerud Toth 
Boyd Gantefoer Heppner 
 

Nays — 19 
 

Van Mulligen MacKinnon Lingenfelter 
Mitchell Johnson Calvert 
Trew Lorje Scott 
Cline Hamilton Stanger 
Jess Kasperski Ward 
Murray Langford Murrell 
Thomson   
 

Bill no. 475 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act 
(Village of Elbow) 

 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I’d like to move first reading of Bill No. 475, 
The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Village of Elbow). 
 
The division bells rang from 12:21 p.m. until 12:31 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 
 



1456 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 1998 

Yeas — 6 
 
Krawetz Bjornerud Toth 
Boyd Gantefoer Heppner 
 

Nays — 20 
 
Van Mulligen MacKinnon Lingenfelter 
Shillington Mitchell Tchorzewski 
Johnson Lautermilch Lorje 
Scott Cline Serby 
Hamilton Stanger Jess 
Kasperski Ward Langford 
Murrell Thomson  
 

Bill No. 476 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act 
(Village of Elfros) 

 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Deputy Speaker. 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to move first reading of Bill No. 
476, The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Village of Elfros). 
 
The division bells rang from 12:33 p.m. until 12:43 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 6 
 

Krawetz Bjornerud Toth 
Boyd Gantefoer Heppner 
 

Nays — 20 
 

Van Mulligen Lingenfelter Shillington 
Mitchell Tchorzewski Johnson 
Lautermilch Calvert Trew 
Lorje Scott Cline 
Serby Hamilton Stanger 
Jess Kasperski Murray 
Langford Murrell  
 
The Speaker: — And with wishes to all members that they’ll 
have an enjoyable Saskatchewan weekend at home and with 
your families and constituents, this House now stands adjourned 
until Monday afternoon at 1:30 o’clock. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:45 p.m. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1445 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1445 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1445 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1445 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1445 
  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1445 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1445 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1445 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1445 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1446 
  McPherson...............................................................................................................................................................................1446 
  Haverstock...............................................................................................................................................................................1446 
  Goohsen ...................................................................................................................................................................................1446 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ........................................................................................................................................................................................1446 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Stanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................1446 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1446 
  Jess ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1447 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................1447 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1447 
  Goohsen ...................................................................................................................................................................................1447 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1453 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1454 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Saskatchewan’s First Biopharmaceutical Company 
  Lorje.........................................................................................................................................................................................1447 
 Saskatoon Eastview By-election 
  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1447 
 Agriculture in Lloydminster Area 
  Stanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................1448 
 Proposed Emergency Motion on Plains Health Centre 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1448 
 Call for Free Vote on Plains Health Centre 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1448 
 University Convocations 
  Kasperski .................................................................................................................................................................................1448 
 Watrous and Arm River Hockey Players Draft Picks for Western Hockey League 
  Upshall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1449 
 Filibuster in Legislature 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1449 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Free Vote on Closure of Plains Health Centre 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1449 
  MacKinnon..............................................................................................................................................................................1449 
 Synchrotron Project in Saskatoon 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1451 
  MacKinnon..............................................................................................................................................................................1451 
 Hospital Bed Shortage 
  McPherson...............................................................................................................................................................................1451 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1451 
 Health Care in Southern Saskatchewan 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1452 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1452 
 Closure of Plains Health Centre 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1453 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1453 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1453 
  MacKinnon..............................................................................................................................................................................1453 
 
 



 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 218  The Saskatchewan Right to Work Act  
  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1454 
 Bill No. 219 — The Democratic Unionism Act 
  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1454 
 Bill No. 463 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Town of Duck Lake) 
  Draude (Recorded division) ...................................................................................................................................................1454 
 Bill No. 464 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Village of Duff) 
  Draude (Recorded division) ...................................................................................................................................................1454 
 Bill No. 465 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Town of Dundurn) 
  Draude (Recorded division) ...................................................................................................................................................1454 
 Bill No. 466 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Village of Duval) 
  Draude (Recorded division) ...................................................................................................................................................1455 
 Bill No. 467 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Village of Dysart) 
  Draude (Recorded division) ...................................................................................................................................................1455 
 Bill No. 473 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Village of Edam) 
  Bjornerud (Recorded division) ..............................................................................................................................................1455 
 Bill No. 474 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Village of Edenwold) 
  Bjornerud (Recorded division) ..............................................................................................................................................1455 
 Bill No. 475 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Village of Elbow) 
  Bjornerud (Recorded division) ..............................................................................................................................................1455 
 Bill No. 476 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Village of Elfros) 
  Bjornerud (Recorded division) ..............................................................................................................................................1456 
 
 


