





























































Hansard: April 22, 1999


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 707 
 April 22, 1999 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a 
petition to present today on behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan. The prayer reads: 
 

Whereas your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reduce the royalty taxes on new drilling in Saskatchewan 
to stop job loss and create new employment in this sector. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

These petitions come from the Carnduff, Oxbow, Weyburn 
areas, Mr. Speaker. Across southeast Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise here today 
to bring forward petitions in regards to regional hospitals. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call upon the NDP 
government to provide funding in this budget to have the 
Swift Current Regional Hospital equipped and staffed as a 
specialty care hospital and to immediately provide funding 
for the purchase and operation of both imaging equipment 
and a renal dialysis centre. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the people that signed the petition are from the 
Shaunavon, Admiral area of the province. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This afternoon I 
present petitions from residents of the northwest concerned 
about the confusing and dangerous entrance to the city of North 
Battleford and requesting that the junction to Highways 40 and 
16 be relocated. 
 
Your petitioners come from Battleford, North Battleford, Cando 
and Saskatoon. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure for me to rise once again on behalf of citizens of 
Saskatchewan who are concerned about children with special 
needs and their education. And I’ll read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide essential funding and ensure the delivery of 
scientifically proven, diagnostic assessment and 
programming for children with learning disabilities in 
order that they have an access to an education that meets 
their needs and allows them to reach their full potential. 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people who’ve signed this petition today are 
from Meath Park, from Montreal Lake, Gronlid, Saskatchewan 
and Prince Albert. 
 
And I present it on their behalf with pleasure. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I rise to present 
petitions on behalf of citizens who are concerned for farmers in 
the crisis that they find themselves in today. The prayer reads as 
follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call upon provincial and 
federal governments to immediately take steps to end 
unfair world subsidies and provide farmers with prompt 
relief from declining incomes and act as watchdogs against 
rising input costs which are harming the rural economy. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, those who have signed these petitions come from 
all across this province. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
citizens concerned about the condition of our highways in this 
province. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call on federal and provincial 
governments to dedicate a significantly greater portion of 
fuel tax revenues toward road maintenance and 
construction so Saskatchewan residents may have a safe 
highway system that meets their needs. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And the good people from Ituna, Foam Lake, Hubbard, 
Yorkton, and Bankend have signed these petitions. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the petitions presented at the last 
sitting have been reviewed and found to be in order. Pursuant to 
rule 12(7) these petitions are hereby received. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills 

 
Clerk: — Mr. Johnson, as Chair of the Standing Committee on 
Private Members’ Bills presents the ninth report of the said 
committee which is as follows: 
 

Your committee has considered the following Bills and has 
agreed to report the same without amendment: 

 
Bill No. 302 - The Group Medical Services Act, 1999 



708 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1999 

Bill No. 303 - The Saskatchewan Foundation for the Arts 
Act 

Bill No. 304 - The Saskatchewan Medical Association Act 
Bill No. 301 - The Credit Union Central of Saskatchewan 

Act, 1999 
 
Your committee recommends under the provision of Rule 66 
that fees be remitted less the cost of the printing with respect to 
Bill No. 303. 
 
Mr. Johnson: — Mr. Speaker, I move seconded by the member 
for Kindersley: 
 

That the ninth report of the Standing Committee on Private 
Members’ Bills be now concurred in and that the said Bills 
be accordingly referred to the Committee of the Whole. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Eastern Air Supplies Wins Award 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday I had the pleasure to attend a recognition event for a 
very successful business in my constituency. A Canora business 
named Eastern Air Supplies was the recipient of an award 
presented by Saskatchewan Power for product excellence. I 
want to also thank the minister responsible for the Crowns for 
being in Canora to present that award. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 12 years ago Len and Lena Jackson started a 
small, two-person business on the family farm where nylon 
straps and belts were manufactured. From those small 
beginnings Eastern Air Supplies now occupies a 6,000 square 
foot building within the town of Canora and employs nine 
people. 
 
The company is the owner of the only high speed loom in 
western Canada that can produce straps of various widths. The 
uses for this product have continued to increase. Tie-down 
straps, tow ropes, slings to lift locomotive engines in excess of 
400,000 pounds, Mr. Speaker, are just a few that I can name. 
 
I want to congratulate the Jacksons, the employees, and all 
supporters of this venture. I understand that an expansion of this 
business is soon to take place. 
 
Best of luck and success to Eastern Air Supplies. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Weyerhaeuser Canada’s Revised Business 
Plan Provisionally Approved 

 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Today it was announced that the province 
has given provisional approval to Weyerhaeuser Canada’s 
revised business plan. This is good news for the people in 
Prince Albert, for those in northern Saskatchewan, and for the 
Saskatchewan economy as a whole. 
 

The plan, after extensive consultation, Mr. Speaker, proposes 
sustainable expansion of Weyerhaeuser’s lumber operations 
while it relinquishes part of its licence area. This in turn will 
allow for other new developments in the North. 
 
The plan projects a $90 million investment and the creation of 
500 new jobs. The Big River saw mill and a new Wapawekka 
saw mill will account for these new jobs. All of this in addition 
to a $315 million environmental upgrade already announced for 
the Prince Albert pulp mill and the paper mill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a significant announcement and example of 
how government and industry are working together to provide 
significant and sustainable — and particularly on this Earth Day 
— environmentally sound development in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Carmel Athlete Wins Wrestling Championship 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to recognize a young athlete from my constituency, from 
the community of Carmel — Ryan Shedlosky. Ryan won the 
bronze medal in the 45 kilogram weight class at the national age 
class wrestling championships held in St. Catherines, Ontario 
last weekend. Shedlosky who wrestles with both the Humboldt 
Collegiate wrestling team and the Saskatoon Wrestling Club 
attended as a member of Team Saskatchewan after becoming a 
provincial champion in his weight class at the Saskatchewan 
open age class championship. 
 
The national championships in all age classes are open 
tournaments. Ryan was competing in the cadet class, those aged 
15 and 16. In his weight class there were 20 competitors. Ryan 
finished the tournament with a 4:1 record with his only loss 
coming in the semi-finals to the eventual gold medalist. 
 
Ryan was also the provincial open champion in the 45 kilogram 
class for juveniles. This is the age class for 17- and 
18-year-olds. He could not attend the juvenile nationals because 
it was held the same week as the cadet championships. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Ryan enjoys wrestling and eventually would like 
to represent Canada at an international event. So I congratulate 
Ryan, and good luck with his wrestling career. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Earth Day 
 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today is a day when 
many people around the world try and emulate our pioneers. 
They do so by reducing their consumption of non-renewable 
fuels and by reducing consumption of renewables as well. 
Re-using resources is also something people do today, this 28th 
annual Earth Day. 
 
Our pioneers, Mr. Speaker, used to reuse apple boxes, apple 
crates, and they used them as chairs and as tables and even as 
cupboards. Today we can reuse newsprint as attractive 
wrapping paper or we can even recycle the same newsprint. 
There are many things each of us can do to honour our planet 



April 22, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 709 

earth and to help make a better future for ourselves, our 
children, and our fellow people. Today we can help, we can 
beautify, we can purify the air. 
 
I urge each of us to renew our personal commitment by 
practising energy conservation, by recycling an additional item 
that perhaps we don’t recycle in our own household, or by 
planting a tree. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this 28th anniversary of Earth Day reminds us that 
this earth is a fragile planet and it is our island home. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Elk Losses Due to Tuberculosis 
 

Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, elk producers across 
Saskatchewan face severe losses due to detection of 
tuberculosis in one elk on a farm in Ontario. The 473 animals at 
this farm will be destroyed by the end of the month due to an 
order from the Canadian Food Inspection Agency. 
 
While elk breeders and the Canadian Venison Council support 
the inspection agency’s effort to protect food safety, they 
oppose the imminent loss of a valuable research opportunity if 
the slaughter proceeds too hastily. They also oppose the low 
rate of compensation. 
 
Thirty-four of the 36 owners whose animals will be destroyed 
are from this province. They will receive compensation 
amounting to only 20 per cent of their herd’s value. 
Considerable hardship to producers and communities will 
result. 
 
The provincial Liberal caucus has attempted to get the federal 
minister to meet and discuss this matter with affected 
producers. He agreed to send bureaucrats but this meeting 
produced no positive results. 
 
In closing, we urge the Minister of Agriculture to get involved 
and ensure these producers are fairly compensated. Join the 
provincial Liberal caucus and producer groups to encourage the 
federal government to act fairly and help our producers. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Volunteer Recognition in Prince Albert 
 

Mr. Langford: — On Saturday, Mr. Speaker, on Saturday 
night I had the chance to attend this year’s volunteer 
recognition award banquet in Prince Albert. I enjoyed the 
banquet and the entertainment very much. 
 
Don and Erma Brunsdon provided music and the Meath Park 
Ukrainian dancers did a part for us as well. 
 
Volunteers in our community do priceless work in almost every 
area of service. 
 
I would like to mention some of the people from my 
constituency of Saskatchewan Rivers who were recognized. 
They are Bob Robinson for special services, Peter Feschuk for 
sports, Helmer and Lois Aspvik for special services, and Glenna 

Elliott for recreation. 
 
I once again would like to express my congratulations to them. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Third Party Leader Welcomes New Granddaughter 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank you for the 
opportunity for allowing me to stand and share a very 
wonderful event that occurred in my constituency yesterday, 
April 21. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just want to tell my colleagues here in the 
Assembly and all our wonderful guests that are here today, that 
as we go through the path of life there are highlights. And 
yesterday was another one in my life because Kevin and Kim 
Osika-Schick, my daughter and my son-in-law, presented my 
wife Barbara and I with a beautiful little baby granddaughter, 
Kierra Dawn Osika-Schick. And I am so . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — I thank you for that. It’s quite an exciting event, 
and I just want to assure you that my family is doing everything 
possible to maintain the population in this great province of 
ours. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

National Organ Donor Awareness Week 
 

Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is 
National Organ and Tissue Donor Awareness Week. To 
demonstrate the life-giving importance of this week I’d like to 
read from a recent letter I received from very close friends of 
mine, Elaine and Kelvin Greschner. 
 
It reads that: 
 

On March 27, 1999, my wife (Elaine) received a 
life-saving double lung transplant. We had been waiting 
for the call since June of last year . . . and wondered if the 
call would ever come. Now, nineteen days later, the 
progress she has made is remarkable. She is walking, 
lifting weights, and in her own words, has “gotten her life 
back.” 
 
The sad part of this is that many people, young and old, are 
waiting to “get their life back.” The even sadder part is that 
many don’t survive (Mr. Speaker). 
 

For their good fortune, they want to give something back. 
During donor awareness week, Elaine and Calvin, or Toby as 
most of us know him, are asking people to forward photocopies 
of their organ donor card to the Saskatchewan transplant 
coordinator, so that they can be used to bolster the spirits of 
those who are waiting a transplant. 

 
For more information please call 1-800-667-7551. 
 
The letter goes on, Mr. Speaker, to say “thank you to 



710 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1999 

Saskatchewan Health for covering the costs of flying” them to 
Winnipeg and for paying all hospital and drug costs for the 
procedure. 
 
It closes by saying “they’re heading off for a glorious 
three-mile walk.” 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, no further comment is necessary. 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Negotiations With Nurses 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Premier. 
 
Mr. Premier, I’m sorry but I have to say I told you so. 
Yesterday I said your memorandum of understanding was 
nothing more than an NDP (New Democratic Party) trick 
designed to fix your political problems instead of fixing the 
health care problems in this province. You did it to social 
workers and now it’s clear you’re doing the very same thing to 
nurses. 
 
Nurses say you’re doing nothing to address the issues in the 
memorandum of understanding. You’re doing nothing about the 
working conditions and the excessive overtime. In fact nurses 
say SAHO (Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations) 
is actually pulling items off the table that were in the agreement 
when it was signed on Sunday. 
 
Mr. Premier, which items have you pulled off the table? And 
which part of the agreements are you now reneging on? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, as usual the Tory Party’s 
position is — and question — is filled with inaccuracy. The 
negotiators are SAHO, on behalf of the employer, and the 
Saskatchewan Union of Nurses on behalf of the union. 
 
I want to say that as far as the government is concerned until 
late last night according to some news reports the issues of the 
dispute had been resolved and are resolved by the memorandum 
of understanding signed last weekend — the answer I gave the 
hon. member yesterday. And as far as I know neither party has 
repudiated the MOU (memorandum of understanding). And as 
far as I know both parties still agree that a future collective 
bargaining agreement will be on the basis of the MOU. 
 
So therefore I am surprised to hear of news reports that we are 
at an impasse or at an apparent impasse. And thus in 
consequence I’ve asked the facilitator, Mr. Stephen Kelleher of 
British Columbia, to prepare for the government a written 
report as soon as possible detailing the positions of the two 
parties that they’ve taken to the table this week. And I’ll release 
that report as soon as can be done so and thereafter determine 
what other action is to be taken. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Premier, the nurses don’t believe that this 
MOU is on the table complete. Patients don’t believe you. 
Nobody believes you. You destroyed the health care system and 
you forced the nurses to go on strike. And now you’re breaking 

your very own agreement. 
 
Mr. Premier, what are you going to do now? The first time you 
talked to nurses, that fell apart in a matter of a few hours. And 
your latest commitment to nurses took about four days to fall 
apart. So we wonder what the plan is now, Mr. Premier. What’s 
the next political trick you’re going to use on Saskatchewan 
nurses? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, it’s obvious — to me, in 
any event — that there’s hardly any value in giving an answer 
to the hon. member and the members of the Conservative Party 
over there because the follow-up question is based on 
something entirely different than the answer that I gave. It 
doesn’t matter what I say; she gets up and reads her prepared 
text. 
 
Let me just repeat it one more time. Nobody has repudiated the 
MOU so far as I know. The basis of a future agreement is based 
on the MOU. 
 
The news of an impasse as reported by the news reporters and 
the journalists is a surprise to the government. I’ve asked Mr. 
Stephen Kelleher to give me a written report on the issues taken 
by both parties, which report will be made public to the House 
and to the people of Saskatchewan; and what action thereafter, 
if any, that has to be taken will be announced at that time. 
 
That’s the second time I’ve said that to you. See if you can 
devise your question, please, which is based on that answer. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Perhaps the 
Premier could devise an answer that’s related to the question, 
because he hasn’t answered the question for us, he hasn’t 
answered the question for nurses, and he certainly hasn’t 
answered the question for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
So again my question is for the Premier: Mr. Premier, the ink 
isn’t even dry on the agreement you made with nurses and it is 
falling apart because you’re still not listening. The nurses say 
working conditions are not being addressed, and this morning 
both sides walked away from the bargaining table and the 
mediator says that both sides are too far apart to continue 
bargaining. 
 
Mr. Premier, once again you have betrayed the nurses. What are 
you doing . . . you’re doing nothing to address the working 
conditions and the patient care. Mr. Premier, you didn’t learn a 
thing from the 10-day strike. Why are you already reneging on 
the agreement you made with nurses? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, if the matter wasn’t as 
serious and as grave as it is, it would be laughable, these 
questions. The memorandum of agreement is made by the 
Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations and the 
Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, to which the government was 
able to facilitate the agreement. It remains the basis of the 



April 22, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 711 

agreement until I hear otherwise, not from that hon. member or 
from the old Tory Party under a new name. I’m going to hear it 
from Mr. Kelleher, and on that basis the public will know what 
the facts are and we’ll know what action we have to take. 
 
But I tell you what we won’t do, Mr. Speaker. We won’t do 
what the Saskatchewan Party says it will do when it gets into 
power and that is, “a plan to invite private health providers to 
the province to reduce waiting lists, passed without any 
opposition or convention.” They say they stand up for the 
nurses. They stand up for private health care providers. They 
stand up for American two-tier health care. That’s something 
we do not subscribe to. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Premier 
may be laughing at nurses and at patients, but the people of this 
province will not be laughing when they go to the polls when he 
ever calls the election. 
 
Mr. Premier, we have a very serious problem here. Nurses don’t 
believe a thing you say, and why should they? You’ve been 
talking about better health care for eight years, and what has it 
got us? 
 
We have hospital closures, record waiting lists, nursing 
shortages. Your health care record, Mr. Premier, is a complete 
failure. And now nurses are threatening to walk off the job yet 
again because of your mismanagement and deceit. 
 
Mr. Premier, when are you going to learn . . . Besides getting a 
report, when are you going to address the problems of working 
conditions and patient care in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the working conditions 
issues have been addressed in the memorandum of 
understanding. The monetary issues have been addressed in the 
memorandum of understanding. And so far as I know, no party 
has rejected that memorandum of understanding as the basis of 
a future settlement. 
 
But what the Leader, Deputy Leader of the Saskatchewan Tory 
Party here, the Sask-a-Tory party, should tell this House is 
whether or not he supports 22 per cent plus. Tell us whether you 
support 22 per cent plus for the nurses. 
 
In your next question, tell us if you do. And if you do, tell us 
where you’re going to get the money from. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Funding for Education 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Education. 
 
Mr. Minister, the teachers and school board members across 
Saskatchewan are telling us that eight years of NDP 
government is enough. Enough, Mr. Minister, to bring the K to 
12 school system to its knees. Because over the past eight years 

the NDP has cut education funding while costs continue to 
increase. 
 
On Tuesday the minister accused the Saskatchewan Party of 
wanting to freeze education spending. That, Mr. Speaker, is not 
true and the minister knows it. 
 
What the minister is trying to do is cover up his own 
government’s record. The fact is that the NDP has simply 
frozen K to 12 education funding at its 1991 level. School 
divisions would be better off today by $382 million. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you explain to the people of Saskatchewan 
why the NDP has cut funding by almost $400 million since you 
were elected in 1991? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to you that, and 
to the member from Canora, that obviously he’s experiencing a 
fair bit of anxiety where he sits today. Because when the 
member opposite sat on this side of the opposition, the member 
opposite talked a lot about — and as a school trustee for 
Saskatchewan — about how it was important to invest money 
into education, like this government has been doing over the 
last several years. 
 
But today, Mr. Speaker, when he goes over to the other party, 
where he’s over at the other party with the Saskatchewan 
Tories, he’s in a dilemma, Mr. Speaker. Because over there they 
say that they’re not going to grow the education budget; they’re 
only going to grow it by 1 per cent, Mr. Speaker, on an annual 
basis the cost of living, 1 per cent. And that’s huge turmoil from 
the member, Mr. Speaker, because when he was a 
Saskatchewan school trustee president, he wanted to grow 
education. 
 
Now he’s in conflict with his own policy, Mr. Speaker, his own 
party policy who are going to freeze education in this province; 
they’re going to freeze education in this province, and he 
doesn’t like it and is now speaking against the policy of his own 
party. Which is an interesting position for you, Mr. Member, to 
be because now this is the third position that you have, a 
Liberal, a Tory, and now which party are you speaking on 
behalf of, sir? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I think 
the Minister of Education had better get his facts correct, okay? 
And the facts are these, Mister Minister. If your NDP 
government had frozen education funding in 1991 levels instead 
of cutting the funding, school divisions would be better off by 
382 million. That’s fact, Mister Minister. You can twist and you 
bob and you weave and you can do everything you want, but 
that’s fact. 
 
And it gets worse. While the NDP was cutting education 
funding for eight years, the cost of providing K to 12 education 
services was increasing by $120 million. Mr. Minister, it’s a 
double whammy for school divisions. Less funding for the NDP 
government and increasing taxes. So thanks to the NDP, school 
boards have had to raise an additional $550 million from 
property taxes to make up your shortfall. 
 



712 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1999 

Mr. Minister, will you admit that the NDP has downloaded 
$550 million in education costs to the property taxpayers in just 
eight years? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, first of all, I want to assure 
the member opposite that we both have a fair appreciation and 
understanding of what the operating grants were from 1991 to 
now, the year 2000. And the operating grant, Mr. Member, in 
the year 1991-92 was 374.3 million, is what you’re alluding to 
— the operating grant was 374.3 million. 
 
Today the operating grant, Mr. Member, is 392.5 million. That, 
Mr. Member, is an increase of $20 million of over the same 
period of which you talk about. 
 
I want to say to the member opposite, you keep alluding to the 
amount of dollars who have been reduced on the property side. 
When you take a look at what happened, when you take a look 
at what happened, Mr. Speaker, during the Tory administration 
in 1982, the percentage of government investment in education 
was 55 per cent. 
 
Today over that same period of time, it’s gone from 55 per cent, 
it’s gone up to 39 per cent. And over the first period, from 55 
per cent to 45 per cent during the years of 1981 to 1991 — it is 
your party are the people who reduced. Your party is the people 
who reduced it, 10 per cent over the period. 
 
This government has an investment in education, will continue 
to grow it, Mr. Member, into the future, to ensure that 
Saskatchewan children . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Next question. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, you 
have to understand that there are monies that are being 
transferred to school boards in three categories. They are 
operating grant; they are educational development fund; and 
they are the capital grant. 
 
In 1991, Mr. Minister, for your information if you haven’t 
received that over the last six months, that number was 452 
million. Today, Mr. Minister, that number is 427 million. Every 
year since 1991 that number has been smaller than 452 million. 
Those are the facts, Mr. Minister. School divisions depend on 
that. You know that as well as I do. 
 
A Saskatchewan Party government, Mr. Speaker, will not freeze 
spending on education and we certainly won’t cut $382 million 
from the K to 12 funding. 
 
Mr. Minister, your predecessor, the current Minister of Health, 
complained in 1991 that education was being underfunded by 
the previous government. Mr. Minister, after eight years your 
NDP government has yet to match the 1991 funding level. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. The hon. member has 
been extremely lengthy in his preamble. I’ll ask him to go 
directly to his question now. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is: Mr. 

Minister, will you finally admit your government has devastated 
K to 12 education and driven local property taxes through the 
roof at the same time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
member opposite, and he knows this as well as I do, that in 
education over the last ten years or rather the last eight years in 
this province you’ve seen innovations in this province that you 
haven’t seen anywhere else in Canada. And people come to this 
province to look at the education models we have here of which 
to some degree, Mr. Member, you had some responsibility in 
helping it get there. We have, and you’ll agree with me, that we 
have some of the best education programs in Canada. 
 
We have a new community school model today, Mr. Speaker, 
of which people from across the world come here to look at our 
community school model and are transplanting it in 
communities across Canada today because it’s the best model. 
 
We have a special education program in this province, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s second to none anywhere in the world. People 
come here to look at our special needs program and look at how 
our program works. 
 
We are concerned about rural education in this province and 
through SCN (Saskatchewan Communications Network) 
provide some of the best SCN site education anywhere in 
Canada. People come here to study our SCN programs. 
 
And I say to the member opposite: you need to take a look at 
the history in this province in education. And you, sir, and your 
party are on a path to zap education in a big way. One per cent 
increase on an annual basis is what you talked about in this 
province which is a reduction to education in a big way. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Member, if you want to change the 
agenda on your party you should be . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order, order. Next question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Negotiations with Nurses 
 

Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for the 
Premier. During the morning negotiations between SAHO and 
SUN (Saskatchewan Union of Nurses), the mediator brought in 
to fix your mess has reportedly thrown up his hands. He has 
thrown up his hands in frustration because the government, the 
NDP, according to him has not budged one bit during the new 
round of negotiations. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, he is reported to have said the NDP has 
reneged on the memorandum of understanding. Nurses are now 
contemplating their next move which could include more job 
action. 

 
Mr. Premier, you tried to decoy the nurses with another 
diversion from your political bag of tricks, but it looks like this 
latest slight of hand is going to blow up in your face like the 
nurses’ original walkout. 
 
Are you going to inject yourself into this next round of 



April 22, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 713 

negotiations or learn from your previous experience? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I’m sorry I perhaps, did 
not hear the Leader of the Liberal Party’s question but I thought 
he said that Mr. Kelleher indicated that somehow the 
negotiations were — what were his words? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Reneged. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Reneged? Yes, we reneged were the 
words. 
 
That is not the situation. I’ll have a written report from Mr. 
Kelleher sometime later this afternoon or early evening, and we 
will have a list there of the issues that SAHO says are 
outstanding, a list of the issues that he says that SUN are 
outstanding and we’ll see how big the impasse is. 
 
So far as I know, nobody has reneged on the MOU and nobody 
has said that the MOU is not the basis of a settlement. That 
there are gulfs and differences on the negotiations, obviously 
Mr. Kelleher has said that publicly. 
 
Let’s get the written report; I said I’ll table it. You can take a 
look at it and the public can take a look at it and we’ll decide 
what to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A question for the 
Minister of Health. Your government has spent time calculating 
nursing staffing level plans. Mr. Speaker, I wonder if the 
Minister of Health could tell us how many nurses have signed 
contracts outside of Saskatchewan? How many are seeking 
work outside of Saskatchewan? How many have given their 
notice to retire? And how many are looking for alternate 
employment? 
 
If those questions, Mr. Speaker, can’t be answered, then how 
can we arrive . . . how can you arrive, Madam Minister, at a 
master plan of what is needed and what is realistic? The nurses 
you said last year were virtually hired are now virtually gone. 
 
Will you stand in this House today and come clean with the 
truth about this entire situation? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the member may not have had an opportunity to read the 
memorandum of understanding that was signed between the 
Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations and the 
Saskatchewan Union of Nurses. This memorandum of 
understanding was signed on Sunday morning at about 7 a.m. 
 
What I can report to the member, contained in the memorandum 
of understanding are several elements that are important to 
workplace issues. 
 
One of those elements, Mr. Speaker, is an independent 
assessment process which deals with nursing practice issues. 
Now nursing practice issues surround the issues in the 
workplace. And our government and SAHO and nurses have 
made a commitment to deal with that issue in this collective 
agreement — that’s point number one. 

Point number two, a second important issue for nurses is to 
convert casual positions to full-time positions, and that that 
commitment is in that MOU. 
 
And thirdly, Mr. Speaker, nurses want a seniority-wide process. 
And that commitment is in the MOU. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have in that MOU the elements necessary to 
correct the kinds of issues that nurses want addressed in the 
workplace. And I can assure the public, this government wants 
those issues addressed as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Advertising Budget in SaskPower 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question today is to the minister responsible for Crowns — the 
Deputy Premier. 
 
Yesterday the minister bragged that SaskPower made a hundred 
and forty million dollars while sucking this from the taxpayers 
of the province. However in 1997 while taxpayers were being 
gouged of millions of dollars, SaskPower’s communications 
and public affairs department went on a shopping spree, Mr. 
Speaker, with a 50 per cent increase in the budget. 
 
According to a freedom of information request obtained by the 
Liberals, SaskPower’s PR (public relations) department 
increased their spending in 1997 to just over 4 million bucks, up 
from 2.7 million the year before. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Deputy Premier, how can you tell the 
workers of this province to shut up and take 2 per cent hikes 
while you reward your PR flacks with a 50 per cent increase in 
their budget? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know what the point 
of the question opposite is. The Crown corporations are running 
. . . the Crown corporations of Saskatchewan, the Crown 
corporations of Saskatchewan provide amongst the lowest 
utility rates in Canada. 
 
Go down the list of them — go down the list of them from 
Energy to SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) to 
SaskTel to Power. They provide to Saskatchewan citizens 10 
per cent of the jobs; they provide a significant benefit in the low 
rates; they provide a profit to pay down the debt that the 
members opposite created for us through the ’80s; and they 
provide a hundred million dollars annually to the provision of 
services like education and health. 
 
If the member opposite doesn’t like that, maybe he wants to 
join the Sask-a-Tories and ask for privatization. 
 
We like what the Crowns do and the way they do it, thank you 
very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. By that response, 



714 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1999 

we have to assume that they are more than prepared to defend at 
election time, each and every hack that they’ve hired, each and 
every time that they’ve increased ad budgets by 50 per cent. 
Well, we’ll work on that at election time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this isn’t the first time that we’ve seen this double 
standard from the NDP. The NDP raised some health districts’ 
CEO (chief executive officer) salaries by 17 per cent. 
SaskEnergy increased its advertising contract to their NDP hack 
firm Phoenix Advertising by 50 per cent in one year. 
 
At the same time the NDP pad their ad agency contracts 
accounts and their PR budgets, students get shafted, potholes 
get bigger, and our health care system slips deeper into a coma. 
Perhaps it’s time you started to care more for the people of this 
province than you care about the politics and the propaganda of 
your government. 
 
Is this your priority, to load up your NDP friends and insiders as 
much as they can carry from the public purse before you go to 
the polls? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Speaker, there is something the 
member opposite may not understand. That the Crown 
corporations today are in a competitive mode; they are . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. Speaker, if the member opposite 
is finished muttering from his seat, I’ll continue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member opposite surely is by now aware that 
the utilities in Canada, through national regulation, and in many 
cases are now in a competitive mode. And you know what? The 
Saskatchewan taxpayers have supported the place of these 
Crowns in the competitive industry — whether it’s in SGI on 
the regular insurance; whether it’s in SaskEnergy where the 
rates are the best and nobody can come in here and compete; 
whether it is on SaskTel, where SaskTel has retained over 90 
per cent of their customers because of the loyalty. 
 
Yes, of course it’s important in the competitive marketplace to 
get your message out. The member opposite might want to see 
his companies fail. The member opposite might want to see his 
Crown corporations fail. But I tell you we do not, and the 
people of Saskatchewan do not, and we’re going to let them run 
good businesses like they’ve always done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Retention of Physicians in Province 
 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Health. Madam Minister, last 
week the Saskatchewan Party raised a very serious problem in 
the town of Maple Creek. The people of Maple Creek have lost 
five doctors in three years because of the NDP’s high taxes. 
 
Madam Minister, Mr. Speaker, this problem is not confined to 
Maple Creek. Towns and cities all across Saskatchewan are 
watching helplessly while doctors and specialists leave the 
province and that’s . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . You ask the 
question why? Because the NDP has burdened them with the 
second highest taxes in Canada. 
 
The latest doctor to leave Maple Creek told the local newspaper 

that he was leaving because NDP taxes are killing him. This 
doctor said he was going to Alberta where he will be allowed to 
incorporate and therefore pay far less in taxes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Madam Minister, what is your government doing 
to encourage doctors to stay in, rather than leave this province? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I find this an 
interesting question coming from this member who was elected 
in 1986, 1991, and 1995, as a member of the Progressive 
Conservative Party. 
 
Let me remind the member, and perhaps go back a little in 
history, to talk about why we’re at where we’re at in this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, each and every day in this province the citizens of 
this province spend $2 million on interest on the public debt. 
Why, Mr. Speaker? Because that member’s party racked up a 
$15 billion debt. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I find it incredible that that member would 
talk about high taxes, more spending on roads, more spending 
on health, more spending on education, and tax cuts, given that 
we have $2 million a day on interest, or $750 million each year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that member’s party’s position does simply not 
add up and we’re not going to go back to the past where this 
province was in debt and deficit. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 217  The Crown Construction Tendering 
Agreement Revocation Act 

 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I move 
first reading of a Bill, Bill 217, The Crown Construction 
Tendering Agreement Revocation Act. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
Bill No. 218 — The Crowns Corporations Amendment Act, 

1999 (Foreign Investment Prohibition) 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I move 
first reading of a Bill, Bill No. 218, The Crowns Corporations 
Amendment Act, 1999 (Foreign Investment Prohibition). 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 219 — The Crown Corporations Disclosure Act 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I move 
first reading of a Bill, Bill No. 219, The Crown Corporations 
Disclosure Act be now read a first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 



April 22, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 715 

Bill No. 221 — The Crown Corporation Managers’ 
and Permanent Heads’ Salaries Act 

 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I move 
first reading of a Bill, Bill No. 221, The Crown Corporation 
Managers’ and Permanent Heads’ Salaries Act be now read a 
first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 222 — The Crown Corporations (Board of 
Directors Appointment) Amendment Act 

 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I move 
first reading of a Bill, Bill No. 222, The Crown Corporations 
(Board of Directors Appointment) Amendment Act be now read 
a first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 223 — The Crown Corporations 
Amendment (Referendum) Act 

 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I move 
first reading of a Bill, Bill No. 223, The Crown Corporations 
Amendment (Referendum) Act be now read a first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 224 — The Accountability of Subsidiaries of 
Subsidiary Crown Corporations Act 

 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I move 
first reading of a Bill, Bill No. 224, The Accountability of 
Subsidiaries of Subsidiary Crown Corporations Act be now 
read a first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 

 
MOTIONS 

 
Distinguished Volunteer Medal Recipients 

 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I move, seconded by the member from Cannington: 
 

That the House do now recess until 4 p.m. for the 
Saskatchewan volunteer recognition tea, and that this 
Assembly reconvene at the call of the Speaker ringing the 
bells five minutes in advance of reconvening. 

 
Leave granted 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Speaker: — With that carried, I will ask everyone to 
remain seated in your places. Those who are involved in the 
medals event this afternoon will leave and will re-enter the 
Assembly as soon as possible, and we’re able to begin. 

We will now stand recessed with the Sergeant-at-Arms to ring 
the bells to summons the members at 3:55 p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 4 p.m. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, and here it is, the answer to 
question 62. 
 
The Speaker: — The answer to item no. 1, question no. 62 is 
tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Education 

Vote 5 
 
The Chair: — Before we get started, I would ask the minister 
to introduce his officials, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. To my 
immediate left is the deputy minister of Education, Mr. Craig 
Dotson. Directly behind me is the associate deputy minister, 
Ken Horsman. Seated right next to Ken, to his left, is Mae Boa, 
executive director. 
 
Michael Littlewood, seated next to me is . . . Michael is the 
executive director, legislative and school administration; Larry 
Allan, the executive director of school finance; seated at the 
back is John McLaughlin, executive director of teachers’ 
superannuation; and Mr. Cal Kirby, director of facilities. And to 
my right and one desk back, Mr. Chair, is Gerry Sing Chin, who 
is the manager of the school operations grants. My officials, Mr. 
Chair. 
 
Subvote (ED01) 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I think 
before we agree to that item, we have a few questions for the 
minister. And, Mr. Minister, I want to welcome you as the 
Minister of Education, the first opportunity that you’ve had to 
be in Education estimates. And of course a special welcome to 
all of your staff here this afternoon. 
 
We have a limited time period today, Mr. Minister, and so there 
are a number of things that I want to touch on. We’ll begin, Mr. 
Minister, by looking at of course education overall. As the 
Minister of Education, a recently appointed Minister of 
Education, you’ve inherited some of the things, of course, that 
the former minister was trying to institute. 
 
One of those was in the area of amalgamations and 
restructuring of Education. What I’d like to have you clarify for 
the members of the House and of course people in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister, is the restructuring plan that the 
former minister had embarked upon, voluntary . . . the kind of 
plan that was put in place has been a bit of . . . a bit of . . . a bit 



716 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1999 

successful but also has struggled. And we hear most recently I 
think in the last couple days we hear now that in the west 
Saskatoon area that the school divisions there are looking at it 
and saying: no, amalgamation is not on for us. And in fact they 
have withdrawn from that process. 
 
I understand the quotation in The StarPhoenix from director of 
education Brian Keegan has indicated that the board 
unanimously . . . that board unanimously has indicated that they 
will not take part in restructuring. 
 
What I’d like to ask of you, Mr. Minister, is as far as your . . . 
your philosophy and your idea about amalgamations, about 
restructuring, are we following the pattern that was established? 
Have you ideas on how we can move forward? And also I 
guess, how do you address the concerns that have been 
expressed by the director of education and the board in 
Saskatoon (West)? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I want 
to first of all thank the member from Canora for the question 
and certainly indicate to the member that this is a wonderful 
portfolio that I have the opportunity to be a part of today. And I 
know that he has a strong appreciation for my feelings, having 
been an educator and also a senior member of the SSTA 
(Saskatchewan School Trustees Association), the president of 
the organization in this province, and has worked hard for the 
betterment of education in this province. 
 
So I know that he shares with me the admiration that we have 
for the system and the people who work in it and the initiatives 
that we have undertaken in this province over the last several 
years. Really to make this a better place for our Saskatchewan 
students and residents and provide good opportunities for 
children as they move on into the workplace and the careers and 
for the training in this province. 
 
You asked the question about amalgamations and sort of the 
overall thinking and direction of the government. As you’ve 
well described, that in the last several years the minister prior, 
Ms. Atkinson, and certainly I have taken the same position, and 
that is to continue to speak to school divisions across the 
province and talk about voluntary amalgamations because there 
are certainly efficiencies in the amalgamations across the 
province. 
 
Today as you well know there are some 90 school divisions, 
90-plus school divisions across the province. And gradually 
we’re seeing or have seen over the last several years a coming 
together of school divisions. As you’re familiar with the area 
from which you come, not the Crystal Springs, but the Crystal 
Lakes School Division has recently amalgamated and have 
found some efficiencies in there. 
 
And there are lots of issues, as you well know, with 
amalgamations. And our position will be to continue to 
encourage them, on a voluntary basis, to promote 
amalgamations across the province because there are 
efficiencies. 
 
And I’m saddened today to respond to your comment as it 
relates to the Saskatoon West decision because I think it’s an 
unfortunate decision for that part of the province, because a lot 

of good work went into trying to determine whether or not there 
were benefits to this. 
 
And when I examined some of the work that they have done 
with the Outlook and Biggar School Divisions, there was I think 
something like 450 or $480,000 worth of efficiencies that they 
had in fact identified which really would have made its way 
back into the operation of the schools. 
 
And I know that you have identified on a number of occasions 
the kinds of pressures that exist within the school environment, 
and I concur with you for sure on those. And if any time you 
could take that kind of administrative saving and transplant it or 
redirect it into the front line operations of school divisions, or 
classrooms, it would be very, very valuable. 
 
So I’m hoping that there might be some further discussion in 
that area and that amalgamations continue to be viewed in a 
generic way across the province, with our promotion of it, of 
course. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m glad to hear 
those last couple of words — with your promotion. And I think 
this is a time, Mr. Minister, for leadership. And I raised this 
question with the past minister as well. 
 
When we talked about restructuring of school divisions, we 
talked about taking existing — and you’ve mentioned Crystal 
Lakes School Division and I think that’s a good example. 
We’ve taken two existing school divisions — boundaries that 
existed in about 1944 or whenever they were drawn — and 
we’ve put them together. And the question still is before school 
division boards, that new board of education, there are 
problems. And I’ve referred to them a year ago as areas on the 
fringes. The fringe problems of the boundaries. 
 
Have you, as the current minister, do you have the Boundaries 
Commission in place? Is it assisting boards of education to 
solve the problems that exist with the old boundaries of the 
1940s? And what do you see happening in terms of providing 
leadership to boards of education to address those concerns. 
Because I know, Mr. Minister, you’ve made a couple of good 
points around some of the efficiencies that boards of education 
may achieve. 
 
But what’s happening with boards of education currently of 
course is that they’re doing a lot of sharing. And they have done 
that already and they have reduced costs as a matter of 
balancing their books, of course. But at the same time, when 
they look at amalgamation and they look at a large system — 
and I understand that that system was going to be in excess of 
4,000 students and in excess of 25 schools — they pull back. 
They pull back and I think the public in one area has responded 
by saying, we don’t think you should be part of that huge area; 
it’s not beneficial for us to be in that. 
 
At the same time we hear of boards of education who have 
already amalgamated — in a much smaller sense, the Crystal 
Lakes School Division — and there are still areas that haven’t 
been addressed. And they will not be addressed by the school 
division — neighbouring school divisions — because of course 
we’re talking about turf protection. We’re looking at areas of 
land that if you, if you agree to transfer a huge amount of land 



April 22, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 717 

to the neighbouring school division, you lose that tax base. And 
as a result they’re not willing to look at that. 
 
Will your department, will you as Minister of Education, be 
providing leadership in that area to address those concerns and 
assist any of the boards of education who are struggling with 
those kinds of boundary problems? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Chair, to the member, when we 
talk about assisting boards in the role of amalgamations — 
we’ve been doing this now for some time — and the 
undertaking certainly from me and from the department will be 
— and this government — will be to continue to do that in the 
way in which we have in the past. And today we provide some 
remuneration to district boards to assist them with their consult, 
financially, in the amalgamations. And certainly our 
departmental people are there to assist with some of the 
progress work that they do. 
 
And the Boundaries Commission is in place — the question you 
asked of whether it is in place, and it is in place. It’s there to 
assist school divisions if in fact they want to engage the 
Boundaries Commission in their work of amalgamations. 
 
You asked though a very important question. And that is, you 
know, will there be a more significant role played by the 
government or the ministry in advancing amalgamations across 
the province. 
 
And by and large, what this administration has said, and I think 
we’ll continue to take the position, is that we do it through 
consensus and that we encourage the district boards across the 
province — or not district boards, excuse me, school divisions; 
some of the language is still a little tight as you can understand 
— so school divisions across the province to, to work together. 
 
Now there may be some interest, or there may even be some 
promotion, that we should do this by dictate. But it’s clearly not 
the position of this administration or this government to impose 
that kind of a process on school divisions today. 
 
(1615) 
 
Because what we’ve seen historically — as you’ve seen, I know 
— over the years school divisions have gotten together; they’ve 
made decisions about increasing the size of their boundaries; 
they’ve closed schools over the years, historically. And so 
we’ve allowed that process to continue to take place at the local 
level with the elected trustees, who we think represent the 
communities and their constituency in a very admirable way. 
And they’re always concerned about the quality of education of 
students and equity. So as much as we might see, or think that 
we see, deficiencies in the system — and I think there are some, 
and that’s why we talked about amalgamations — getting in 
front of it as a ministry or as a department I think is certainly 
not the direction that I would be supporting today, but rather to 
continue to work in partnership with school divisions to 
promote that into the future. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
you’ve indicated that there are about 90-plus school divisions. I 
was wondering if any of your officials have a listing of all of 
the school divisions that exist in the province today. And could 

you also indicate to me how many school divisions exist like 
the new Crystal Lakes — how many amalgamations have 
actually taken place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Member . . . or Mr. Chair, to the 
member, there are 30 that have now became nine. So we have 
nine amalgamated school divisions across the province. And 
when you ask how many school divisions do we actually have 
in place today, I said it was 90, but it’s really 100 — we have 
100 school divisions today. And we can provide you with a list 
of all of those school divisions and we’ll have that available for 
you in the future. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Do you want that in alphabetical order? 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you. Well the member opposite wants 
me to ask for it in alphabetical order, but it really doesn’t 
matter, Mr. Minister. I know the gentleman might have trouble 
reading from A to Z, but it won’t really matter. 
 
The document, Mr. Member, that we’re really interested in, of 
course, is the nine amalgamated school divisions. I believe, Mr. 
Minister, you’ve received a number of letters from those school 
divisions, and I’m not sure whether there’s more than one. 
 
How have negotiations proceeded within those new 
amalgamated boards of education with both their professional 
group — in other words arriving at a new link agreement — 
and with their paraprofessionals, if indeed there is a union 
group as CUPE (Canadian Union of Public Employees) or 
whatever it may be. Do we have new contracts in place in all of 
the nine amalgamated school divisions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I’m not able to answer that question fully, 
because when you ask how much correspondence I’ve had with 
the school divisions that have amalgamated, I’ve only had 
actually correspondence from one of the nine that I’ve 
identified to the member from Canora. And it really has only 
been from the Canora, Timberline School Division, which is the 
new Crystal Lakes School Division, is the only one that I’ve 
had any correspondence from where they’ve identified some 
issues that you’ve identified this afternoon. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I haven’t had the 
opportunity to contact the other eight boards as well but I will 
do that, and I hope that those boards also will be in contact with 
your department. 
 
As indicated in that letter, Mr. Minister, I think we have a bit of 
a problem occurring here. And the letter to you, Mr. Minister — 
I mean you have a copy of that and so do I — the board of 
education has identified some concerns. 
 
What they’re facing is, of course, two existing contracts that 
existed with the teachers’ associations of both of those school 
divisions. Two existing contracts existed for the CUPE workers 
as well. And now they’re trying to negotiate. And of course it’s 
both groups looking at what was probably their best clauses and 
they’re putting them forward. 
 
As indicated in that letter to you, Mr. Minister — I think it’s 
dated January 12, ’99 from the board of education, the director 
of education — they’re looking at a figure of $140,000, new 



718 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1999 

dollars, would be necessary if they were to implement the 
requests that were on the table at that time. That’s a staggering 
amount of money to bring about new contracts. And I know 
we’re talking about contracts right across this province in health 
care and everywhere else. 
 
What role will your ministry play or your officials play in 
assisting Crystal Lakes with, I guess first of all, some advice? 
 
And secondly, are you going to be addressing the . . . if indeed 
there are more than just Crystal Lakes that are having difficulty 
and require additional funding, will any additional funding be 
allocated to those new school divisions, that upfront costs that 
will be necessary to put in place new contracts? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Chair, on balance we would 
view these as being some savings across the piece. But as the 
member from Canora knows, it has always been the 
responsibility and the role of the local school boards to 
negotiate the agreements, not only with the sports staff but 
issues that are pertaining to other responsibilities that educators 
perform today within their school divisions. 
 
And it would not be my expectation or intent to either involve 
the minister or the department in the process of working out the 
individual arrangements of which school divisions have for 
years and years traditionally held in sorting out the levels of 
benefits that teachers would have outside of the provincial 
agreements. And that would continue to be the position of 
certainly the ministry today, and I expect would be the 
recommendation I get from the department. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, could you clarify whether 
indeed your predecessor at any time had indicated that 
additional monies would be made available to boards who 
would look at the possibility of amalgamations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I think only from two areas: for grant 
protection, I expect that there was a commitment made; and for 
some funding for the transitional piece in order to assist boards 
with their amalgamation process. 
 
I think if there was a commitment and I don’t . . . I wouldn’t 
know . . . I don’t know right off the top, but I would expect that 
it would only be in those two areas that the ministry would have 
made any kind of a commitment to school divisions. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. It’s my 
understanding that a number of years ago the Minister of 
Education offered a sum of money to existing school divisions 
to look at extra costs that would be incurred if they were going 
to amalgamate. It wasn’t a large amount of money, but it was a 
small amount of money that was suggested that boards of 
education could use. 
 
As I pointed out, and I’m pretty sure that we’re going to hear 
the very same answer from all the other eight amalgamated 
areas, that additional monies are going to be needed to put in 
place an amalgamation process. You’ve indicated that you want 
that to occur at that local level, and that you want that contract 
to be negotiated at the local level with the teachers and with the 
support staff, and I agree with you. 
 

But what’s happening is we’re placing an additional financial 
burden on the taxpayers. And maybe that’s the kind of financial 
burden that is scaring away the people of Saskatoon (West) to 
say if it’s going to cost us — and they’re talking about a much 
larger concept than the Crystal Lakes concept — if there’s an 
additional $150,000 needed to bring about . . . or 140,000 I 
think is the number that the director of education has quoted 
here. If that’s what’s needed as additional monies in Crystal 
Lakes, what amount of monies might be needed in this new 
concept surrounding Saskatoon (West)? 
 
Is that kind of thing scaring boards of education and the public 
at large from saying no, don’t touch this; we don’t want to be 
part of putting up additional monies to be part of a larger 
picture and lose that kind of autonomy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I think, Mr. Chair, it’s my sense that when 
school divisions come together to have a discussion about 
amalgamation they would clearly have an appreciation of what 
the disparities are between each other. And so . . . Because it 
wouldn’t be any different today than if they were negotiating on 
an individual basis with their employees. 
 
What they’ve done of course is now made a decision that they 
would bring two or three school divisions together and 
collectively . . . and they’re doing this on a voluntary basis. And 
so their understanding of what their needs might be in terms of 
financial commitments, I think, are obvious. 
 
I don’t share the same view that this is an extra burden to the 
taxpayer. This would be on the other side of that, in my view. 
Amalgamations are intended to provide some relief to the tax 
base, if I might consider it that way. Because what we would 
see of course is that there would be clearly some efficiencies in 
the amalgamations. 
 
As I pointed out to you, the unfortunate feelings that I have 
regarding the Saskatoon (West) position, because there you 
actually did see a large chunk of money that would make its 
way back into the front lines in the delivery of educations in the 
classrooms. 
 
So it’s not an extra burden in my view to the taxpayer. What it 
is, it’s a reflection of what the savings might be to the taxpayer 
at the end of the day because those dollars would be redirected 
into the front lines of providing better, higher quality education 
to our students. 
 
Now just in completing part of your other question, and that 
was the understanding that you had that there might be some 
chunk of money that would have been available to school 
divisions on amalgamation. I expect that what it really is, is the 
$15,000 that was made available — and still is — to school 
divisions to assist them with their transition process. And that 
commitment is still there, and we’ve made that commitment to 
each of the school divisions that have been involved in the 
amalgamations that we talk about today. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I 
guess in speaking with board members in the Crystal Lakes 
School Division, they are very aware of course that that has 
been a shared entity for many years. In fact at the time that I 
still was at the Canora board level we were already sharing a 



April 22, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 719 

director of education, a secretary-treasurer, the office, and on 
and on and on. 
 
The amount of savings that will be incurred by this 
amalgamation process in Crystal Lakes is going to be very 
limited because over the years they have saved those hundreds 
of thousands of dollars of reducing those costs. So we’re going 
to see different kinds of things in the province, Mr. Minister, 
and that’s the point I’m making. 
 
In one area like the Crystal Lakes, they will have to find 
additional new monies to put in place a new contract. It won’t 
be found in the efficiencies because they already saved those 
monies years ago. Yes, maybe in Saskatoon (West) and in that 
area, if it’s a larger concept, there is the possibility of saving 
significant dollars and that will be. 
 
The point that I’m making there, Mr. Minister, I think that your 
department and your minister’s office has to be able to assist, 
and it may have to even assist financially to address the extra 
costs that boards of education are going to incur, or else that 
whole voluntary concept that your predecessor so aptly spoke 
about is just not going to happen. Boards of education need to 
have some benefits at the end of the day to be able to look at the 
concept of amalgamations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well I think that what we should keep in 
mind here — and the member identifies it, I think, Mr. Chair, 
quite correctly because that’s how I view it as well — and that 
is that when we go to promote amalgamations across the 
province today, part of it is that we’re hoping that we might be 
able to capture some efficiencies within the system and then be 
able to redirect them into the front-line delivery of education 
across the province and the schools of which education is 
provided. That’s part of it. 
 
I think the other part of the amalgamation piece of course is to 
look at how we might in fact enrich the quality and equity of the 
system across the province. And you’re correct, that it varies 
from different parts of the province. And in the Crystal Lakes 
School Division, by pulling together two school divisions, at the 
end of the day we might not see a significant cost or efficiency 
that would be redirected. But what you might then see is an 
enriched level of shared services within the two school 
divisions that would enhance the quality of delivery in that 
particular area. 
 
And so when we’re talking, I think, about the benefits of 
amalgamations, they’re far broader than just what might be 
found in the financial piece of the process. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister. Maybe we’ll 
leave voluntary amalgamations alone for a minute or two. 
 
Mr. Minister, in your Saskatchewan Education report, the report 
of 1998, there was mention made of course of the testing results 
across Canada, and specifically Saskatchewan. And I recall last 
year the Minister of Education, then minister of Education — as 
a result of the levels of testing and the results of Saskatchewan 
students in the area of mathematics — that a commission or a 
group was put together with some significant funding to 
identify what had happened in the area of mathematics. Was 
this just a small glitch or . . . you know to I believe report back 

to the minister of Education as to what we could do in the area 
of mathematics to improve our skills? 
 
Could you inform the House and the public at large as to where 
we are with that study? Is it complete? Has the monies allocated 
— and I believe they were $200,000 — have those monies been 
spent? And where are we regarding change in terms of 
developing new concepts and new programs? 
 
(1630) 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Chair, to 
the member. First of all, I want to indicate to the member that 
I’m looking at the Provincial Auditor’s report, the fall report, 
volume 2, the 1998 version of his report, and in the conclusion 
portion of his response he says this: 
 

The Department of Education used best practices and 
succeeded in gaining and maintaining key stakeholder 
commitment to the tracking and reporting of education 
indicators. In doing so, the Department has demonstrated 
leadership in reporting. 
 

So I think it’s important for the record that we indicate the 
significance of the auditor’s report in the process of the testing 
results. 
 
When you ask the question about what it is that we’re doing 
with indicators that have come our way as it relates to the 
mathematics issue, and I can outline for you what our action 
plan has been and I can provide a copy for you as well if you’d 
like. But these are the number of things that we’ve implemented 
to ensure that this process meets the kinds of expectations that I 
think we have in administering the department. 
 
We’ve done this: two additional provincial consultants are 
providing leadership today; a team of more than 50 
mathematics teacher-leaders are helping to deliver in-service; 
we have a new and innovative mathematics material are being 
evaluated collaboratively by the western Canada protocol 
process; we have a new assessment, and evaluation tools are 
being developed; we have far greater parental involvement in 
the process today; we have the University of Regina is now 
completing a mathematics instrumental time across the province 
and the study will ensure curriculum use in the province. 
 
So those are the five or six bullets that really address the action 
plan that we put in place to try to address the issues that were 
identified for us. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Good. Thank you, Mr. Minister. First of all, I 
do want to say that the Saskatchewan Education Indicators 
document is a very good document in terms of providing 
necessary information to the people of Saskatchewan. And I 
wasn’t in any way implying that the indicators document is not 
a good document, as the auditor has agreed. 
 
But I do want to indicate that — I believe it’s on page 32 — one 
of the statements there said that at levels 3 and 4, Saskatchewan 
13-year-olds achieved lower than the Canadian profile. 
 
And that’s my question, Mr. Minister. You’ve indicated that 
your action plan has involved, you know a number of teachers, 



720 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1999 

curriculum people; you’ve talked about two additional people in 
Saskatchewan to act as curriculum coordinators. Has there been 
a need to change the curriculum at that level? 
 
The question that parents are asking as a result of those tests, 
was there something wrong with the curriculum, was there 
something wrong with the way it was being taught? Or, you 
know, has your action plan determined what needs to be 
changed at that curriculum level? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member. I think it’s 
important . . . In his question he identifies an area that’s 
absolutely correct. And that is that when you look at the 
implementation of the mathematics program across the 
province, at the time in which the testing was completed, the 
new curriculum was not fully implemented. 
 
And so today, now that we have the curriculum fully 
implemented, I think if we were to do the same kinds of testing 
today with the kinds of supports that we’ve built into the 
system, we’re likely to see a much different result. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, under 
your leadership now, there are two other sort of studies that are 
being done. One is to deal with the exceptional children and 
how that fits into our school system, and the other one of course 
that you most recently announced was the role of schools and 
how we’re looking at that. 
 
Let’s deal with the first one, Mr. Minister. Could you tell us 
where the committee is regarding its public findings or its 
public discussion around exceptional children and the special 
needs that so many students bring to classrooms? When do you 
expect the report? What kinds of things do you see happening 
as a result of that particular body that is doing its work at the 
moment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Chair, to the member. As you 
know, when I arrived in the ministry in September, the special 
needs report had already been engaged to the credit of the 
minister of Education prior to me — the member from 
Saskatoon broadway. Not Saskatoon broadway. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Nutana. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Nutana. Saskatoon Nutana. And so the 
process was well on its way. The committee had already been 
identified and the committee members had been identified and 
they were doing some very good work when I had already 
arrived. 
 
I’ve had the occasion now to meet twice with the committee. 
And I want to say to you that the public portion of the 
consultation process is now completed, and currently the 
committee is busy working with the individual stakeholders 
within the education system and around it. And expect that this 
process will likely provide some interim information to me this 
summer, early September, with the final recommendation on 
the document and their work . . . or of a document of their work 
likely in December of this year. 
 
As you well know, the issues around special needs in this 
province have grown dramatically over the last several years. 

And on a daily basis there are many, many pressures within our 
school environment today and a growing number of special 
needs. 
 
And accordingly, it’s our hope and certainly our expectation — 
and that’s why the committee is in place today — that it will 
provide us with some direction as to how in fact we’ll deliver 
special needs programs across this province in the future. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And of course 
without indicating, you know, what your solutions might be, I 
guess you can’t indicate that to us until you see the report. 
 
The whole situation with special needs, as you’ve indicated, has 
been growing over the years. There are many more 
requirements of the education system to deal with needs of all 
kinds of children. And that I think, Mr. Minister, is tying 
directly into the role of schools. People are asking the question: 
should the school be dealing with this and this and this? 
 
And that’s the question that I know that you’ve put in place, and 
I think that dialogue is going to occur and it’s going to occur at 
a most appropriate time. The time frame is a little long and I’ve 
mentioned that to you before, Mr. Minister. But what is going 
to have to have to happen, Mr. Minister, is that you’re going to 
have to have the leadership from the various government 
agencies. 
 
We saw the report of 1992, supported by every agency that was 
involved in that symposium, whether it was Justice, whether it 
was Health, whether it was Social Services. All of those 
departments said it would be terrific to have an integrated 
model whereby the school roof would have under it . . . one 
component would be education but all of those other things 
would occur as well. Great concept, but did not occur because 
of course Health funding did not follow. 
 
The requests of the Health department to provide health care 
officials to come into a school system and administer 
medication is turned down. Those are the kinds of things that 
were recommended in 1992, and I know that you weren’t the 
minister and that concept hasn’t been dealt with. 
 
And I wonder, Mr. Minister, depending of course on what you 
see happening in that dialogue, what would your position be at 
the moment regarding an integration of school-based services 
and allowing other types of government agencies to put in place 
the funding necessary to bring help to people of Saskatchewan? 
 
You know, and we start to look at boards of education having to 
cut back. We know that guidance programs, we know that 
counselling programs have been eliminated in a lot of the 
schools. And, Mr. Minister, I do want to indicate that in some 
city schools and many inner-city schools, great things are 
happening, okay. There are programs that are being developed 
with Justice officials, with Social Services people, and you 
know maybe there is a sharing of the financial burden. 
 
We do know that of course Education dollars are being spent to 
deliver those non-educational needs, and I think that’s what was 
starting to bother not only board members, but also the parents. 
Who is going to pay for all these things that are required in the 
classroom setting? 



April 22, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 721 

You know, we saw the horrific example of a disaster in 
Colorado just a couple of days ago. We need to ensure that we 
provide financial assistance, whether it’s through Education or 
whether it’s through Health or Social Services, we need to 
ensure that we provide the kinds of dollars necessary to put in 
place the people to be able to assist. 
 
I ask for your response. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Chair, to the member opposite. I 
have now had an opportunity to hear the member on a couple of 
occasions as it relates to the whole integrated piece. And I know 
that in 1992 there was a good deal of work that was done by the 
Saskatchewan school trustees with the interest of course of 
promoting a model that would have an integrated model or 
integrated system tied to it. 
 
And when I had the opportunity first to look at the broader 
piece of what’s happening in education today, and I come from 
. . . I come from this from a different perspective of course than 
which you do. You have come through the system as an 
educator and have witnessed firsthand some of the pressures 
that are involved in the education system, you know, having 
been a teacher and a principal and a board trustee, and then later 
the president of the Saskatchewan School Trustees Association. 
You have seen it internally. 
 
I want to say to you that my route has been a little bit different 
in that I have practised in the area of social services for many, 
many years and have witnessed the kinds of responsibilities and 
programs in which we were responsible to administer from the 
Department of Social Services or Justice, and we have a huge 
dependency on the school system to try and deliver many, many 
of those programs in that environment. 
 
And so from my perspective, the role of the school is really to 
examine how much more this institution is prepared to take on 
or can take on, because as you and I both know, that schools 
don’t have an option. Because when children arrive at their door 
today and are asked for particular services, then the school 
system simply provides the services. They simply do it. 
 
And they don’t reject anybody. They don’t say, well I’m sorry 
today because you’re here and you’re an abused child or today 
you don’t have any food in your stomach, we’re not going to 
take you today. They don’t have those kinds, they don’t have 
those kinds of options. 
 
And so school divisions and school systems have taken on all 
these responsibilities over the years. And so the role of the 
school is to examine very, very broadly . . . and this is a public 
dialogue with, in my view, no preconceived notion about what 
we’ll want to see at the end of the day, because I think the 
public needs to tell us how in fact they want to see their school 
systems operating into the future. 
 
Do they want to be an environment with an eclectic group of 
services in them, today where you have hot lunch programs, 
and you have within that environment, single parents and that 
you have daycares and that you have preschool programs and 
you have child education counsellors and you have justice 
workers and social workers? Is that what we want our schools 
in the future to look like? 

And to some degree you’ll find them today in some 
environments across the province, as you already say. So we’re 
integrating some of those services. 
 
And so I want, I want a dialogue in this province that, first of 
all, is led by a group of people who make up that broad 
perspective of interest; people who are from Social Services and 
people from Justice and Health and Education, so that as they 
go around the province and check the wisdom of the people of 
Saskatchewan; that in fact they’ll be able to craft a solution at 
the end of the day that will reflect what Saskatchewan people in 
fact want to see their schools be. 
 
And maybe then we’re on a process to change the way in which 
we have to fund them. Because as you point out, and I think 
rightfully so, that today we have the Departments of Health and 
Social Services and Justice who have great, great expectations 
of our school system and maybe should be greater involved in 
how we fund those things into the future, which I think is a 
different piece in my view. Because once we get some 
consensus of what we want our school environment to look like, 
then I think we need to start addressing how it is that we’re 
going to sustain them into the future from a financial 
perspective. 
 
And so I’ve engaged in some discussion already with the 
Saskatchewan School Trustees Association about looking at 
how that process might work. And they aren’t isolated. It isn’t 
the Department of Education and the SSTA who alone can 
make a final decision on how we fund into the future. I think we 
need to include our partners who are at the municipal level — 
both at SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association) and SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities) — because they have a huge investment as well 
because their communities are very concerned about what 
happens to schools in the future. 
 
And I’ve cited this example on a number of occasions, as you 
can well appreciate, because I’m sure you’ve been there on 
many occasions — I know you’ve been there on many 
occasions on your own — where I’ve witnessed what happened 
in the Fort Qu’Appelle, or the Qu’Appelle school division, 
which was raised I think by one of your members recently, 
where you have the school division who’s at the front of the 
room talking about the importance of consolidating a high 
school in that particular area because it makes good sense from 
the point of view of quality of education and accessibility and 
maybe — maybe — even efficiency. 
 
So in the wisdom of the school trustees, they’re busy trying to 
accomplish that. And then the clip on the television channel 
switches, and you have somebody from your urban government 
or your municipal government standing at the microphone 
saying you can’t do this because at the end of the day you’re 
going to kill my community. 
 
(1645) 
 
And so I think we need to have that discussion as a partnership 
today, because you can’t be calling on school divisions to do a 
different job or a better job in delivering education. And then 
you have another member of your community who is an elected 
leader saying you can’t do this because we don’t support it. 



722 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1999 

So part of my discussion will be to try to promote some 
common theme and dialogue in that process when we get to 
talking about funding. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. You’ve highlighted 
a couple of very good things, Mr. Minister, that I think we have 
to be very, very careful with. 
 
We have seen what has occurred in the health system regarding 
the extra burden on nurses, and of course the whole question of 
nursing practices. At the same time, I think we’re starting to 
hear that very, very slightly in the education community as well 
when we start to see all of the requests that are being placed on 
the school. 
 
The teachers are feeling that stress and they’re feeling that 
burden to say, is it our job to provide the lunches? And you’re 
very, very accurate to say that teachers will provide whatever 
they can; if they have . . . you know, if they have their own 
lunch bag along, they’ll share it with the people if they 
recognize that indeed a child has come to school hungry and is 
unable to learn because of hunger. So those kinds of things have 
to happen. 
 
And when we go through this dialogue process, Mr. Minister, I 
think what we have to ensure that at the end of the day, if we’re 
changing course, if we’re determining that there’s additional 
monies now that are going to come from Health and Justice and 
Social Services to implement programs, we have to ensure that 
there is . . . that program is implemented province-wide. 
 
There has to be accessibility in rural Saskatchewan to the same 
kinds of things that there are in downtown Regina. When we 
look at the availability of police officers in the schools that I 
visited here in Regina . . . You know, I mean they’re next door; 
they’re the neighbours; and it’s very easy to get them in. In 
rural Saskatchewan, without funding to be able to ensure that 
those kinds of services arrive at the school, they don’t 
necessarily get there. And I know you’re from rural 
Saskatchewan and you’ve seen those kinds of things happening. 
 
So if you hear it in the dialogue — and I’m sure you will — 
from parents and teachers, I hope that we’re looking at a 
province-wide program, not just to highlight what is a problem 
in some city schools, but also in rural Saskatchewan as well. 
And I look forward to your report and I look forward to the 
kinds of things that will happen. 
 
Mr. Minister, if you want to comment on that a little later, that 
would be fine. But I’d like to turn directly to the budget of 
course and the estimates in Education as time is slipping by. 
 
You know the first thing, Mr. Minister, that I’m sure startled the 
school trustees association — and it did me — is the fact that 
the budget for K to 12 education overall, last year to this year 
has dropped by $9 million. And I know . . . I’m sure you get the 
school trustee magazine. The trustee magazine has right on their 
front page the fact that the budget for K to 12 education overall 
was 558 million last year . . . sorry, this year. And last year it 
was 567 million — $9 million less. 
 
Mr. Minister, I guess you lobby as a cabinet minister with the 
Minister of Finance. Why did you allow $9 million to leave K 

to 12 education? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well I’m . . . I was tempted to spend some 
time talking more about the role of the school. But now you’ve 
encouraged me to move to the other piece, and I will move to it 
quickly. 
 
I want to say to the member opposite that the sheet that you’re 
reading from is the one that I’ve had some opportunity to read 
from too. And as you look at it and examine it, you can see that 
clearly the reductions this year in the K to 12 system are 
directly related to the pension reduction. And that’s where the 
reductions are. 
 
Now I think that it’s important for us to examine . . . And I 
know that over the last several days you’ve been certainly 
asking me to pay attention to some of the issues that are 
happening around the province and some of the things that are 
being said by school divisions across the province as it relates 
to the level of funding. And there are some pressures out in 
Saskatchewan land as it relates to the education system. 
 
And I don’t dispute that for a moment. And so part of my 
exercise is to do some of the things that I think might fix that 
into the future. And certainly, as I’ve already identified, the role 
of the school will be one of those so that we can identify 
collectively across the province what it is that we think schools 
should be doing and how we might enrich them into the future, 
given that there are other partners and players that need to be 
involved in that process. 
 
But clearly, when you look at the kinds of pressures that we 
have within the government overall, that the government was 
expected to deliver on this year, and you allude to the concerns 
on a daily basis on your side of the House that we have in 
health, and we made a huge commitment this year as you well 
know — $195 million to the Health file. And at the end of the 
day after you take the 195 million out of the pool of new money 
that you have, it doesn’t leave you with a great deal of 
additional resources. 
 
So what you do of course then is you apply them to all the other 
departments across government. And this year we made the 
decision that we would put an additional $13.5 million into the 
Health file or into the Education file — excuse me — and then 
for operating grants. And then added another $24 million onto 
the capital piece. 
 
So today across the province I know that school divisions are 
saying we wish you would have done more. And I say to you: I 
wish we could have done more. But the bag of money is only so 
large and this year our bag, of course, had to be shared with a 
great many players within the system. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. You know, Mr. 
Minister, I need to ask you to clarify a comment you made and I 
was going to do that today during question period but the time 
did not permit me. You’ve stated two days ago when I asked 
you a question on education, you indicated that there were 
300,000 additional people in Saskatchewan. And I’m 
wondering, were we at 700,000 in 1991 and today we’re at a 
million? Or were we at a million in 1991 and today we’re at 1.3 
million? Because 300,000 people must be hiding, because I 



April 22, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 723 

don’t know where you found that we have 300,000 additional 
people in this province since you took over office in 1991. 
 
Your comments, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — If you were to examine the events in 
Saskatchewan under your old administration, what you’ll see in 
Saskatchewan is that you will have seen that through the years 
1991 . . . or 1982 to 1991, you had a massive exodus of people 
from the province of Saskatchewan. And when you do the 
numbers from 1981 to today, you’re going to be very, very 
close to 300,000 people because the census in this province is 
extremely lower. 
 
So I think what you should do in this province is examine what 
happened in our exodus of people between 1981 and 1992. And 
today of course what’s happened is that we have the largest 
population in this province over the last 20 years. 
 
And we have an additional 10 more people, the member from 
Kindersley says, that’s moved into his community. And that’s 
always good news — that we have more and more people who 
are moving into our province and people from Alberta 
obviously coming back into Kindersley. 
 
So we have significant growth in, we have significant growth in 
this province today and it is very much a good news story. 
 
And accordingly, when we have more people coming to 
Saskatchewan, as you very well know, we’re going to be able to 
. . . there’ll be more people employed in this province as there 
are today. And we’ll continue growing the economy in this 
province and, accordingly, have more money for education into 
the future because this is what this province is about — growing 
our economy and population. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Could you ask your 
officials to answer this question for you, because I’m not sure 
that you have the answer at your fingertips. You stated in the 
response to me that we have more children going to school than 
during the time of the late 1980s. I understand from the report 
that I received from your officials that our current enrolment in 
Saskatchewan is about 191,000 students plus. What was the 
enrolment in the province of Saskatchewan in the time that you 
came to office, 1991? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I expect that if I were to examine the full 
perspective of how many students today we have attending not 
only K to 12 but post-secondary and community colleges in this 
province, we probably have a significantly larger number of 
students today who are attending our educational systems than 
they were in 1991. 
 
And I think when you . . . it’s a bit of a stretch, I would suggest 
to you, to suggest that we would have more students today in 
the K to 12 system than we did in 1991, or the years in which 
you have in question. Because today, as you and I both know, 
that our enrolments have been declining, and today we have, I 
think, 191,000 students that are in our K to 12 system. And our 
hope would be that we would see some of that growing. 
 
But over time as our economy improves and as we continue to 
promote the economy of this province and jobs and industry, 

then we’ll see more people coming to Saskatchewan, and it’s 
my hope that we’ll see additional students attending our 
schools. 
 
And as the member from Melville this morning or earlier today 
suggested, he is involved or his family is involved in making 
greater contributions to this province. So we already know that 
we have one additional person coming to the K system probably 
within the next five years. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, if I 
could request from your officials — and it’s for the purpose of 
understanding how the enrolments are changing in 
Saskatchewan and whether they’re changing more significantly 
in rural Saskatchewan as I’m assuming they are — if I could 
ask your officials to provide a chart that would indicate the 
enrolments in school system for the 1990s and up to the current 
year, that would be appreciated, so we can see where we were 
and where we’re headed, I guess, in terms of enrolments. 
 
Mr. Minister, you did mention capital funding. Capital funding, 
Mr. Minister, is a vital part of the amount of money that boards 
of education receive. And over the last couple of days as you’re 
aware in this legislature, I’ve tried to ask you questions 
regarding the total funding package that goes out to boards of 
education, and I’ve used comparison documents of the 1990-91 
to current date. 
 
We look at operating grant, and of course back then there was a 
conditional grant in the early part of the 1990s called the 
educational development fund, and there is the capital grant. 
Those three components are the money that is transferred to 
boards of education. 
 
That money that was transferred to a board of education, to all 
the boards in the province, in the 1991-92 school year was 
about 452 million. And of course it’s dropped ever since then. 
What has occurred this year is we see a number of about 427 
million, still $24 million less than you provided to boards of 
education in ’91-92. 
 
The area of capital is even of much greater concern to boards of 
education. We know from talking with the facilities department 
that they have as much as 400 applications before them for 
capital. 
 
You have indicated, Mr. Minister — and I’m reading from one 
of the articles that you indicated — you expect six major 
projects to be approved and possibly as many as 100 smaller 
projects within the entire province. That leaves probably 300 
projects still on the list. 
 
You have reduced, Mr. Minister, if we look at the capital grant, 
you have reduced the amount of money in capital from 32.5 
million last year to only 30.1 million this year. You’ve also 
allowed $2.4 million to be cut from the capital budget. 
 
How do you expect boards of education to handle their capital 
requirements if, number one, you are about $40 million less 
today than you were in 1991-92, real costs, and at the same time 
you in fact have cut $2 million from last year. And the projects 
continue to pile up. Capital is of great concern, Mr. Minister. 
And I wonder how you explain that to boards of education. 



724 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1999 

Hon. Mr. Serby: — First of all, Mr. Member, the new capital 
this year stayed the same. The interest costs are what went 
down this year. So I think when you reflect the numbers then 
what you’ll see, you’ll see that the interest costs have actually 
been reduced, and the amount of capital that we put into the 
system today is exactly the same. We’re at $24 million. 
 
I think what’s important to recognize is that we know that we 
have some pressures within the capital system today. And we’re 
going to enrich the capital amounts over the next little while as 
funding resources are available to us. And so I think we need to, 
we need to stay tuned for the capital piece as we move along 
over the next couple of years. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

BILL WITHDRAWN 
 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, with 
leave, I would want to ask for the removal of Bill 221 — 
apparently there was a printing error on the Bill — and for 
reintroduction later. I would move, with leave, that we could do 
that. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:03 p.m. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 


