





























































Hansard: December 07, 1999


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 35 
 December 7, 1999 
 
The Assembly met at 10:01 p.m. 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
Standing Committee on Agriculture 

 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 
the member for Kindersley: 
 

That the first report of the Standing Committee on 
Agriculture be now concurred in. 
 

I so move. 
 
Motion agreed to unanimously. 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 46 
 

Provincial Agriculture Crisis 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, if I could, I would 
like, by leave, seconded by the member from Kindersley, that 
on behalf of the Legislative Assembly, transmit copies and 
verbatim transcripts . . . I guess this is under rule 46, I’m sorry; 
I think out of place here. I have to wait for that motion to be 
passed. 
 
The Speaker: — I thank you. We all need a little help. This has 
a been a real great evening for everybody, and everybody’s 
excited. So I will once again ask for a resumption of debate on 
the emergency motion. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, I’m both pleased and honoured to 
enter the discussion on this very important sector of our 
economy this evening — agriculture. And we’ve heard a lot 
from the farm leaders of Saskatchewan today about the topic 
and how important it is to our province, and indeed to our entire 
nation. 
 
And on behalf of the official opposition I want to thank the 
farm groups for taking the time to come to the legislature in this 
very unprecedented fashion and present their views to the 
Assembly, to our province, and indeed to the country of 
Canada. 
 
And I hope, and I sincerely hope, that our remarks and the farm 
leaders’ remarks were heard in Ottawa today, and I’m counting 
on that fact that they are. I understand the Premier and the 
Minister of Agriculture will be speaking tomorrow to the 
Standing Committee on Agriculture, as I will be, and we’ll be 
certainly making it known to them what transpired here over the 
course of the last number of hours and the importance to our 
country and to our province with respect to that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to be a farmer here in Saskatchewan. 

And I think all farmers in this province are proud to be involved 
in farming here in this great province. We are proud to be 
involved in an industry that enjoys some of the simple pleasures 
in life as well as things that are a little bit more complicated. 
 
Some of the simple pleasures like smelling the freshness of the 
soil at seeding time. Watching a new crop come up and develop 
into a bumper crop. Watching the birth of a new calf or a new 
hog being born. The sight of a great crop, cutting into a new 
crop of wheat or canola or lentil or what have you. A 
bin-busting bumper crop is what we all look for in agriculture. 
Those are some of the things that give us a great deal of pride to 
be a farmer in Saskatchewan. 
 
Often there are other problems though and other things that we 
have to contend with in agriculture. Drought, too much rain — 
as we heard from some of the folks here this evening — frost, 
grasshoppers, wheat midge, canola diseases, army worms. And 
the list just goes on and on and on, as all farmers would know. 
 
Couple it with breakdowns and combine fires, flat tires, banks 
and bankers, income statements, crop projections, income 
projections, putting down that very productive cow that we’ve 
had over the years — those are some of the things that we’ve 
had to deal with that are a little more heartbreaking in 
agriculture. Those are just some of the things that we always 
used to have to deal with on a farm. 
 
Now farmers spend countless hours sitting at their desk or at 
their kitchen table dealing with programs like crop insurance, 
GRIP, NISA, AIDA. The last three, of which interestingly 
enough, are a four-letter word, and that farmers have had to deal 
with. And it’s become the new reality in agriculture in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The new buzz words like Estey and Kroeger and rail-line 
abandonment, elevator closures, income shortfalls, WTO, 
marketing — those are the kinds of things that farmers spend a 
lot of their time thinking about in Saskatchewan today. 
 
Now, part of running a farming operation includes things like 
sleepless nights, wondering how your going to make it through 
the next few weeks, how you’re going to make the next 
payment that is coming due inevitably. Mind-numbing and 
physical-numbing days trying to get another crop in or looking 
out the combine window wondering how you’re possibly going 
to be able to afford to make the payment on that parcel of land 
that you so eagerly purchased up a while ago and now perhaps 
even regret that decision. 
 
No farmer in this province that I know of asks for pity, not a 
one. We don’t share our thoughts all that often in this great 
province about the troubles that we have. What farmers really 
want, I think, is just simple understanding of their concern, and 
action to deal with those concerns. And in some way gain a 
hopeful understanding from the people that are not associated 
with agriculture as to the plight that they find themselves in 
today. 
 
We truly have a great country in Canada and I think we’re all 
justifiably proud of that country. Many of the people of this 
world look upon it as the greatest nation in the world, as we do. 



36 Saskatchewan Hansard December 7, 1999 

And the reasons why are very many. 
 
What makes Canada a great nation? A high living standard, 
maybe. Health care, obviously yes. Education, yes. Care for 
those less privileged than us, absolutely. Freedom, of course. 
All of those things that make this country great are what are a 
part of our being here in Saskatchewan and a part of our being 
as Canadians. 
 
What makes a country great? That’s the question that I think is 
— one of the questions that we are constantly faced with in this 
Assembly and as a federal administration, obviously. It’s 
coming together in times of crisis, I believe is what defines a 
nation in large measure. Whether it’s in times of conflict, world 
wars, and things of that, gone by. Or whether it’s in times of 
crisis that we have no control over as a nation. 
 
When the ice storms were happening in Ontario, southern 
Ontario and parts of Quebec, the nation responded. The nation 
responded because it was the right thing to do. Clearly it was 
the right thing to do. And in fact, many people wondered why 
our governments couldn’t move even faster to respond to the 
crisis that was there. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, a lady in my constituency said to me 
that when the crisis in Quebec was happening, she sent a . . . 
she purchased a generator, a small power generator, and prepaid 
it, the freight, down to a friend of hers in Quebec. And when 
asked why she did that she said because she simply couldn’t 
bear — she couldn’t bear to see on the evening news the kind of 
problems that there were faced with in that part of the country 
and stand by and do nothing. 
 
She said she believed it was her responsibility as a Canadian to 
do what she could to help out, so she did that for her fellow 
friend in Quebec. And she said, quite simply, it was the right 
thing to do. It was the right thing to do. And we all know that it 
was the right thing to do. Just as when the Maritime fishing 
industry in this country was faced with crisis, the country 
responded because we all know it was the right thing to do. 
 
When we saw flooding in southern Manitoba, the visual images 
were breathtaking to all of us. And I was just down in 
Manitoba, Mr. Speaker, last week and I had occasion to see a 
map of the flooding as it was at its peak levels. And I was 
interested, the Department of Agriculture put out this map and 
they showed that it was . . . at that time when it was at the peak 
levels, it was the 28th largest lake in the world. That’s from 
nothing to the 28th largest lake in the world, just in the matter 
of a few days. 
 
And I have a friend down there, that while the flooding was 
taking place I called him and asked him . . . or just prior to it 
taking place, I called him and asked him whether he would be 
experiencing any trouble. And he said, no, I don’t think so, 
because I’m 12 miles away from the river — 12 miles away 
from the river. I called him at the peak of the flooding down 
there and he said, it’s lapping at our door today. That’s how 
quickly it came upon them. 
 
And what did we do as a nation? We responded to the call. We 
responded and said to those people in southern Manitoba that 
this is a crisis and we must deal with it. It’s imperative as a 

country that we have that kind of response mechanism when we 
need it most. And we need it now here in Saskatchewan. 
 
That has been a part of building a nation. And I think part of 
that nation building is a process that we are going through here 
today. And I think it’s also one of the things that has made our 
country the great nation that it is. 
 
And I want to pay tribute this evening to our Premier for his 
contributions with respect to nation building. He has been a 
member for a long time in this Assembly, as we know, and he’s 
made great contributions, both provincially and federally. And I 
couldn’t help but feel, when we were in Ottawa, some degree of 
sorrow for not only the Premier of this province but for our 
province itself when we ran into the type of roadblocks that we 
did when we went down in that farm delegation. I can’t help but 
think the Premier must have questioned a lot of his work over 
the years. 
 
And I think I recall one of the things that he said when asked by 
one of the reporters whether this is a sad time for our country. 
And I think he responded by saying yes, it’s one of these times 
when you call into question some of the good work that you’ve 
done over the years. And I think that’s important, that we 
recognize the Premier for his contributions in that regard. 
 
It is those kinds of contributions that are the glue that holds our 
nation together — many great leaders federally, provincially, 
federal assemblies, provincial assemblies, and just simply 
people working together to try and build something good for 
our country and for ourselves. 
 
When the farm delegation, Mr. Speaker, as I said, went down to 
Ottawa, they were met with, I think, a response that we had no 
idea we would be met with. A kind of, oh, almost a disdain for 
our concerns. And it was extremely troubling. I think we went 
down there with a tremendous amount of optimism that our 
concerns would be listened to and addressed, because it simply 
was the right thing to do. And we were essentially told to pack 
up and go home, in a manner of speaking. And it was 
heartbreaking to see that type of thing take place. 
 
(2215) 
 
And subsequent to that, we hear the Minister of Agriculture 
saying in Ottawa these days, in not so recent days, a few weeks 
back, that maybe we have to simply have a little bit of tough 
love for our concerns here in Saskatchewan. Tough love, that’s 
what he said, is the response to a crisis in agriculture here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
This morning, Mr. Speaker, I looked up “tough love” to find out 
exactly what the definition of that is. And I contacted through 
the Internet the program that’s based out of, I believe it was the 
original founder of it, out of the United States. And the 
program’s definition goes as follows: 
 

For parents troubled by the behaviour of their children of 
any age. For those with past, current, and anticipated 
problems concerning school, family, alcohol, drugs, or the 
law. 

 
That’s what the national tough love program tries to address, 



December 7, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 37 

and I think they do a very good job of that. 
 
Tough love was the message that we got for our agriculture 
producers here in Saskatchewan, and I think it was extremely 
disheartening to say that. We’re not an errant child; we’re not 
someone that has had a brush with the law. 
 
Farmers in this province are not someone who have somehow 
or another done something wrong and must be punished for it. 
Or be given a message that you simply have to do what is the 
responsible thing to do to pull yourself out of crisis. That’s what 
the tough love message means. 
 
That isn’t what we are faced with here in Saskatchewan at all. 
We are faced with a crisis that is of no making of our own. We 
are faced with a crisis, an income crisis that is a result of an 
international trade war that no farmer in this province can 
manage on their own. If a farmer in Saskatchewan isn’t in 
trouble, it’s only because they have a little bit deeper pockets, 
and it will be soon when they all are in trouble. It’s not about 
saving a few farms; it’s about saving all farms here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, the importance of this cannot be 
understated. It’s extremely important that we move as quickly 
as possible to address the concerns in agriculture here in this 
province before we continue to see farm families ripped away 
from their livelihood. 
 
And I was very, very moved by some of the comments of the 
grandmothers and mothers and young people here in our 
province in letters that were read out in the Assembly here 
today. So I sincerely hope that this effort has made a difference. 
I think it’s made a tremendous difference in Saskatchewan. I 
hope it makes a difference in Ottawa. 
 
And we in the official opposition will continue to pledge our 
support for the farm delegation to try and convince Ottawa and 
indeed others in this country that there is a need here and it 
most certainly needs to be met. 
 
And when we talked earlier today a little bit about the concerns 
that some people have that maybe we should just let this thing 
go, I don’t think they have any understanding of the breadth of 
the problem that we have here in Saskatchewan. And I hope 
today’s debate has somehow or another made them a little bit 
more aware, a little bit more understanding, a little bit more 
caring, and a little bit more willing to do what we all know is 
the right thing here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to, as I 
understand, close the debate, and I want to say, first of all, 
thank you to all members of the Assembly who have stuck with 
us here today and actually, I think, been involved in a very 
historic day — the meeting of the Agriculture Committee on the 
floor of the Assembly. 
 

I want to thank the Ag Committee members, both from the 
government and opposition, for being there to ask the questions, 
to be involved in the process. But most of all to the farm 
organizations, some who are still here in the gallery, and others 
who have come here to present to us on this most important 
issue and to re-emphasize to the federal government that the 
attitude that somehow the farmers who are going broke in our 
province are somehow inefficient and not capable of doing the 
work and surviving, that somehow it’s their fault for the fact 
that they’re going broke. 
 
And I want to say that nothing could be further from the truth. 
The fact of the matter is, if there were any inefficient farmers 
left three years ago when the Crow rate was removed, they were 
gone by then. 
 
The people we’re losing today are the youngest, the university 
educated, those that know how to use a computer. They know 
the science of agriculture. Their only mistake is farming a few 
miles north of the US border where the subsidies are 
substantially different. That’s the difference. If they were in the 
United States or Europe, applying the technology they apply 
here today, they would be the most successful farmers because 
on the cost side it’s very similar. The cost of fuel, the cost of 
chemicals, belts for a John Deere combine — there’s not a great 
deal of difference on that side of the formula. 
 
When you look at the income side though, you find a minimum 
of 30 per cent difference in gross income on one side of the 
fence line, as Alan Balfour, who farms at Climax indicated at 
the Wheat Pool convention. Thirty per cent difference in 
income — farming in Saskatchewan versus farming in Montana 
or North Dakota — because of the subsidies being paid by the 
national government in the United States versus Canada. 
 
And we shouldn’t buy the line that the Canadian government 
cannot compete with the US treasury when it comes to 
supporting farmers. Taxpayers in Canada pay only one-third the 
amount of subsidies to Canadian farmers as the US government. 
So we should not buy the argument that the money isn’t there. 
We know that there’s about $95 billion in surplus over the next 
five years. And we just can’t accept, and we aren’t going to 
accept, and we’re going to work even harder together with our 
farm organizations to make this pitch work in Ottawa when the 
next budget is read. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I want to say that one of my heroes 
is my father who is 82-years-old and raised nine kids on a little 
farm north of Shaunavon. And I want to talk just for a moment 
about being a Canadian. Because my dad, an old German 
farmer, moving here from the United States where they had a 
little homestead in North Dakota and then immigrated about 
1909 to southwest Saskatchewan. Dad was born in 1917. He 
always had this attitude that everything went to Eastern Canada 
— Ontario and Quebec. And those on the farm will know the 
story. Over and over we heard it as we were growing up. 
 
And one day when I was newly elected member, I got to go to 
Montreal and I told my Dad to come with me. And he did. And 
we flew into Montreal and we rented a car and drove to Quebec 
City along the St. Lawrence River. And part way to Quebec 



38 Saskatchewan Hansard December 7, 1999 

City . . . it was in the autumn and it was beautiful and the trees 
were turning and the farmers had their apples and various things 
for sale along the road. And we came across a farmer who had 
an old John Deere combine, and the combine had plugged up in 
some wet swaths. And my dad insisted that I stop the car. And 
he went over and couldn’t communicate because my dad 
couldn’t speak French and the farmer couldn’t speak English. 
But somehow working together, one pulling the drive belt and 
one putting the PTO (power take off) into gear, they got the 
combine going. They waved to each other, never saying a word, 
but they made the combine work. 
 
And that’s the image that I have of my father, but more 
importantly of what I think of the Canada we love and know 
should be about — Canadians helping Canadians — whether 
you’re from Eastern Canada, Western. And I think that this is 
what we all believe. 
 
And I watch with pride when our federal government in the past 
has protected people who have had ice storms or floods in 
Manitoba, as we all have. And I was proud of those who got on 
planes and flew to Montreal a couple of years ago during the 
referendum to tell the people in Quebec that we loved them, we 
wanted them to stay. And many farmers were included in that 
movement to keep Canada together and I know that we as 
legislators believe in doing everything we can to build a 
stronger country. 
 
And even when . . . we remember Bombardier running into 
trouble in, I think it was in Brazil where contracts weren’t being 
let properly, and our federal government went to bat for 
Bombardier as well they should, to protect jobs. And so the 
contracts are done right and we were proud of our federal 
government for doing that. 
 
But here we are today asking our federal government, because 
of a international trade war which they have responsibility to 
come to our assistance, we feel not only slighted but we feel 
hurt. And it’s interesting that when we were in Carlyle . . . And 
I wanted to read a quote from a young farmer there who we’ve 
heard many times. But I have the transcript and I talked to him 
recently and he said he wouldn’t mind if I read it in speeches, 
when I was giving speeches from time to time. And I want to 
quote what he said about Canada and the farm crisis, and I 
quote: 
 

My wife and I are fourth-generation farmers on a farm that 
just celebrated its centennial. We are proud to be farmers 
but I, like many of you, am having to swallow my pride 
and ask for help. Mr. Vanclief, you say if we can’t make a 
go of it, we should get out, and that’s easy to say for many 
people. But when you are working the land that has been in 
the family for generations, you just can’t walk away. Even 
if you could, for many farmers it would take their lifetime 
to pay all the bills and outstanding debt. For many farmers. 
any equity built up in the farm is long gone or, in our case 
as new farmers, we’ve been going deeper in debt every 
year. (And he says) Indeed, on October 28, it was a sad 
day. When I got home from my off-farm job that day, the 
first thing I did was take down the Canadian flag that has 
flown at our farm since before I can remember. (He said) I 
will never put it up again. (But the hope comes from what 
he said in a few moments later, after he talked about the 

crisis. He then said), and we went on to say and challenge 
Prime Minister Chrétien, and I quote, “Make me want to put 
up my Canadian flag and show me that you care.” 

 
I think that’s what we’re all saying today in our own way. We love 
this country. We’re a big part of it. We may be a small percent of 
the GDP (gross domestic product) as farmers but we’re like the 
foundation under this building. It may be a small percentage of 
what you see, but it’s a fundamental building block of our country, 
and we need the support. And today was an important part of that. 
And I thank you all immensely. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The division bells rang from 10:27 p.m. until 10:28 p.m. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 53 
 
Romanow Trew Hagel 
Van Mulligen MacKinnon Lingenfelter 
Melenchuk Cline Atkinson 
Goulet Lautermilch Thomson 
Kasperski Serby Belanger 
Nilson Crofford Hillson 
Kowalsky Sonntag Hamilton 
Prebble Jones Yates 
Higgins Harper Axworthy 
Junor Wartman Addley 
Hermanson Elhard Heppner 
Julé Krawetz Draude 
Boyd Gantefoer Toth 
Peters Eagles Wall 
Bakken Bjornerud D’Autremont 
McMorris Weekes Harpauer 
Wakefield Wiberg Hart 
Stewart Kwiatkowski  
 

Nays — nil 
 

The Speaker: — The motion is carried unanimously. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, by leave I move: 

 
That the Speaker, on behalf of the Legislative Assembly, 
transmit copies and verbatim transcripts of Rule 46 motion 
and debate, with respect to the farm income crisis now 
facing Saskatchewan farmers, as well as the verbatim 
transcripts of the hearings of the Standing Committee on 
Agriculture to the Prime Minister of Canada, the federal 
Minister of Agriculture, the federal Minister responsible 
for the Canadian Wheat Board, and all opposition party 
leaders, and respectfully request that they cause the House 
of Commons to immediately hold an emergency debate on 
this matter of urgent public concern. 
 

I so move. 
 
Leave granted. 
 



December 7, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 39 

Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I move this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:32 p.m. 



 

 


