





























































Hansard: March 23, 1999


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 179 
 March 23, 1999 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have 
a petition to present on behalf of people very concerned about 
health care and the imminent closure of hospitals. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
abandon any plans to reduce acute care or close any more 
hospitals in the North-East Health District. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition come from the 
communities of Arborfield and Carrot River. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new petition to 
present today. The prayer reads: 
 

Whereas your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reduce the royalty taxes on new drilling in Saskatchewan 
to stop job loss and create new employment in this sector. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from the Carievale, 
Gainsborough areas of southeast Saskatchewan and Pierson, 
Manitoba. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a petition to present on behalf of farmers of Saskatchewan 
to do with the crisis in agriculture. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
demand that the federal government work with 
Saskatchewan to put in place a farm aid package that 
provides real relief to those who need it, and that 
provincial government develop a long-term farm safety net 
program as it promised to do when it cancelled GRIP 
against the wishes of farmers. 
 

The community involved, Mr. Speaker, is from the community 
of Rhein. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To as well present a 
petition, a petition calling on the government to review its 
CCTA (Crown Construction Tendering Agreement) agreement, 
and I read the prayer: 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to end 
its unfair tendering policies and immediately cancel the 
Crown Construction Tendering Agreement. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by a group of people from 
the . . . it looks like the northern area of the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I so present. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I arise on behalf 
of citizens concerned about pending hospital closures in rural 
Saskatchewan. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
abandon any plans to reduce acute care or close any more 
hospitals in the North-East Health District. 
 

Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
communities of Carrot River and Arborfield. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
today from the people of the Carrot River area: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
abandon any plans to reduce acute care or close any more 
hospitals in the North-East Health District. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

People that have signed this petition are also from Carrot River 
and Arborfield. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, the petition I have this 
afternoon, the prayer is as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reduce the royalty taxes on new drilling in Saskatchewan 
to stop job loss and create new employment in this sector. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

This petition comes from the southeast part of the province, 
Carievale in particular, and I’m pleased to present on their 
behalf. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too have 
petitions from citizens of Carrot River demanding that no more 
hospital closures take place. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
abandon any plans to reduce acute care or close any more 
hospitals in the North-East Health District. 



180 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 1999 

And as I’ve mentioned, Mr. Speaker, the signators are all from 
Carrot River. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, while I bring 
forward petitions. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call upon the NDP 
government to provide funding in this budget to have the 
Swift Current regional hospital equipped and staffed as a 
specialty care hospital, and to immediately provide funding 
for the purchase and operation of both imaging equipment 
and renal dialysis centre. 
 
And as in duty bound your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I look through these hundreds if not thousands of 
petitions in the southwest, and I believe that every community 
in the southwest part of Saskatchewan has had somebody sign 
this. 
 
I so present this today. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well to 
present petitions on behalf of people who are concerned about 
the need of having a regional hospital in their area. The prayer 
reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call upon the NDP 
government to provide funding in this budget to have the 
Swift Current regional hospital equipped and staffed as a 
specialty care hospital, and to immediately provide funding 
for the purchase and operation of both imaging equipment 
and renal dialysis centre. 
 
And as in duty bound your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, those who’ve signed these petitions — and there 
are many of them — are from a number of communities 
throughout the southwest but also from the Thunder Creek 
constituency. People from Main Centre, Rush Lake, Morse, 
Hodgeville, Neville, Pambrun, Vanguard, Herbert, Morse, just 
to mention just a few as well many from other areas of the 
southwest including also the city of Swift Current itself. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to rise 
again today on behalf of the people of this province to present a 
petition. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call on federal and provincial 
governments to dedicate a significantly greater portion of 
fuel tax revenues toward road maintenance and 
construction so Saskatchewan residents may have a safe 
highway system that meets their needs. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition has been signed by the good folks in 
the communities of Fillmore, and also — looks like a coffee 

stain here — from the good folks out in Creelman. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 
petitions from residents of the northwest, requesting remedial 
action for the dangerous and confusing entrance to the city of 
North Battleford, and specifically the Highway 40 and 16 
intersection. 
 
Your petitioners this afternoon come from North Battleford, 
Gallivan, Cochin, Meadow Lake and Sonningdale. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am also pleased to 
present a petition on behalf of my constituents. The prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call upon provincial and 
federal governments to immediately take steps to end 
unfair world subsidies and provide farmers with prompt 
relief from declining incomes and act as watchdogs against 
rising input costs which are harming the rural economy. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

The signatures come from the good people in Lemberg and 
Neudorf, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
once again on behalf of people who are concerned about 
children with learning disabilities in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And I’ll read the prayer: 

 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide essential funding and ensure the delivery of 
scientifically proven diagnostic assessment and 
programming for children with learning disabilities in 
order that they have access to an education that meets their 
needs and allows them to reach their full potential. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The petitioners who have signed this today, Mr. Speaker, are 
from Broadview, Grayson, Cowessess, and Regina. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today’s last 
petition is nevertheless still important and I’ll read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately start work on the rebuilding of our secondary 
highway system to provide for safe driving on what are 
becoming known as pothole roads and enter into 
negotiations with SARM and SUMA for a longer-term 
plan of rural road restoration reflecting future needs, and to 
provide safety for all drivers as the new trucking 
regulations change safety factors on these rural roads. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition comes from the RM (rural 



March 23, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 181 

municipality) of Prairie No. 408, which is up in the Battleford 
area; signatories are from the Battlefords mostly, but there are a 
few also from the community of Wilkie. And I’m happy to 
present this on their behalf today. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the petitions presented at the last 
sitting have been reviewed and found to be in order. Pursuant to 
rule 12(7) these petitions are hereby received. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
give notice that I shall on day no. 12 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Justice: what exemptions to the 
Saskatchewan Farm Security Act have been made by the 
Farm Land Security Board in 1999 for the purpose of 
allowing non-residents of Saskatchewan to purchase land 
in excess of the maximum amount of non-residents as set 
out in the Act? 
 

I also give notice, Mr. Speaker, that I shall on day no. 12 ask 
the government the following question, and also to the Minister 
of Justice: 
 

What exemptions to the Saskatchewan Farm Security Act 
were made by the Farm Land Security Board in 1998 for 
the purpose of allowing non-residents of Saskatchewan to 
purchase land in excess of the maximum amount for 
non-residents as set out in the Act? 
 

I give notice that I shall on day no. 12 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Justice: what exemptions to the 
Saskatchewan Farm Security Act were made by the Farm 
Land Security Board in 1997 for the purpose of allowing 
non-residents of Saskatchewan to purchase land in excess 
of the maximum amount for non-residents as set out as in 
the Act? 

 
I also give notice, Mr. Speaker, that I shall on day no. 12 ask 
the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Justice: what exemptions to the 
Saskatchewan Farm Security Act were made by the Farm 
Land Security Board in 1996 for the purpose of allowing 
non-residents of Saskatchewan to purchase land in excess 
of the maximum amount for non-residents as set out in the 
Act? 
 

I also give notice that I shall on day no. 12 ask the government 
the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Justice: what exemptions to the 
Saskatchewan Farm Security Act were made by the Farm 
Land Security Board in 1995 for the purpose of allowing 
non-residents of Saskatchewan to purchase land in excess 
of the maximum amount for non-residents as set out in the 
Act. 

I also give notice, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. The hon. member has a series of 
questions which appear to be identical except for the difference 
in the year, and if the hon. member would wish to advise the 
House of the same question and name the other years, that 
would be really quite sufficient. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The questions that 
I’ll ask on day no. 12 also include the year of 1994, 1993, 1992, 
and 1991. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 12 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Hon. Minister of Energy and Mines: how many 
natural gas and H2S flares are burning in the province’s oil 
fields; has the industry offered to voluntarily reduce the 
number of flares as they have in Alberta; how many 
cyanide formations have there been identified in the 
province; how many cyanide formations have been 
perforated by the oil and gas drilling such as the one in the 
Consul area; have residents been issued a warning of the 
dangers to health in these areas as has been the case in 
northern Alberta? 
 

I so submit, Mr. Speaker. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Ms. Murray: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. I would like to 
introduce to you and to all my colleagues in the Assembly, 
seated in the west gallery, a splendid and very fine group of 
young people. They are in fact, Mr. Speaker, 50 grade 8 
students from MacNeill School. They’re accompanied by their 
teachers Jim Harrop and Ron Schindel. 
 
And I know that after they’ve spent some time in the Chamber, 
they’re going to have a tour of the building. And later on I look 
forward to meeting with them and answering any questions they 
may have on the proceedings of the House. 
 
So I would ask all my colleagues to join me in extending a 
warm welcome to the students from MacNeill School. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Murray: — I’ve got another one. Thank you. While I’m 
on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to introduce two very 
special people to you seated in the Speaker’s gallery. One will 
be known to many of you, Donna From, my constituency 
assistant. And all of us here will know how important our CAs 
are to the work that we do. 
 
And seated with her is Tony Martin, a very accomplished 
musician and friend from Lumsden, who is very interested in 
the proceedings of the House. And so I’ve asked him to come 
and spend some time with us here. Please join me in extending 
a warm welcome to Tony and Donna. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 



182 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 1999 

I’d like to introduce to you and through you to the members of 
the Assembly, a guest seated in the west gallery, Mr. Patrick 
Delainey from Aquadeo, involved with L & M Wood Products 
of Glaslyn and P & E Logging. Mr. Delaney started showing up 
in my office a while ago and got to know him pretty well. Oh 
by the way, seated beside him is my chief of staff Corinne 
Bernier. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Decision on Treatment for Cancer Patient 
 

Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we are 
all familiar with the tragic case of 13-year-old Tyrell Dueck. 
While there is debate about the most appropriate course of 
cancer treatment in this case, people have been almost 
unanimous in expressing serious concern about the ability of the 
government to intervene in decisions made by responsible 
parents about their children. 
 
As members of the Legislative Assembly, we’re elected to 
represent the views of our constituents. People are saying we 
need to look closely at the processes that are currently in place 
with regard to family intervention by the Department of Social 
Services. 
 
There is a legitimate role for government to play in protecting 
children. However the process of intervention must be 
supported by the public and these processes must respect the 
right of responsible parents to make decisions regarding the 
raising of their children. 
 
The Department of Social Services needs to review its policy 
with respect to family intervention to ensure the rights of 
responsible families are not being violated. 
 
The public needs to have an opportunity to participate in this 
review, and the government needs to make the results of this 
review public. 
 
Our prayers go out to Tyrell Dueck and his family in this very 
difficult time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Health Care in Carrot River 
 

Mr. Renaud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the true spirit of 
co-operation which this Assembly occasionally achieves, I want 
to thank my Liberal and Tory colleagues for gathering 200 
people together so I could discuss with them the advances being 
made in our health care system. 
 
We had a spirited meeting yesterday afternoon in Carrot River 
to discuss health care, an issue near and dear to everyone. I had 
the floor for about an hour and a half because the citizens of 
Carrot River had a number of tough, pointed questions which I 
was happy to answer. 
 
They had questions, Mr. Speaker, about the information spread 
by my colleagues who called the meeting. I answered the 

questions because it was very clear at the beginning that the 
Liberals and Tories were more interested in bashing each other 
than explaining how they could manage Health. 
 
The Tories said that they would introduce Texas audits and no 
more. Understandably so, because an audit is a prelude to 
slashing the Health budget. And Mr. Hermanson said he really 
didn’t say that we have too many hospitals in Saskatchewan but 
the Liberals said that we really did . . . he really did say that, 
and complained about the highways. It was a very good 
meeting, Mr. Speaker, all around. And today the people of 
Carrot River do know that there will be health care facilities in 
their community. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Congratulations to CJVR Radio 
 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today, Mr. 
Speaker, I rise to congratulate Melfort’s own CJVR Radio. 
CJVR 750 this past weekend cleaned house at the Country 
Music Awards. They captured the Country Music Station of the 
Year Award for the fourth consecutive year. CJVR also tied 
with CKRM for the Merit Award. Cal Gratton received the 
Music Director of the Year, On-Air Personality Award and 
Country Person of the Year. My sincere congratulations to Mr. 
Gary Fitz, the management, and staff of CJVR 750 Radio in 
Melfort. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Regina Economy Hot 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Mr. Speaker, I’m happy today to talk about 
positive economic . . . the positive economic performance of the 
city of Regina. 
 
According to the conference board . . . Mr. Speaker, according 
to The Conference Board of Canada, Regina and Calgary shared 
top spot for employment growth in the country in 1998. Six 
thousand new jobs were created in Regina, a 5.6 per cent 
increase over 1997. Six thousand! The strong job growth was 
led by new jobs in management, administrative and other 
support, health care, the professional, scientific and technical 
services sectors. 
 
Regina was second best — yes, behind Calgary but ahead of 
Toronto — in the nation in terms of best overall growth in gross 
domestic product because of strong activity in construction, 
commercial services, wholesale and retail sale, and housing 
starts. 
 
Louis Theriault, senior research associate and author of the 
conference board’s Metropolitan Outlook says the latest figures 
from the board point to another good year in 1999 for the 
Regina region and continued growth in GDP (gross domestic 
product), employment, and retail sales. 
 
All this, Mr. Speaker, in the city and province I am proud to 
live in without having to envy anyone else, as the Tories sitting 
opposite seem to want to do all the time. 
 
Thank you very much. 



March 23, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 183 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Unionization of Saskatoon Food Bank Staff 
 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
think I speak for all of us, Mr. Speaker, when I say that 
Saskatchewan people depend on the work and dedication of 
food banks and their staff everywhere in our province. When 
families and individuals are in need, it is heartening to know 
that the food bank can fill a most serious void. 
 
However it is important for me to bring my constituents’ 
concerns to this Assembly even if they are questioning an 
esteemed organization. And the calls I have received are 
deserving and worthy of acknowledgement. 
 
Apparently, Mr. Speaker, some of the staff at the Saskatoon 
Food Bank have become unionized workers. Callers to my 
office are wondering how and why such a necessary, 
not-for-profit organization would organize its staff in a union 
setting, especially when these very staff depend upon public 
donations and the goodwill of Saskatoon volunteerism to 
provide added services. 
 
There is great concern on the part of these callers that the work 
of the food bank might be jeopardized by the unionization of 
Saskatoon Food Bank staff. And I hope that Saskatoon citizens 
who have constantly supported the city’s food bank and are 
worried by this change will be provided with appropriate 
reassurances that their donations will be directed to the needy 
and only the needy. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

75th Annual Regina Horse Show 
 
Ms. Murray: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This week between 
March 22 and 26, Regina is hosting the “Jumps into Spring” 
Horse Show, which is the 75th annual Regina horse show. Once 
again the Saskatchewan Hunter/Jumper Association is 
presenting this event as a means of showcasing their sport and 
the horse industry. 
 
First of all, Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate the 
Saskatchewan Hunter/Jumper Association on their diamond 
anniversary and to say that I am certain this year’s show will be 
as well run and exciting as all the others. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to point out that the “Jumps 
into Spring” Horse Show attracts over 100 competitors from 
across western Canada and the United States every year. Every 
year the show brings high calibre show-jumping competition 
for all ages and levels of skill. 
 
Every year the show brings approximately $180,000 to 
Regina’s economy. Events like this increase tourism, boost 
Regina’s economy and its reputation as an excellent host city. 
More importantly perhaps such events, big and small, also help 
community spirit by building a strong volunteer network and by 
giving residents of the city and of the province yet another 
special event to attend and to be proud of. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Government Priorities 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Saskatchewan people have been sitting by and watching as 
health care waiting lists increased; farmers sat by and suffered 
while governments bickered over aid; and as highways have 
crumbled. These are the priorities of Saskatchewan people, yet 
they continue to suffer under the NDP (New Democratic Party) 
government. 
 
While the priorities of the people of Saskatchewan suffer for 
want of action, Mr. Speaker, the NDP has tended to its own 
priorities. Well on two occasions in the last four years, Mr. 
Speaker, the present Minister of Economic Development found 
it necessary to take political hacks and flacks with her on 
foreign trips to New York, Hong Kong, and Tokyo. 
 
While waiting lists grew, highways crumbled, and farm income 
slumped, the Minister of Agriculture was not going to be 
outdone by his cabinet colleague. Over the last four years on six 
different occasions his priority was to take political hacks and 
flacks to foreign destinations. Possibly, Mr. Speaker, those 
airports in Seoul, Tokyo, Phoenix, Tucson, Mexico, 
Indianapolis, and China are just too big for the minister to carry 
his own bags. 
 
In any event, Mr. Speaker, it’s time this government got its 
priority straight, and put issues like health care ahead of trips 
for hacks and flacks. 
 

SaskTel’s Sympatico Highspeed Internet Service 
 

Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In 1996 
SaskTel was the first telephone company in North America to 
offer high-speed Internet service using digital subscriber lines. 
 
Since then Internet services include not only Regina and 
Saskatoon, but also Prince Albert, Moose Jaw, Swift Current, 
the Battlefords, Weyburn, Estevan, and Yorkton. Yet the 
demand for this leading edge technology continues to grow and 
SaskTel has been there to meet that need. 
 
On March 13, SaskTel began offering its Sympatico Highspeed 
Internet service to residential customers in White City and 
Emerald Park, right in the heart of Regina Wascana Plains 
constituency. Sympatico Highspeed offers Internet access that’s 
up to 50 times faster than basic Internet dial service. Another 
improvement is the ability to allow simultaneous telephone 
conversations and Internet use on the same phone line. 
 
By offering Sympatico Highspeed, SaskTel not only meets a 
demand but it also strengthens its position as an industry leader 
for interactive and multimedia services within Saskatchewan, 
across Canada, and around the world. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 



184 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 1999 

Hospital in Carrot River 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I’m also happy today because I 
can stand up and represent the people of Carrot River Valley by 
asking the Minister of Health a question. Madam Minister, 
yesterday almost 300 people crowded into a meeting in Carrot 
River to talk about the future of rural health care. 
 
Madam Minister, the conclusion was unanimous: the NDP 
health care reform process is a disaster. Just ask your colleague, 
the NDP MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) for 
Carrot River Valley. What he’ll tell you, Madam Minister, is 
that people in his constituency are mad as hell and they aren’t 
going to take it any more. 
 
The Speaker: — Now I think the hon. member will recognize 
that her language is non-parliamentary, and I will ask her to 
withdraw that remark. 
 
Ms. Draude: — I withdraw that remark. 
 
And there’s something else that the NDP member from Carrot 
River Valley should tell you. Nobody believes you any more 
when you say the NDP has no plans to close rural hospitals. The 
people in Carrot River Valley certainly don’t believe you. They 
say that you’re going to close their hospital. 
 
Madam Minister, will you stand today in this legislature and 
assure the people of Carrot River that the NDP won’t close their 
hospital next year? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, 
there are few days that go by in this province when we don’t 
receive a press release from another politician capitalizing on 
the fears and anxieties of this province’s citizens. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that it’s important that we rise above this 
so-called public discourse and get to the facts. Mr. Speaker, our 
government has said that we are not going to close rural 
hospitals. Mr. Speaker, what we are going to do is provide more 
hospital and more health care services for people living outside 
of Saskatoon and Regina, Mr. Speaker. 
 
For the edification of the members opposite, they will know that 
with changing technology and with less invasive procedures, 
Mr. Speaker, thousands and thousands of surgeries that used to 
be done on an in-hospital basis are now being done on an 
out-patient basis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important that the people of this 
province get the facts, and not people capitalizing on fears and 
anxieties. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the facts are that people in rural 
Saskatchewan know the NDP government is closing hospitals. 
You got up in the legislature a few days ago and said the NDP 
won’t close rural hospitals. But do you know what? Nobody 
believes you, Madam Minister, and there’s a good reason why. 
Because it’s not true. 

And I will quote the doctor from Carrot River yesterday. This is 
what he said when he stood up at the meeting. He said, “I’m 
sick of hearing the district say no, the hospital isn’t closing. Yes 
it is. That white building will be closed.” That’s the doctor’s 
words, Madam Minister — the hospital will close. 
 
Madam Minister, will you care to change your statement and 
will you finally come clean and admit the NDP does plan to 
close hospitals, including that white building in Carrot River. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I also have a quote that I’d like to report to the people 
of this province. The Saskatchewan Party seems to have 
problems with figures. Mr. Speaker, not 300 people in Carrot 
River; according to the CBC (Canadian Broadcasting 
Corporation), 200 people in Carrot River. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to give another quote. According to the 
Saskatchewan Party leader, Mr. Hermanson . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order! Order! Now the Chair is 
having some difficulty being able to hear the minister’s 
response because of . . . Order! . . . because of comments 
coming from both sides of the House. And I’ll ask for the 
co-operation of all hon. members. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. What I want 
to say to the people of this province is that according to the 
Leader-Post, March 3, 1999, Elwin Hermanson who is the 
leader of the Saskatchewan Party from which that member is a 
member, has indicated that he couldn’t guarantee that his party 
would keep the doors open at all 36 hospitals. He’d have to do 
an evaluation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So the fact of the matter is that there will continue to be hospital 
beds in Carrot River. We don’t have to do an evaluation. There 
will be hospital beds in Carrot River. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, I was there yesterday and so 
was the CBC and I counted 278. I said about 300. Sorry. 
 
Madam Minister, I think the people in Carrot River talked about 
. . . they talked about what the minister says when she gets up in 
the House and they call it pure, unadulterated gobbledegook 
because you just won’t come out and say what you really mean. 
 
When you talk about converting a hospital, do you know what it 
means? You’re going to convert a hospital to an empty 
building. That’s what converting a hospital means. One senior 
who attended yesterday’s meeting in Carrot River summed it up 
really well. He said, they tell us we’re going to have a better 
facility afterwards but we don’t believe them. 
 
Madam Minister, nobody believes your government any more, 
not even your own junior Health minister. She says there will 
be fewer hospitals in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Madam Minister, will you please come clean and explain what 
you mean and tell people of rural Saskatchewan that there will 
still be hospitals as we know them. 
 



March 23, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 185 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I think my colleagues on this side of the House and most people 
that know me have no difficulty understanding what I mean. I 
don’t speak gobbledegook, Mr. Speaker, I speak the facts. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, to get back to another report and this is from 
Melfort, CJBR, they reported that just under 200 people 
attended their meeting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that the Saskatchewan Party, the Tory 
Party, can’t add up the facts. Mr. Speaker, what I want to report 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Now all hon. members will 
recognize it’s not necessary to be shouting across the floor, and 
I’ll ask for the co-operation of members on both sides of the 
House to allow the Hon. Minister of Health to conclude her 
response. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
What I can report to the Assembly is that Carrot River will have 
a hospital with four acute care beds and two swing care beds. 
What I can report, Mr. Speaker, is that there will be 32 
long-term care beds 
 
What I can report, Mr. Speaker, is that there will be lab testing 
and X-ray testing. What I can report, Mr. Speaker, is that acute 
care treatment will also include treatment. Mr. Speaker, there 
will be hospital beds in Carrot River. 
 
The opposition, the Tory Party, can’t guarantee anything. I’m 
giving you a guarantee. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Farm Aid Program 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: —Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Agriculture. Mr. Minister, 
farmers are starting to receive their applications off the Internet 
for the farm aid program. These forms are nothing but a 
make-work project for accountants and bureaucrats. 
 
Once again, nobody really thought about farmers when they 
were designing this inadequate program. 
 
I’ve looked at this form, Mr. Minister, and all I can say: what 
on earth were you thinking of? Where were you when they 
designed this ridiculous program? Were you still in Mexico 
suffering from heat stroke? 
 
Mr. Minister, how did you allow this to happen? How did you 
and the federal government design such an inadequate, 
unreasonable program? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, again we see the opposition trying to mislead the 
public. I have said from the beginning that we reluctantly went 
into this program. I said from the beginning that I was not 
satisfied with the way the program was going to be run. I said 
from the beginning that we will continue to try to improve it 

and talk the federal government into improving it. But we had 
no input. 
 
For this member to stand up and say, where was I, is a direct 
attempt to mislead the public. 
 
I would say to that member over there, explain to the public 
why your leader, Mr. Hermanson, one year after the federal 
government cut $80 million out the Saskatchewan agriculture 
— money for Saskatchewan agriculture — he came in the 
House the next year as the Reform leader and said: cut more. 
Tell the public that. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Minister, I believe what Mr. Hermanson said, if you’d have 
read the whole clip, he was trying to cut the bureaucracy. 
Something you should pay attention to. 
 
Mr. Minister, we are hearing estimates the accountants are 
going to charge any . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Now the Chair is having 
some difficulty being able to hear the question being put and I 
will ask — order — and I will ask for the co-operation of all 
members of the House to enable the hon. member to put his 
question. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
we’re hearing estimates that accountants are going to charge 
anywhere from 300 to $1,000 to fill out these forms. And then 
after the forms are filled out, most farmers aren’t going to 
qualify for any assistance. One farmer said it’s like buying a 
thousand dollar lottery ticket. And the way this program is 
designed, you might be better off buying a thousand dollars 
worth of lottery tickets. 
 
Mr. Minister, farmers are going to have to hire accountants to 
fill out these forms and at the end of the day, thousands of 
farmers — some of the farmers that need the help the most — 
aren’t going to get a cheque. They’re going to get a bill. 
 
How did you let this happen? Why weren’t you at the table? 
Why did you let the federal government design a program that’s 
actually going to stick farmers with a bill instead of giving them 
the assistance they need. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, this is incredible. A party 
along with the Liberals who kept saying, who kept saying day 
after day, just put your money in, just put your money in, which 
made our bargaining position weak, weaker, and the federal 
bargaining position stronger, now stands up in this House and 
says, how did you do it? 
 
Well take some credit for this whole process. I agree that the 
process is not good. I agree that the federal government bungled 
it from day one; the Liberal federal government bungled it from 
day one. 
 
But I have another question for the member when he gets up on 
his feet again. The member that advocated getting rid of $320 
million out of Saskatchewan pockets, farmers’ pockets annually 
. . . You see, you see, it hurts. The truth hurts. The member who 
advocated getting rid of the Crow benefit which took $320 



186 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 1999 

million out of Saskatchewan farmers’ pockets annually, now 
stands up and tells them this program is inadequate. 
 
If he hadn’t had succeeded in getting rid of the Crow, we 
wouldn’t need this program. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would suggest, 
Mr. Minister, you might as well just let us govern. You blame 
everything on us anyway. We might as well just do it — maybe 
we could get it right. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Minister, you say, you say you have 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, if 
the Minister of Agriculture and the Premier had have gone to 
the table with some money from the province of Saskatchewan, 
they might have let you have some input. Naturally they 
weren’t going to when you wouldn’t go with nothing to offer. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to give you a few examples of how 
ill-designed your program is. You and the federal government 
have determined that: number one, interest is not an expense; 
number two, farm rent is not an expense; three, property taxes 
are not an expense — and the list goes on and on. 
 
Mr. Minister, who comes up with this? Mr. Minister, do you 
agree with these rules? Do you agree that interest, rent, taxes, 
and others are not legitimate farm expenses? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Again, Mr. Speaker, he should be asking 
that question or maybe he should get his federal MPs (Member 
of Parliament) to ask the question in Ottawa. Get some of your 
federal — oh, I forgot. You don’t have any. You don’t have 
any. Well, that’s tough. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just listen to what the member said. He said, you 
just should’ve went down there and put your money on the table 
and you would’ve got a better deal. Well he says he’s a farmer. 
How many farmers go into the dealer and say, I’ve got 80 to 
$100,000; what’ll that buy me for a tractor? Does that make any 
sense? Does that make any sense? 
 
It doesn’t make any sense. And I’ll say one more thing. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Now I’ll ask all hon. members 
to allow the Minister of Agriculture to conclude his response. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, you don’t go into the 
dealer and say, here’s 100,000, give me the best you got. You 
know what you’ll get. I want to say one more thing. 
 
This program, Mr. Speaker, this program, Mr. Speaker, has 
many flaws, and I’ve said that hundreds and hundreds of times. 
 
But the member said one thing when he began: he said, just 
give us a try, maybe we can get it right. Well I’ll tell you, the 

policies that they have promoted and succeeded to implement 
. . . to help implement have cost this province on an annual 
basis $635 million. I’m not going to give you a chance to get 
anything right because I know your policies have taken money 
out of farmers’ pockets. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Use of Government Executive Jet 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as sure as 
you can tell the signs of spring, you can also tell a government 
that’s on its last legs. You can tell because of the abuse of 
power and their abuse of government perks at taxpayers’ 
expense. Through a freedom of information request the Liberal 
caucus has learned that the Deputy Premier used, probably 
abused, the executive government jet. On June 27, the flight 
logs for the executive jet report that the minister, his wife, and 
two sons travelled on the executive aircraft from Regina to Fort 
Nelson to Anchorage to Whitehorse and then back to Regina. 
 
Can the minister explain to the House what government 
business he was on and why his family needed to travel with 
him? And does he think this is a good use of taxpayers’ funds 
when everybody else is asked to tighten their belts? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t have all the 
information with me, but I understand that the dates that you 
refer to I was on government business to the western governors’ 
conference, which I attended last year and I think three of the 
four past years. And I might add the member who represents the 
town of Shaunavon, Wood River, has attended that conference 
in the United States in the past at government expense. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, perhaps the minister missed the 
text of my question — the explaining to the House the reason 
for his family and the cost to the taxpayers as a result of that. 
And if there are some remunerations that had been made would 
the minister table them in the House here today. It’s all a matter 
of priorities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Minister, we found this through a freedom of information, 
and I’m sure perhaps that if we look through more pages we 
may find more abuse. Mr. Minister how can the people expect 
your government to get its priorities straight when you can’t 
even get yours straight. People languish on waiting lists. Can 
you answer that please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
member opposite that if he’s got a problem with the 
government policy, that’s one issue. But I want to say to you 
very clearly that when government ministers travel on 
government business the policy is, has been, was under the 
previous administration — I think is in Ottawa — that if the 
plane is travelling and there’s no expense to the taxpayers that 
ministers are allowed to take their family, their children along. 
And on occasion — on occasion — I have taken my family 
with me at no expense to the taxpayers. 
 
Now if you have problem with that policy, if you have a 
problem with that policy, then that’s an issue. But that’s the 
policy that I follow. Other members in this Assembly know that 
that’s the policy. And if you want to play politics with issues of 



March 23, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 187 

substance, I don’t mind that. 
 
But I would really urge you not to include my family, who are 
following government policy. The work I was doing at the 
governors’ conference in Anchorage, Alaska was at government 
expense for myself and not a penny was used for my family. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Management/Union Ratios in Crown Corporations 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
according to the government’s latest figures there are 
approximately 2,300 employees at SaskPower, of which 504 are 
in management. How does the minister justify that there is one 
manager for every four employees at SaskPower? And how 
does the minister justify SaskTel’s 5:1 ratio. Doesn’t he feel 
that this is a bit excessive even for the NDP government. 
 
My question is to the Deputy Premier. When you don’t have 
money for the people’s priorities — health care and highways 
— how can you justify having so many hacks and flacks 
appointed to management in the Crown corporations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I say to the member opposite that 
when it comes to the payment of managers in our Crown 
corporations and the value that we get for money in our 
Crowns, if you look at the cost of services in the province of 
Saskatchewan, I can tell you very clearly that our managers as 
well as our employees are second to none anywhere in Canada. 
 
I have here a graph that I’m going to table as to the . . . relates 
to what that member and others talked about the high 
compensation for our employees and our managers. In 1982 
when we left office and the Conservatives took over, the 
difference between the medium, or average, salary of union 
people and managers or the CEO (chief executive officer) was 
four times. The difference was 26,000 for employees; 100,000 
for the CEO. 
 
By 1991 that had changed to 33,000 for the average employee 
to 428,000 for the CEO or 16 times — 16 times. That has now 
been reduced back to four times. I’m going to table that. 
 
And I say to the member opposite that he should know, he 
should know this and he should apologize to the managers and 
families who he slanders in this House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Obviously, 
obviously the minister in charge of the Crowns is trying to . . . 
to think we’re talking about the wages not the hundred and 
hundreds of managers who are your political friends and 
insiders. 
 
Mr. Minister, your government has no money for health care, 
no money for highways, but when it comes to rewarding NDP 
friends and insiders that sky is the limit for you guys. Admit it. 
If you had your way you would sooner fill the ranks, the Crown 
corporations, with your NDP friends and insiders. You would 
rather fill them with your buddies than spend one penny on 
reducing waiting lists or putting it towards these ridiculous 

highways in Saskatchewan. Admit that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I say to the member opposite that 
when it comes to the management teams that we have in our 
Crown Corporations, the evaluations that have been done 
recently is that our Crowns run hugely efficiently as compared 
to any other utilities in Canada. 
 
I say to the member opposite that if he knew what he was 
talking about, which obviously he doesn’t, he would know that 
we have the lowest long-distance rates anywhere in Canada — 
the responsibility of our workers and managers. We have the 
second lowest natural gas rates and the lowest automobile 
insurance rates. 
 
I say to that member, I say to that member, if you want to talk 
about people’s ability to manage, you might just check at home 
and your ability . . . who started out with a party as official 
opposition, with what I think is a credible leader, you’re now 
down to a rump of a party, largely the responsibility personally 
of you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Application Form for Farm Aid Program 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have another question for the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
More confusion, Mr. Minister. This morning I’m getting calls 
from farmers that are saying they’ve been to rural service 
centres in the last day or two and rural service centres are 
recommending, do not fill out the application; changes are 
coming to that application. 
 
So I called Ottawa, I called the AIDA (Agriculture Insurance 
Disaster Assistance) office and they said, no such changes are 
coming; we don’t know what they’re talking about. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you settle this once and for all so farmers 
know. Can they fill out the application and apply or should they 
wait? Is there changes coming? Is there not? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, I, like the member 
opposite, am not aware, or the other people are not aware. I’ll 
give you my word that I will check into this, if you want to tell 
me what rural service centre it came from. I don’t like having 
farmers confused. If there is confusion I certainly want to get to 
the nub of it quickly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 
Cost of Ambulance Services 

 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
the for the Minister of Health. Madam Minister, since you seem 
to have been caught off guard with the fact that Saskatchewan 
was in the midst of a serious shortage of nurses, it may also 
come as a surprise that NDP Saskatchewan is also suffering 
from a lack of hospital beds. 
 



188 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 1999 

Well, Madam Minister, the bed shortage is causing another 
problem. When rural patients are discharged early from city 
hospitals to free up a bed, it’s the patient who pays for the 
ambulance ride back to the district hospital. But for patients 
who live in the city, ambulance transfers between hospitals are 
performed at no extra cost to the patient. It’s another example of 
the two-tiered health care system. Rural patients pay for return 
ambulance services; city patients do not. 
 
Madam Minister, would you confirm the government has this 
two-tiered ambulance policy in place — rural patients pay; city 
patients don’t. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, what the 
member may not know is that ambulance service has never 
been an insured service under medicare. What I can inform the 
member is that the province of Saskatchewan pays 
approximately $13 million each year to health districts across 
the province to assist them in providing some subsidy to 
ambulance operators in this province. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, we do have a subsidy available for 
senior citizens. The subsidy means that a senior won’t pay more 
than $250 a trip. In addition, Mr. Speaker, we also have air 
ambulance available to the province’s citizens, and they too, 
who take an air ambulance trip, I believe they don’t pay more 
than $300 per trip. 
 
So I guess for the edification of the member, ambulance 
services have never been part of an insured service in the 
province of Saskatchewan, but we have significantly increased 
the amount of money going to district boards for emergency 
services. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 15  The University of Regina 
Amendment Act, 1999 

 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 15, 
The University of Regina Amendment Act, 1999 be now 
introduced and read a first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 16 — The Mineral Taxation 
Amendment Act, 1999 

 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
16, The Mineral Taxation Amendment Act, 1999 be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 17 — The Local Government Election Act, 1999 
 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I move that Bill No. 17, The Local Government 
Election Act, 1999 be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 18 — The Constitutional Questions 
Amendment Act, 1999 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 18, The 
Constitutional Questions Amendment Act, 1999 be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 19 — The Superannuation (Supplementary 
Provisions) Amendment Act, 1999 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 19, The 
Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 
1999 be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
Bill No. 215 — The Health Districts Amendment Act, 1999 

(Fully Elected Health Boards) 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I move first 
reading of Bill 215, The Health Districts Amendment Act, 1999 
(Fully Elected Health Boards). 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 20 — The Business Corporations 
Amendment Act, 1999 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 20, The 
Business Corporations Amendment Act, 1999, be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
Ms. Draude: — With leave to introduce a guest, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in your 
gallery is a friend of mine, Audrey Miller from Lake Alma. She 
worked with the Department of SERM (Saskatchewan 
Environment and Resource Management) for a while and now 
has been visiting our office frequently to talk about her 
concerns. And I ask my colleagues in the House to join with me 
to welcome her to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1430) 



March 23, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 189 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the 
day, by leave of the Assembly, to move several routine motions 
pertaining to the membership of committees and a motion in 
regards to the absence of a member. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Substitution of Members on Committees 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 
the member from Prince Albert Carlton: 
 

That the name of Mr. Buckley Belanger be substituted for 
that of Mr. Harry Van Mulligen on a list of members 
composing the Standing Committee on Estimates. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, 
seconded by the member from Prince Albert Carlton: 
 

That the name of Mr. Buckley Belanger be substituted for 
that of Mr. Grant Whitmore on a list of members 
composing the Special Committee on Regulations. 
 

The Speaker: — The motion is not in order. I don’t see the 
seconder of the motion present in the House. If I can pause just 
for a moment. 
 
The Chair erred in the proceeding by accepting the motion we 
just passed and I’m going to ask the House to reconsider that 
motion and ask that it be moved and seconded by members both 
of whom are in the House. And do we have leave of the House 
to return to the first motion, if we may. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — I move that we amend that motion 
to be seconded . . . moved by me, seconded by the member 
from Regina Elphinstone. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved with leave by the 
Government House leader, seconded by the Deputy Premier: 
 

That the name of Mr. Buckley Belanger be substituted for 
that of Mr. Harry Van Mulligen on the list of members 
composing the Standing Committee on Estimates. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 
the member from Regina Elphinstone: 
 

That the name of Mr. Buckley Belanger be substituted for 
that of Mr. Grant Whitmore on a list of members 
composing the Special Committee on Regulations. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 
the member for Regina Elphinstone: 

That the name of Mr. Buckley Belanger be substituted for 
that of Mr. Grant Whitmore on a list of members 
composing the Standing Committee on Environment. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, 
seconded by the member from Regina Elphinstone: 
 

That the name of Mr. Buckley Belanger be substituted for 
that of Mr. Grant Whitmore on a list of members 
composing the Standing Committee on Education. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, 
seconded by the member from Regina Elphinstone: 
 

That the name of Mr. Ned Shillington be substituted for 
that of Mr. Ed Tchorzewski on a list of members 
composing the Standing Committee on Privileges and 
Elections. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, 
seconded by the member from Regina Elphinstone: 
 

That the name of Mr. Myron Kowalsky be substituted for 
that of Mr. Ed Tchorzewski on a list of members 
composing the Standing Committee on Constitutional 
Affairs. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Leave of Absence for Member to attend 
25th Anniversary Celebration 

 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I move, seconded by the member from Regina 
Elphinstone: 
 

That leave of absence be granted to the member for 
Saskatoon Meewasin from March 24 to March 26, 1999, to 
attend and be honoured along with other former Chairs at a 
celebration of the 25th anniversary of the Canadian Turkey 
Marketing Agency. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Jess, seconded by Ms. Murrell, 
and the proposed amendment thereto moved by Mr. Krawetz. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Under the 



190 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 1999 

relatively wide-ranging debate allowed under the Throne 
Speech I’d like to speak briefly about my wonderful 
constituency of Meadow Lake and how one man made my 
constituency an even better place in which to live. 
 
Senator Fred Martell was born in Meadow Lake, Saskatchewan 
on December 10, 1924 to his parents Bruno and Judille Martell. 
Throughout his life his parents served as strong role models to 
him, and their community leadership focus created the desire 
within Fred to serve his people in a leadership position. 
 
He was first elected as chief of the Waterhen First Nation in 
1958 and served a number of terms totalling 26 years. In two 
elections Fred went unchallenged and was acclaimed for 
another term by his band members. 
 
Senator Martell was active in politics at the band, tribal council, 
and provincial level. Early in his years as chief he attended a 
meeting in Fort Qu’Appelle where Premier Tommy Douglas 
addressed the chiefs. Fred spoke often of how he was moved by 
this speech and encouraged his leadership by this charismatic 
leader. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, every person that knew Fred has an 
interesting and humorous story to tell, and I too have one and I 
related this yesterday at the gathering that took place in Fred’s 
memory. 
 
When I first met Fred some 15 years ago in the credit union 
system when I was working there, we got talking about our own 
private lives. And one of the things that he was particularly 
interested in was meeting my father who had known a number 
of his friends as well. Well the meeting took place, Mr. 
Speaker, on election day in 1991. For those of us who were 
elected in 1991 you will remember it was a snowy and 
miserable day. 
 
Fred volunteered . . . he contacted me and volunteered that he 
would haul voters to the polls for me because many of the 
people on reserves didn’t have vehicles. I graciously of course 
agreed. Anyway Fred was out hauling voters to the polls with 
his van and every day . . . or every 15, 20 minutes he saw this 
other van coming down the road. 
 
And on the reserve the roads are fairly narrow, and that day 
with a lot of snow they were quite slippery. Fred, believing that 
the other van was hauling for opposition members, slowly crept 
his vehicle into the middle of the road in an effort to carefully 
edge the vehicle off the road. 
 
Well it was at the end of the day when he stopped this vehicle 
and confronted the driver who had been driving this van, and lo 
and behold he discovered that the driver of the vehicle was none 
other than my father hauling voters for me. 
 
So from that day on they loved to relate that story back and 
forth and it’s been told often — the day that Fred tried to run 
my father off the road. 
 
Anyway, he was instrumental in the formation of the Meadow 
Lake Tribal Council and served 12 years as their chief. His 
leadership carried over to the Federation of Saskatchewan 
Indian Nations, where he always took an active role in all 

developments. In 1992, Fred was appointed as senator to the 
FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations) and 
subsequently selected as president in 1996. That is president of 
the senators. 
 
He regularly attended a number of meetings and went wherever 
he was called. He was known for his humility and 
encouragement in all matters discussed at the FSIN level. 
Oftentimes he resolved issues by encouraging people to always 
work together and that this unity would bring success. 
 
In 1996, as president of the senate, he witnessed the signing of 
the agreements to establish the FSIN treaty implementation 
process. This, for him, marked a fulfilment of a lifetime of 
commitment to the treaties. 
 
Throughout his life, Mr. Speaker, Fred was strongly committed 
to developing education initiatives for First Nations people. His 
support for Indian control of Indian education was unwavering 
and he led in the development of many of the education 
institutions that are now renowned throughout Canada. He 
served as chairman of the FSIN Indian Education Commission 
and the Saskatchewan Indian Community College, now known 
as SIIT (Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies). 
 
In 1992 he was awarded FSIN’s citizen of the year. He received 
numerous other honours and awards for his service to First 
Nations people. He worked his whole life, believe it or not, with 
only a grade 3 education, yet inspired by many of his family 
members to pursue their . . . yet, I should say, he inspired many 
of his family members to pursue their education. Today much 
of his extended family are leaders in the field and hold graduate 
and post-graduate degrees. 
 
In his remarks to the people of Waterhen yesterday, Chief Perry 
Bellegarde said that Senator Martell was a role model for Indian 
people. I’d like to correct Chief Bellegarde only slightly and say 
that Fred was a role model not only for Indian people but for all 
who knew him. You only had to meet Fred once to appreciate 
his gentle sense of humour but at the same time he was quiet 
and powerful in his leadership abilities. His arguments on any 
issue were always reasoned and very persuasive. The last time I 
visited with Fred was at his home in Waterhen. We had a 
wonderful visit and I regretted having to leave. 
 
Yesterday, Mr. Speaker, we buried Fred’s body but I assure you 
we did not bury his soul. There will forever be memories of 
Fred and what he has done to advance not only the causes of 
Indian people, but to promote harmony between all cultures in 
this wonderful province. 
 
Fred will be sadly missed by wife Cecile, and their 16 children; 
his brothers Pete, Marcel, Arthur, and sister, Juliet. 
 
He has many grandchildren, great grandchildren, nieces and 
nephews. To all of them he was Uncle Fred, the head of a very 
large and prominent extended family. Outside the family, many, 
many people in all walks of life who knew him and his presence 
will miss him throughout our province. Thank you very much, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Flavel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
honoured to be able to stand in my place in this Assembly today 



March 23, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 191 

and enter this debate on the Speech from the Throne of the 
Fourth session of the 23rd legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say how honoured I am to be able to 
serve the greatest people, in my opinion, in Saskatchewan and 
that is the voters of Last Mountain-Touchwood, and it is on 
their behalf that I reply to this Throne Speech. 
 
As the Throne Speech says, with spring in the air and a new 
century dawning, it is a good time to reflect on the basic values 
that has built our province — those being the values of balance, 
common sense, and of hope. The men and women of 
Saskatchewan use these values to build our province and they 
did it the Saskatchewan way. We can be very proud of how far 
we have come in such a short time, but, Mr. Speaker, there is 
much left to do. 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to start today by talking about one of our 
most prized gifts in Saskatchewan, that being our health care 
system. Mr. Speaker, as I talked the other day to one of the 
board members of one of my health districts, we were talking 
about what health care is and how far the direction of health 
care has gone, and he informed that even himself when he was 
first appointed to this board had to correct his thinking in the 
meaning of what health care actually is. 
 
He said that when someone mentioned health care to him years 
ago, the only thing he thought of was a doctor and a hospital. 
And I believe that there’s lots of us that way. Health care means 
a doctor or a nurse and a hospital. Well that’s no longer the 
case. Health care now means a doctor, a hospital, home care, 
chiropractor, dentist, physiotherapists, and on and on. 
 
He told me that in their health district they thought they would 
try a chiropractor and to see if there was a real need for it. 
People started going to him instead of the doctor, found that 
they could get treated there a little cheaper and better than the 
doctor. In fact people started going to him so much that this 
chiropractor, in a short time, actually got burnt-out with 
overwork in that health district. 
 
Now they’re trying to hire two chiropractors for that same 
health district because they realized and the people realized that 
a visit to the chiropractor every once in a while, if needed, gives 
people a better quality of life and actually saves the health 
system dollars. 
 
The other person they thought they would try to bring in there 
was someone that works on the care and the treatment of 
people’s feet — and I won’t try to say the name. But anyway it 
took a long time actually to get, he said, to get some of the 
elderly people to go to this person because, as you know, some 
seniors are very set in their ways and they’re not going to have 
someone messing with their feet and so forth. 
 
But finally, after they got some going to it and they realized that 
after they were treated and they found that they could walk 
better and they had less pain and therefore could look after 
themselves a little easier and a little less home care needed, they 
started to tell their friends about it. And the friends started to go 
to this person and found out that yes, there is more to health 

care than just a doctor, and there’s more to health care and good 
care than a doctor, and therefore their quality of life improved 
because of it. 
 
Have we made mistakes in reforming health care? Certainly, we 
have. We have some waiting list problems and we have some 
ambulance shortfalls in rural Saskatchewan. We have some 
problems getting doctors into rural Saskatchewan and keeping 
them there. But all of these I’m glad to say are being addressed. 
 
You know in Strasbourg they never had a hospital. I was born 
in the town of Strasbourg, and you might say that was quite a 
few years ago, and at that time, there was not a hospital neither. 
It was simply a house that was remodelled to serve as a hospital 
and that served the time. 
 
But now they have one of the best health care centres in 
Saskatchewan. In fact one of the former ministers of Health, the 
hon. member for Moose Jaw Wakamow, visited that facility 
years ago and said at that time that it was even ahead of its time. 
And I’ll tell you it just keeps getting better. 
 
They now have, of course, a doctor, but also they have an 
emergency room with all the up-to-date equipment to repair and 
to stabilize a patient to make them ready for transportation to a 
major facility. Why would they just have that? Because, Mr. 
Speaker, the people know that you can’t afford a major facility 
in Strasbourg and in Raymore, in Southey and in Earl Grey and 
every other small town. That would not make sense so they 
have built accordingly. 
 
But they also have a dentist, an optometrist, chiropractor, and 
others coming in on a regular basis and more services for the 
people of Strasbourg and the district. 
 
Is our health care system perfect? Course not. But it is better 
than any other in the world. 
 
And that is why I support the Minister of Health and the 
Associate Minister of Health in their initiatives to make the 
system even better. And that’s why I support this government’s 
direction in health care. Because I believe that health care is 
whatever it takes, both mentally and physically, to make one’s 
quality of life the best that we can make it. 
 
And that is also why I believe that now is not the time to 
abandon the principles of our health care system nor to freeze 
our investment in our people’s health and quality of life. 
 
Next subject, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk on a little is education. 
As the Throne Speech said, today one-fifth of the population of 
Saskatchewan is in school. We all know that the key to 
maintaining a strong economy and our lifestyle is the best 
education in the world. 
 
The greatest worry for me is that the times are changing faster 
in some ways than our schools can. In fact, in some cases we 
seem to be more concerned with modern technology that we 
forget that first a student must first learn the basics of 
arithmetic, reading, writing, and general science. 
 
When I hear of a math teacher telling a student that to learn the 
multiplication table is not important — that your calculator will 



192 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 1999 

take care of it — I become alarmed. 
 
Also, when it is no longer important that a science student 
needs to know that an acid and a base neutralize each other, I 
become alarmed. 
 
I may be old-fashioned but I still believe that first you learn the 
basics well and the rest follows easier and is learned much 
faster. 
 
Do we have some problems in the education field? You bet. I 
still think that we have to have our schools in this province 
teaching the same thing at basically the same time, and I’ll tell 
you why. 
 
Statistics say that a person will no longer or not likely start a job 
and keep that job until he or she retires. In fact, they may 
change occupations four, five, and even up to six times. And in 
some cases that change of job may also mean a change of 
location. 
 
So it’s not fair for a student to go from Hudson Bay, 
Saskatchewan to Consul, Saskatchewan and to the points which 
two schools are in the curriculum are so far apart that the 
student may not be able to fit in before the year end. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that Hudson Bay or Preeceville should 
be within a few days of where Consul are in the same grade at 
the same time of the year. And as I understand it now this is not 
happening. And I believe that it is wrong — that this is a wrong 
that has to be corrected. 
 
Also when I hear people tell me that a university class taken in 
the Regina campus is not transferable to the Saskatoon campus 
or vice versa in our own province, one has to wonder if the 
different campuses are more interested in turf protection than 
helping a person better their education. 
 
These are some problems that I’m sure will be rectified. 
 
As we prepare our classrooms and students for the next century, 
I wonder what direction we’ll have to take in our schools. Will 
we bring a kindergarten student into the school, plunk them in 
front of a computer, and think that this is our main learning tool 
all the way through to college and maybe into college? Or will 
we have a return to the basics for the first part of their schooling 
and then bring them into the technological part? Or is there 
some mixture of the two — a balance that may be struck? 
 
I strongly believe that the children of Saskatchewan and Canada 
are the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I send graduation cards out to the students in 
my constituency, there are a few quotations that I write in them. 
I will either put in them, The future belong to you. Best Wishes. 
Or, Follow your dreams for they are the hopes of the future. 
 
I write these because I firmly believe in both of them. Our 
education system allows anyone to build whatever future they 
want. The future belongs to them. Maybe I should add, but you 
have to work for it. But I think that they know you receive what 
you work for. And to follow your dreams because quite often 
your dreams are your true, true hopes for the future. Our 

educational system allows young people to set the direction of 
their own future and to build on their real hopes. 
 
Do I support the Minister of Education and the Minister of 
Post-Secondary Education in their initiative to make our 
education system even better? You bet I do. And I support the 
Premier when he says, as we approach the 21st century, now is 
not the time to freeze investment in our schools and our 
children’s education, because education is the future. 
 
What about the job markets in Saskatchewan. Let me say a few 
words on that, though I should say more. But due to the 
shortness of time I’ll keep my remarks short on it. It was what I 
thought to be an enormous target when we set out earlier on and 
projected 30,000 jobs by the end of the century. Well I was 
wrong. We did it and I’m sure we’ll do more. 
 
Sometimes it is a slow process but most of the time jobs created 
are not short-term jobs. They are in fact long-term, full-time 
jobs that are the result of hard work and well thought out policy. 
Policy that makes value added in rural Saskatchewan come to 
the forefront. A policy that lets our young people stay at home 
with high skilled, high paying jobs, where they have the inside 
track on the expanding growth in our economy in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Let me give you an example of what I mean. Our Minister of 
Agriculture has worked long and hard to have the poultry quota 
for Saskatchewan producers increased. And I thank him for 
that. Sunnyland Poultry in Wynyard employs well over 400 
people, and they have just been sold to Lilydale, a group of 
producers from Alberta. 
 
Because of the expansion of the quota in our province, that 
plant will quite likely double its slaughter capacity, thus 
increasing the number of employees. And these are not 
minimum wage jobs, Mr. Speaker. These are well paid jobs 
with good benefits, and all because we had, and our Minister of 
Agriculture had, a futuristic policy. 
 
The other day I was in the credit union at Raymore and I took a 
look at the bulletin board there, and you know what I saw? Help 
wanted for work in Raymore. Help wanted for a small lawn 
ornament maker in Southey, Scott’s Concrete Lawn Ornaments 
& Greenhouse. They’re hiring two positions — two full-time 
positions in a little lawn ornament manufacturing just north of 
Southey. 
 
What I’m seeing more and more in my constituency are positive 
signs. Not the “Closing Out,” out of sale signs, or “Going Out 
of Business,” “Closed” — those were the signs of the late `80s. 
But I’m seeing the “Grand Opening” signs, “Expanding Our 
Business,” “New Ownership,” “Help Wanted” signs — and the 
list goes on. 
 
We are on the right track, but we must not act recklessly. We 
have learned through bitter experience that we cannot afford to 
buy our future with borrowed money. Because if you do you 
end up with a $15 billion debt that we came out of the 1980s 
with, and it’s still costing us some few million . . . $2 billion . . . 
or $2 million per day in interest payments. 
 
Because of our policies on jobs and economic growth, our 



March 23, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 193 

population is steadily growing. Between 1992 and 1997, 
Saskatchewan led the nation in economic growth, and is still 
growing today. We are paying down the debt — that $15-billion 
debt I talked of earlier. We are paying it down, and we’re 
paying it continually. Because of the paydown on our debt, and 
that coupled with the expansion of our economy, the debt has 
gone from 70 per cent of the gross domestic product to 40 per 
cent of the gross domestic product — nearly half. Quite an 
achievement, Mr. Speaker, in just eight years. 
 
More people are working in our province today than ever 
before. Unemployment is at a 16-year low, and on top of that, 
an Alberta study ranked Saskatchewan number one in youth 
employment three years running. More jobs, more full-time 
jobs, and more youth working. That along with some $7 billion 
in new investment in 1998 tells me that industry, 
manufacturing, and young entrepreneurs see Saskatchewan as 
the best place to invest and to start up. And that tells me that our 
policies in economic development are working. 
 
I want to touch a little on safer communities. Mr. Speaker, as 
you know, the small town of Lestock is in my constituency. The 
town has had some severe problems with crime — and not 
always local people, neither. This is people that are coming 
through and coming in from outside of the community. The 
people of Lestock do their best to protect themselves. But one 
must remember that a large majority of the town’s residents are 
senior citizens, and their ability to protect their property is 
limited. 
 
However, when these offenders — in most cases they are young 
offenders — commit the crimes and destroy property, they are 
quite often caught by the police and taken to court. And that in 
my opinion is where the breakdown takes place. They’re back 
on the streets within hours and in some cases thumbing their 
noses at the police and the citizens because they know that they 
will not be reprimanded for their actions. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, the police continue to do their job, and 
let me say that I think they do their job above and beyond. 
 
But if they’re prevented from removing these people from the 
community, and the people know that, what happens? 
 
Well you hear of cases in Lestock where grandmothers are 
sleeping with loaded guns by their beds, and in my opinion, that 
is the recipe for disaster. And let me make it very clear here and 
now that young offenders in the Lestock area are not of one 
ethnic background. They are of all kinds. Some live outside of 
the town, some inside. 
 
But what do we do to stop all of this? Well as the former deputy 
minister of Justice said at a public meeting in Lestock, 
sometimes you have to remove some of the offenders form the 
area. I have to agree wholeheartedly with him. There may be a 
group, but in most cases, it’s two or three that are leading, and 
leading the rest into the life of crime. 
 
I guess you could say if you don’t want the entire box of 
oranges to spoil, you take out the rotten ones. Well same thing 
as here. But our justice system has to start realizing this and 
acting on that theory, or I’m afraid we will have people picking 
up and taking the justice into their own hands — vigilante 

justice. And, Mr. Speaker, I don’t want that and I don’t think 
anyone else does. 
 
But let me tell you in some parts of my constituency, that has 
been talked about and it’s been talked about a lot in the coffee 
shop. And we have to do what we can to prevent that from 
happening. And our government is doing many things to turn 
this around. 
 
First we have to find the root of the problem, and in many cases 
I believe that the root of the problem is that our family structure 
— as most of the problems I see in society today — is that our 
family structure is breaking down. And we have to give people 
some sense of direction. 
 
(1500) 
 
Many people in that area are on welfare, live without work, and 
live in poverty. Alcoholism in some cases is a major problem. 
The children go hungry, which is leading them into crime. They 
go to school hungry and because of that cannot concentrate or 
learn, and end up without an education, leaving crime as their 
only escape. Violence within the family leads to no direction for 
the youngsters, and therefore making it easy for the criminal 
element to entice him or her. 
 
Are we doing anything? You bet we are. Our Minister of Justice 
has set up the Saskatchewan serious crime task force to target 
organized criminals and gangs. And the serious and habitual 
youth offenders comprehensive action plan is targeting violent 
and repeat young offenders. 
 
He has also lobbied the federal Justice department for positive 
changes to the Young Offenders Act, and got some of them, but 
there is still more room for more improvements. 
 
But the most important is that we have to work to replace that 
feeling of hopelessness and failure with one of hope and give 
them the chance and independence. And our government has 
made a groundbreaking move in reforming the welfare system 
to give people this sense of hope and independence. Building 
independence and the government’s award-winning child action 
plan are restoring hope to vulnerable families and giving hope 
to the young people. This is a slow procedure but it is making 
safer communities from the ground up. 
 
I want to take a moment to give credit to two people who were 
in the lead on the child action plan, not only in our province but 
nation-wide. One of, of course, is the Premier of our province; 
and the other is, I’m proud to say, now my seat mate and the 
former minister of Social Services, the hon. member from 
Moose Jaw Wakamow. Once people start growing 
independence in society, they become productive citizens and 
the communities become safer because of it. And it will work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, now let me turn to a subject that is dear to me — 
agriculture — because I am a farmer and have been for many 
years. I have made my living on the farm for some 29 years. 
I’ve been through the good and the bad — quite often more bad 
than good — but we’ve managed to stay on the farm. Is there a 
farm crisis? Make no doubt about it. I believe that there’s a 
crisis and in fact the crisis that we are now in, in some ways is 
far larger than the crisis of 1980s. 



194 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 1999 

If people go around and ask their lending institutions as I have, 
if there’s a problem, they will likely tell them that what . . . that 
they do not have any more people in arrears this year than they 
have had in past years. But it seems to me that there’s two 
reasons for this. Firstly, because the banks have abandoned 
rural Saskatchewan. They don’t have any outstanding loans 
because they don’t loan any money to farmers. Secondly, 
because I believe that most of the debt that has been owed by 
farmers in most cases could possibly be held by the companies 
that supply the inputs for these farmers — the grain companies, 
the fertilizer companies, spray companies, and along with the 
many of small businesses in our town. 
 
But this crisis did not just start with our low commodity prices 
that we had in the past few years. It certainly . . . it enhanced it. 
It started back when, I think even before this, but one of the 
major things was when the federal government took away the 
Crow benefit. Remember? They said it was good for our . . . it 
was taken away for our own good. And we could do . . . we’d 
be better off without it. Well, guess what? The short fall in farm 
income is awfully close to what we lost in the Crow benefit. 
 
I want to ask what will happen to the Saskatchewan farmers. 
Well I’ll tell you what I think will happen to the farmers of 
Saskatchewan. They will survive. Because I believe that we 
have the most ingenious and most productive farmers in the 
world. And may I live long enough to see the end to the 
mentality that we have to supply cheap food to the people of 
North America. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, people will not go and buy their kids a 
hundred dollar pair of skates. They have to have the $300 pair 
of skates. They have to have the best. 
 
People will protest strongly if the price of the local bread goes 
up by 5 cents or beef rises in the supermarket, the price of beef. 
But in the same breath they could not refuse to buy that new 
vehicle because, you know what, it only went up a thousand 
dollars this year. 
 
I don’t think any producers or any people buying groceries out 
there, if someone said we put 15 cents on a loaf of bread and it 
was guaranteed, guaranteed to get to the farmer, not be lost in 
the shuffle somewhere, that anybody would complain on it. But 
that guarantee has never been made. It’s been said but it never 
gets down to the farmer. But I don’t think the people that I talk 
to in Regina, Saskatoon, or any of the towns would argue with 
paying if they knew it was going to get back to the farmer. 
 
But the attitude that our farmers can continue to produce 
cheaper and cheaper has got to end. We always make laws to 
protect our workers. We don’t allow jobs to be bid out to the 
lowest bidder. We try to prevent that race to the bottom with 
minimum wage laws and unions and so forth. And I believe it’s 
time that the feds put an income security package together and 
implored to stop the race to the bottom of our prized industry, 
agriculture. If we don’t, it will end up with the large companies 
like ConAgra, Cargill, and others owing our land and we 
becoming simply tenants of that land. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, our forefathers left that system to come 
here to a new life. And 100 short years later we are on our way 
back to that same system and I think that’s a shame. 

I want to take this opportunity to thank the ministers of our 
government that were involved for the great work they did in 
securing the organic plant that is to be built just outside of 
Regina. I think in many cases this is the salvation of some of 
our farmers. You get out from the large underfoot of the 
fertilizers and spray companies and to be paid and rewarded for 
it. Certainly it’s not for everyone, but it is in line with our 
commitment to the value added right here at home. 
 
Mr. Speaker, agriculture will continue because the farmers of 
Saskatchewan have the ability to maintain themselves as long as 
we can turn that around and get away from this race to the 
bottom where who’s going to do it the cheapest — and that’s 
where we are now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just wanted to end up — or Mr. Deputy Speaker 
— talking a little bit on The Respect for Constituents Act that 
was mentioned in the Throne Speech. Mr. Speaker, I believe 
there’d be just cause for any person in this Chamber. And when 
I did it myself — ran for election — you go out with a platform, 
and quite often a party platform, and you go to ask the people 
for your support on those policies. Very few people go around 
and ask: elect me as a person. They go around with a list of . . . 
of a policy platform, and that’s what the people are elected on. 
 
So I don’t think it’s right for a person — once the people have 
elected you on one platform — to be able to say, thank you very 
much, you’ve put me in the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan and now I’m going to change my stripes. Now 
I’m going to change my banner. All of a sudden, once I’ve got 
here, I’ve changed what I stand for, and I’ve changed what we 
would do if we did form government. 
 
But if these people all of a sudden change their beliefs and 
change their stripes, then I fully believe that they owe it to their 
constituents to put themselves before them under an election, 
under the new banner, and let the people choose. And if the 
people of those constituencies wish him or her to continue as 
their representative under this new banner, then I say, okay, no 
problem. Then, and only then, can they come back to this 
Chamber and honestly say that they represent their 
constituency. It is only fair to the voters of the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Speech from the Throne has a futuristic 
message and that is where we have to look — beyond the 
horizon. You don’t drive a car looking in the rear-view mirror, 
but you have to look back every once in a while or else you 
forget the failures of the past. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Speech from the Throne is futuristic; futuristic 
for our health care, futuristic for our education system, futuristic 
for our farmers, futuristic for young people, and futuristic for 
our seniors. And that is why I will not be supporting the 
amendment. Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the original 
motion and in support of this government. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Today I have 
two chances to get up and speak about the constituency not only 
of Kelvington-Wadena but also for the people of Carrot River 
Valley, who yesterday asked me to make sure I spoke for them 
when I got up today. 



March 23, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 195 

I have an opportunity to speak to the amendment, which I will 
be supporting wholeheartedly. I listened to the Throne Speech 
the other day and I couldn’t believe that this government had 
such a total lack of vision and a total lack of faith in the future. 
It was nothing more than the rhetoric we hear every day. It was 
not rooted in reality at all, but it came from an arrogant and 
very tired government who does not know what’s happening to 
the vast majority of people out in Saskatchewan. 
 
This Throne Speech is not linked to reality. Then again this 
government isn’t linked to reality. It doesn’t recognize that 
there’s a crisis in rural Saskatchewan. There’s a crisis for our 
farmers, and for our small business people, and retired people, 
and youth, and Aboriginal communities, and every family in 
this province. 
 
There was so little that this government could offer the citizens 
of this province that they were forced to provide a pathetic, 
self-serving piece of legislation called The Respect for 
Constituents Act. How ironic that this government proposes to 
legislate respect for constituents when they demonstrate 
absolutely none themselves. This piece of legislation has 
everything to do with politics and nothing to do with governing. 
 
We’d like to talk about free vote, we’d like to talk about recall, 
which people in my constituency know about very well. They 
also like the opportunity for me to actually vote the way they 
want me to vote because that is who elected me — them. 
 
I want to talk about respect for constituents that the people on 
the other side of the floor have when they didn’t tell the people 
that they were going to close 53 hospitals. They didn’t tell the 
people that they were going to let the roads go to complete 
ruins. They cut municipal government until there was nothing 
left to cut. And then we have . . . 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — Order. I wish to remind 
the hon. member for Kelvington-Wadena, remarks in the 
Speech to the Throne are to be addressed through the Chair as 
opposed to directly across. And being a veteran member, the 
member will know that. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Well, Mr. 
Deputy Chair, I should remind the government, or maybe 
through the Chair I’ll remind this government, that one of the 
contracts that they broke that many, many people in this 
province have not forgotten, is the GRIP (gross revenue 
insurance program) contract. 
 
The GRIP contract cost the farmers of this province millions of 
dollars. It not only was the dollars that this province decided to 
take and put into the General Revenue Fund to balance the 
books so they could say, hey look at me, I balanced the books. 
But they also sent $370 million back to Ottawa. Did Ottawa 
send at least a note saying thank you very much? At least if they 
did, nobody in my constituency got it. They would have 
preferred the cheque, but we didn't get it. 
 
I also want to ask, through the Chair, I’d ask the government 
that this is the same government that promised a fair and open 
investigation into Channel Lake. Now let’s see, Channel Lake. 
Wasn’t that the one that we spent about $77,000 on a lawyer 
for? We had meetings sitting in this legislature last spring for a 

couple of months. Everybody came in. There were witnesses 
lined up for ever and people had their daily little soap opera on 
our channel. And then at the end of it we had Mr. Topp write it 
for us. 
 
It would have saved a pile of money and a lot of time if you 
guys would have had enough respect for your constituents to 
say: doesn’t matter what you say, doesn’t matter what the facts 
are, I’ll tell you what you’re going to spout out. 
 
The people in my constituency say if there’s going to be respect 
for constituents, it had better be so that when we know what’s 
happening, what this government is doing with our dollars. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I also . . . before I go on to another portion 
I’d like to thank the Speaker. Because there’s one thing that is 
happening and since he became Speaker, coming out to the 
schools in our constituency and spending time with them and 
letting them know that they actually have an opportunity to 
become involved in politics, to understand the role of the 
Speaker and the legislature and to see that they actually are 
going to have a voice in the future is something that we can all 
be proud of. 
 
The Speaker spent a full day in my constituency at one school, 
and I think he told me that it was the only school he’d ever 
talked to every classroom in the school from kindergarten right 
up to grade 12. He did a great job. 
 
And at the end of it . . . I’m going to read this into Hansard 
because I’m hoping that maybe next . . . Well if he has the 
opportunity. But maybe at some time people will have . . . be 
able to tell the students in our schools that there is a power of 
one. 
 
(1515) 
 

Often you hear people say I’m only one. I don’t count for 
much. Well it’s simply not true. Sometimes just one vote 
has changed the course of history. 
 
For example, in 1645 one vote gave Oliver Cromwell the 
control of England. And just four years later the execution 
of Charles I took place because of one single vote. 
 
In the United States in 1776 one vote gave America 
English instead of German as their language. And later in 
1868, one vote saved Andrew Jackson from impeachment. 
 
But perhaps the most telling example was that in 1923 in 
Germany one vote made Adolf Hitler the leader of the Nazi 
Party. 

 
I’m only one and you’re only one but don’t ever let us 
imagine that we don’t count. Never underestimate the 
power of one vote. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that one of the big things that the 
government opposite has problem understanding — and maybe 
it’s because a lot of them don’t have direct input into it in their 
past lives — is the idea of job creation. I doubt there is very 
many of us were proud when we have numbers come forward a 
while ago that Saskatchewan was the only province to lose jobs 



196 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 1999 

in the last year. From 1997 to 1998 Saskatchewan lost 4,900 
jobs. Probably young people that actually saw a future for 
themselves in some place other than Saskatchewan, and I 
believe that’s really sad. 
 
As a business person I think there are some of the rules and 
regulations that have got to be changed if there’s going to 
actually be businesses prosper in this province. The 
government’s promise three years ago to look at the regulations 
and downsize them by 25 per cent over 10 years was a start, but 
I don’t know if they started counting at that time or if they 
started counting after they added all the regulations to deal with 
occupation and health and safety. That’s one issue that a 
number of the manufacturers in my area are very concerned 
about. 
 
I’ll give you an example of one of the rules that that is really 
quite silly. In a welding shop, where of course the whole air 
quality is a problem at all times, the government has decided we 
should have a smoking area for those who actually smoke 
cigarettes apart from the smoking shop. 
 
So it’s hard to tell which is the smokiest — the welding shop or 
the smoking area. It is absolutely a redundant, silly thing and 
it’s something that I think the business people are wondering 
about. 
 
The member opposite talked about minimum wage and I was 
interested to read an article that the chamber of commerce had 
written when they talked about the minimum wage actually 
being quite an advantage for the government because 44 cents 
out of every dollar of money went to the government. So there 
was some of that money that helped employees, but it also was 
a huge help for the government. 
 
Our Minister of Economic Development talked about job 
numbers last month when we had a loss. And what she told the 
people of this province is, if you take agriculture out, we 
actually gained jobs. Now let’s stop and think about this for a 
minute. We have agriculture as the backbone of this economy 
and the only thing we can say is that if we ignore the backbone 
of our economy, everything is fine. 
 
This is absolutely ridiculous and I think that the people out in 
this province are just shaking their heads saying, what are we 
doing? What is this government thinking about? We can just 
wipe agriculture off the map. 
 
This is also the same minister that talked about the PST 
(provincial sales tax) a while ago and said that if we actually 
reduce the PST, there might be some more spending and then 
our equalization payments will go down from Ottawa. 
 
We don’t want to . . . we don’t want to work. We keep our 
welfare mentality that we’ve always had in this province. I for 
one do not want Saskatchewan to be a have-not province, and I 
don’t want to be on welfare from Ottawa. I’m quite prepared to 
work, and work hard. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the issues that’s of great concern to 
the people of my constituency is the government’s commitment 
to roads — or their lack of commitment to roads in rural 
Saskatchewan. They’ve fallen approximately $70 million short 

on their commitment to spend $250 million a year on highways. 
We all know that every time we travel out to our constituencies. 
Yesterday the trip out to the area . . . the constituency of Carrot 
River Valley, we travelled over some roads that were 
considered quite treacherous. 
 
But I do have an article . . . a letter that I know the Minister of 
Highways received from one of my constituents, and I’m just 
going to briefly . . . He may even have been a gentleman that at 
one time was thinking that the government opposite was doing 
the right thing, but today he sent me a copy of this, saying: 
 

About a week ago I heard a rumour that highway (#38) 
between Chelan and Greenwater . . . was to be rebuilt . . . 
and preparations were already in the works. At the time I 
did not believe the story. We know that road. It is in very 
good shape (judging by Saskatchewan standards) except 
for a few short stretches . . . It seems to me that it is 20 
years newer than our stretch . . . (between) Perigord and 
Kelvington. Our road is terribly rough with depressed 
wheel tracks and patches on patches on patches. Although I 
was sure the rumour was not true, I decided to check it out. 
(And you know what? It was true.) The contract has . . . 
been awarded! 
 
The people of Saskatchewan have been . . . very patient . . . 
We all realized that we would have to make sacrifices . . . 
(and we even lived there but) we winced (when the) . . . 
GRIP was put down. We groaned under the burden of extra 
taxes . . . 
 
(But all of us knew we needed to do that if we were going 
to get out of debt). We suffered and (we’re) . . . still 
suffering today (as a result of cutbacks from the federal 
government and the way the provincial government has cut 
into our lives). Through all of this we have kept our eye on 
the ball: we will get through this and (we’ll get) back to 
normal . . . 
 
(But) there has been a lot of complaining, especially about 
Health Care and Roads. (And) as a group of people we’ve 
(been) . . . pulling together towards a better future. 
 
I have wracked my brain . . . to (see) how the 
above-mentioned road comes ahead of . . . completing the 
(highway to) Archerwill . . . rebuilding 38 from Perigord to 
Kelvington. I have considered the age of the road, the 
condition of the road, the type and volume of traffic. 
 

And I guess what we have here is a major expenditure of money 
that is not the best use of taxpayers’ dollars, and we’re asking 
the Minister of Highways to give us the criteria that she uses to 
decide which road is going to be fixed and which road is just 
fine in their opinion. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the other issues that people are 
saying to me was the number of maintenance trucks on the 
roads today. We had a USA (United States of America) citizen 
come down during hunting last fall. He asked us what all the 
red flags were on the road and we told him that they were the 
danger holes. We asked him how they spotted the holes in their 
highways. And he said, well we don’t flag them, we just fix 
them. And it seemed to be quite a simple answer to a problem 



March 23, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 197 

we’ve spent a lot of time . . . 
 
The NDP has been very successful at getting people onto the 
welfare rolls and keeping them. There has been no incentive to 
get them off of social assistance and find gainful employment, 
because taxes out there are crippling people and there’s no place 
to go for the jobs that are needed. 
 
Social services is the third largest area of expenditure of this 
government, and the numbers of people on social services has 
increased dramatically since the NDP has come to power. 
 
It is something, an issue that people don’t feel good about at 
night when they go to bed. They don’t have a job. They don’t 
have a reason to get up in the morning. And it’s government’s 
job to allow them . . . to provide an environment to get them 
back to work. It’s something that Saskatchewan Party knows 
that we can do and will be doing. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we had a delegation come in from 
SARCAN a while ago and they wanted to talk about another 
issue, and that was one of recycling. They were talking about 
the containers that came into this province from out of province. 
And they know from this that this government has figures that 
proves there’s $2 million of Saskatchewan taxpayers’ dollars 
that goes annually to Manitoba every year from cans and bottles 
that are brought into this province for recycling. That’s an issue 
that has to be addressed — $2 million is a lot of money to 
taxpayers; it’s a lot of money to municipalities. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — Order. Now many 
members have had the opportunity to enter into this debate. 
Those of you who haven’t, I urge that you take the opportunity 
when the member for Kelvington-Wadena completes her 
entrance into this speech. 
 
I am simply asking all members for their co-operation in 
allowing the hon. member for Kelvington-Wadena to continue. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the whole issue of social work is 
something that the workers in this province have been talking 
about openly to the media since December or earlier. We know 
that they were talking to the government about this last summer, 
and the government settled the wage contract. But they didn’t 
deal with the issue of caseloads. 
 
There are workers in this province that know that they cannot 
go to bed at night feeling confident that they have actually even 
lived up to their code of ethics for social work because of the 
caseloads. It’s an issue that the government must address, and 
we must be looking at making sure that the people do get the 
help that they need. 
 
I also have . . . people in my constituency are talking about 
community homes and the very fact that they are a necessary 
part of the system right now. But they aren’t getting any help to 
either form their association or to talk about the many issues 
that they have to make sure that young people are carried 
through on a caseload with some consistency and that they 
know that people do care about them. 
 

We do have lots of answers. The government prefers not to 
listen to them. And I think that you will find the people of your 
constituency will be telling you the answers because they are 
reading the platform of the Saskatchewan Party right now. They 
know that this government is tired and doesn’t have any idea 
what’s happening out in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Throne Speech promised to strengthen 
kindergarten programs to provide broader access to computers 
and to begin a Role of Schools Task Force. That’s just what we 
need is another task force which is good for NDP cronies. At 
least there’ll be some job creation then. 
 
What is this government’s vision for education of our students 
when it comes to school closures in rural Saskatchewan? 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — Order, order. The 
member is addressing her remarks very properly through the 
Chair and facing the Chair, and I’m having a great deal of 
difficulty hearing the hon. member. I ask for all members’ 
co-operation in this matter. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you again, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m 
asking what this government’s vision is for the education of our 
students in rural Saskatchewan. Will we continue to see schools 
close? We saw last week a Qu’Appelle school was slated to be 
closed and the students would end up being bused to Indian 
Head. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we had a problem with our school in 
Englefeld and the people in Englefeld took it into their own 
hands. They said, I’m going to draw a line in the sand and I 
won’t take it any more. I’m going to make sure that my kids 
receive the schooling that they want. And they worked within 
this government’s laws to have their own school division. 
 
I support people who say, I am going to make it happen the way 
our forefathers made it happen. They came to Saskatchewan a 
hundred years ago and they said, I’m going to do everything 
that I can myself. I’m not asking the government to help me, 
but we need health care, we need highways, and we need 
education. 
 
Out in rural Saskatchewan they’re still looking for health care, 
education, and highways. It’s the kind of thing that unless you 
live in one of the principal cities, one of the few that this 
government has decided should survive, you’re not supposed to 
have it in this province. 
 
Education is a fundamental right that allows individuals to 
receive their full potential as a citizen. Unfortunately 
Saskatchewan trains its young people for export. There are not 
opportunities for our young people to stay in Saskatchewan, for 
them to stay and to work and raise a family and pay taxes, and 
contribute to the potential of our province. 
 
I’d like to ask how many of the members opposite have family 
members who have left this province to work elsewhere. I’m 
virtually sure that every one of you has had this experience, and 
it often happens not because people want to leave but because 
they feel they have no other options. And that’s just not good 
enough. 
 



198 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 1999 

We can no longer afford to educate our young people to see 
them leave, and I believe and our party believes we must create 
opportunities for them to stay here. 
 
An Hon. Member: — How? How? 
 
Ms. Draude: — The members opposite ask how. And I think 
that’s a sorry state of affairs when a government says, how do I 
do it; I don’t know how. Well I’ll tell you how — call an 
election and let us do it. And then you’ll know how to do it. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the Throne Speech the Premier 
admitted that the government had made mistakes in health care 
reforms. Then the minister yesterday talked about the waiting 
lists were not as long as we had said and she wanted to know 
where we got the information. 
 
Well the information came from the Fraser Institute, for the 
information of the members opposite. The numbers are true. 
They are just, and you can’t hide behind saying that they’re 
something we made up. 
 
(1530) 
 
Rural Saskatchewan has taken the brunt of the mistakes this 
government has made in health care. And the Associate 
Minister of Health leads us to believe that the pain is not yet 
over. My constituency would be left with no primary health 
care facility if you expand on your policy that you had in 1992. 
 
Because of your government’s health care reform, increasingly 
there is need for more and more families to provide health care 
to their loved ones themselves. Long-term care for the elderly, 
post-operative care, and ensuring that family members get to 
medical appointments further and further away from home is 
now a family responsibility. 
 
The ambulance rides that we talked about today in question 
period is costing people in rural Saskatchewan 5, $600. In fact 
unless you know all the rules and can get your Blue Cross in 
time, it can cost you 8 or $900. That’s two-tier health, members 
opposite. That is what’s happening out in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And this issue is of particular concern to me because the vast 
majority of at-home care workers are women. Women who not 
only look at the elderly and the sick family members, but 
they’re also the primary caregiver for their own children. And 
who often work out of home . . . 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — Order. Now . . . Order! 
Members on both sides of the House are again becoming louder 
than is necessary to ensure a good debate, and I ask for your 
co-operation to allow the hon. member to continue her speech. 
 
Ms. Draude: — The government opposite has done nothing to 
recognize the important role that women play in the delivery of 
health care. And this government’s health care reform has done 
a dismal job of putting adequate money into home care and 
family support services. 
 
Some of the crises that we see in the health care system and the 
increasing expectations that are being put on the family to care 
for sick patients has been created by the nursing shortage. This 

same government that was madly laying off nurses three years 
ago is now attempting to attract them back from Ontario, the 
States, and wherever else they went to. 
 
But the nurses look at them and say, why would I come back to 
Saskatchewan and pay 10 or 15 or 20 per cent more in taxes 
than I would where I am right now? I might love my family and 
my province but I have to take the dollars home at the end of 
the day. 
 
Surprise, surprise that nurses have left this province in search of 
career options and they aren’t going to come back. And even as 
we sit in the House today the nurses of this province continue to 
seek and negotiate a contract. 
 
Last week the nurses left empty shoes on the steps of the 
legislature inviting the Health minister and the Associate 
Minister of Health to walk a mile in their shoes. I wonder if you 
tried it. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the minister, the members opposite talk 
about zapping. We can talk about the zaps that they have done, 
mostly to rural Saskatchewan. Farmers, health care, education, 
every one of them has known what it means to be zapped out of 
importance as a citizen in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has attempted to claim credit for 
changes to the Young Offenders Act under the guise of the 
federal government legislation. If this government is committed 
to safe communities and the safety of families in those 
communities, how can it be possible that we see caseloads in 
the Department of Social Services like we talked about 
yesterday? 
 
Let me remind you that a child care worker often has a caseload 
of more than 45 people — 45 young people. Foster care family 
workers have caseloads of more than 50. Young offender 
workers, they have caseloads of more than 65 young offenders. 
People that are . . . that need care. People that need special 
attention so they can work their way back into society and make 
sure that they are a viable part of society. 
 
Income security workers have caseloads in excess of 300 — 
300. How can we possibly ensure the safety of the most 
vulnerable people in our society when social workers are 
functioning under these conditions? 
 
Violence against women and family violence is an issue 
throughout our whole province. And what has this government 
done to ensure the safety and well-being of women and 
children? What has this government done to protect the rights 
of women and children in rural areas where increased isolation 
creates more barriers for women attempting to leave a abusive 
relationship? 
 
Creating safe communities starts at home, and this government 
has done little to address the issue of family violence in a 
meaningful and productive way. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, last year, or two years ago for the first 
time the Women’s Secretariat finally was given more than a 
little bit . . . given more than lip service. They were given a 
small amount of money — three-quarters of a million dollars — 



March 23, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 199 

to use the best they can. 
 
And they actually talked about targeting rural Saskatchewan. I 
was really hopeful this meant that maybe some of the women 
that are in abusive situations, some of the women that are 
talking about wanting to go to work, but they don’t . . . there’s 
no daycares for them. Women that are talking about their 
children needing additional clothing for schools. They need 
some help actually raising their children. 
 
Let’s talk about the needs that rural Saskatchewan and farm 
families have. You know what this government decided to do 
with three-quarters of a million dollars? Internet. Internet 
doesn’t feed kids. 
 
Internet is a wonderful tool. But when government has 
fundamental responsibilities of health care and education and 
highways, why in the world would we think the best thing we 
can do for women is to spend three-quarters of a million dollars 
helping them get onto the Internet? They already have the 
computer. They have the knowledge to get work . . . to work it, 
then they can possibly get onto the Internet as well. Maybe it 
was just a way to get the money back to SaskTel through 
another way. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that we have . . . We know about 
the job creation record in this province. We have the worst in all 
of Canada. We know about the taxation system in this province. 
It’s the second worst in Canada. 
 
We have the birthplace of medicare. We have health care that’s 
the worst in Canada. Our waiting lists are longer. The 
percentage of live births is . . . of infant mortality is higher. And 
this government is spending about the same per capita as other 
governments. There’s something fundamentally wrong with 
what’s happening in the health care areas. 
 
Our welfare numbers are the worst in Canada. Crime is the 
worst in Canada. 
 
And let’s talk about no-fault insurance. Ralph Nader, who is the 
founding father of consumer rights activists, came to Regina 
last year to point out the shortcomings of the legislation. Ralph 
Nader cannot be accused of being right-of-centre and he is 
adamant that this legislation is not in the best interests of people 
in this province, the citizens of this province, who have no other 
options. They’re forced to buy their inadequate insurance 
coverage from a state-sponsored monopoly. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the government made 12 references to 
“The Saskatchewan Way” in its Speech to the Throne. This 
government seems totally unaware that it has lost touch with 
what the Saskatchewan way is. They have confused this with 
the NDP way. 
 
This government’s own polling shows them that they have lost 
touch with the Saskatchewan people. They are more concerned 
with their power and control than they are in the well-being of 
our province and ensuring that issues are governed in a 
responsible and accountable way. 
 
I find it very interesting that this government is now boasting 
about a common sense approach to governing. Nothing could 

be further from the truth. Let’s consider some of the examples 
of common sense when it comes to Channel Lake and taxation 
and labour relations and health care reform. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll close my comments today by stating my own 
position and respect for constituents. I have the utmost of 
respect for the constituents of Kelvington-Wadena. And I don’t 
need legislation in order to do this. They are hard-working 
people who know the true meaning of doing things the 
Saskatchewan way. 
 
As a member of the Legislative Assembly, my greatest concern 
is for their welfare. I look forward to the upcoming opportunity 
to challenge this government and for the honour of representing 
this riding. 
 
This government’s approach is not common sense, it’s not 
balanced, and it’s not the Saskatchewan way. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve been waiting with bated breath to 
hear who this government opposite is going to put into my 
constituency to run against me. I’ve heard that perhaps the 
mayor of Humboldt is the one that’s going to be coming into 
my constituency. They’re assuring me into my constituency. I 
really think that the people of my constituency deserve more 
than somebody who’s already lost in one constituency in a 
nomination meeting. 
 
But if they must . . . but if he does want to come over into my 
area, I suggest that he come over to my place in 
Kelvington-Wadena constituency and I’ll spend some time with 
him and teach him . . . tell him some of the things that are going 
on there. 
 
This weekend I’ll be painting in my house in 
Kelvington-Wadena constituency and if he puts his paint 
clothes on, he can come over, work with me and I’ll tell him 
some of the things that are going on in this area. 
 
And I’ll also tell him that the people of my constituency that 
have phoned me saying, now why would the mayor of 
Humboldt, who has the biggest regional hospital in my health 
district want to be in this constituency? He’d have to tell the 
people of Wadena, no, go to Humboldt. Who would you really 
be representing? The people of Kelvington-Wadena want 
somebody who lives in Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people of my constituency deserve 
much more than the Romanow government is willing to offer at 
this time. I am not supporting the Speech to the Throne. I am 
definitely supporting the amendment that was put forward by 
the member from Canora-Pelly and I look forward to voting on 
that today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I 
must say that it’s with a bit of anticipation that I’m standing 
today making my maiden speech as a member of the NDP 
government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



200 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 1999 

Mr. Belanger: — I wish to add, Mr. Speaker, that there may be 
several classes of school kids watching the presentation and I 
want to just briefly explain the purpose of this response is that 
the Speech from the Throne is in which the government 
basically sets out a road map as to where they want to take the 
province over the next year. And of course that’s happening and 
this is what we’re responding to. 
 
And later on in the week, again for the school children back 
home, what we will do is we’ll have the budget that will 
actually have the financial details to support the direction the 
government wants to go. 
 
But certainly, Mr. Speaker, I’m not here today to talk about the 
response to the Throne Speech. I’m really here to talk about the 
constituency of Athabasca and certainly some of the challenges 
that they have, over the next 30 minutes. 
 
First of all, the Athabasca constituency’s a very large 
constituency. And I did measure the distance from my home 
driveway right to the driveway here in the Assembly. And the 
amount is 796 kilometres from home to home. And that’s a long 
ways away, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I want to say, the constituency also includes communities 
way up in the far North and these communities include Camsell 
Portage, Uranium City; they include Black Lake and 
Fond-du-Lac, and of course the small community of Stony 
Rapids. So it’s a long, long way from those communities to here 
in the Assembly. 
 
And I also want to point out the constituency primarily consists 
of Aboriginal people. And the important fact, I guess, is that 
although the huge population in the North is Aboriginal, they 
certainly have a lot of respect and admiration for their 
non-Aboriginal neighbours in many of our northern 
communities. 
 
I want to point out as well, Mr. Speaker, the challenge in the 
constituency of Athabasca is with the young people. The 
population I believe, and I could be corrected on this, that 60 
per cent of the northern Aboriginal folks are under the age of 
33. So that’s a very, very high concentration of young people. 
And as you’re very well aware, Mr. Speaker, when you have 
that number of young people in and about your constituency, 
wanting to see things happen, certainly that calls for strategies 
to deal with all that energy. 
 
I also want to point out, Mr. Speaker, some of the successes that 
we’ve had in northern Saskatchewan, and particularly the 
Athabasca constituency. I’m here today to represent the 
constituents and I want to make sure that people out there, back 
home, and certainly people in southern Saskatchewan, 
appreciate the fabric of northern Saskatchewan, in particular 
Athabasca constituency. 
 
Several months ago I was surprised to hear on the radio a 
couple of friends of mine. One of course is the chief and the 
other is deputy mayor of Turnor Lake. And these two 
individuals are fairly young individuals and they signed what 
they call the Turnor Lake MOU — a memorandum of 
understanding. Where this young chief, being the chief of 
Turnor Lake Indian population, and the young deputy mayor 

decided that we’re not going to let the lines divide us because 
Turnor Lake, right down the centre road . . . on the right is the 
reserve and on the left is of course the hamlet. 
 
And the mayor and the chief said we have an arena here that we 
need to work on, but because these lines are there we can’t help 
each other; well we’re tired of those lines. We’re going to 
diminish those lines. We are one community of Turnor Lake, 
we bring to the table each a strength — the treaty First Nations 
bring their strength as well as the Metis and the non-Aboriginal 
people of the hamlet of Turnor Lake. 
 
So I think the message that this offers to Saskatchewan is yes, 
the Aboriginal folks realize that they have to work together to 
build up their communities. And that the lines that sometimes 
divide us really are a detriment to our northern communities. 
And I think we say that with full respect for the First Nations 
and the treaty rights. We don’t do that in spite of it. 
 
And I think I want to say, my hat goes off to the mayor and 
council of Turnor Lake and certainly the chief and council of 
the Turnor Lake band. 
 
I also want to talk about the Ile-a-la-Crosse basketball team. It’s 
a young team from my hometown that were one win away from 
showing up at the provincials. They lost, I believe, in the 
sectional finals. And again these are all young individuals that 
walk the streets of Ile-a-la-Cross, attend the Ile-a-la-Crosse 
school. They were one win, Mr. Speaker, away from the 
making the appearance at the big show. So there’s a lot of 
young, ambitious athletes as well. 
 
(1545) 
 
And another one I want to talk about was the Dillon chief, the 
chief of the Dillon band, Elmer Campbell, who’s really, quite 
frankly, a strong leader in northern Saskatchewan. He’s been 
recently re-elected as chief. And Mr. Campbell is very, very 
protective of his band and certainly of the band members. 
 
And recently he worked alongside of SERM where a certain 
lake was under threat of being overfished and that there was a 
lot of questions about the role of the treaty people harvesting 
fish from that lake. Well Mr. Campbell and his council stood up 
and said, we will now use treaty rights to protect that lake from 
overfishing. And I think it really supports the example of Chief 
Robert Sylvestre of Turnor Lake in terms of working together. 
 
I also want to talk about Pinehouse, Garry Tinker. Many of you 
may realize a number of years ago this disabled young 
individual from the small community of Pinehouse walked 
many, many miles — I believe he walked to this city from Lac 
La Ronge. I’m not sure of the distance but I do know that he 
walked with his crutches to bring highlights and certainly to 
bring the challenge of northern folks and the disabled people, 
who number 400, in terms of trying to get some of their issues 
heard and certainly explained to the people of the province. 
 
And as well, Mr. Speaker, I also want to take my hat out to the 
community of Pinehouse because Pinehouse had a hockey team 
a number of years ago, three years ago, and this team was very, 
very good. They entered a number of tournaments throughout 
the northwest and certainly in the northeast and other regions, 



March 23, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 201 

and they dominated the hockey scene for a long, long time. 
Very gifted hockey players. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the surprising thing about this Pinehouse 
hockey team is they never had a rink. What they’d done was 
they cleared a section of the lake and that’s where they 
practised. 
 
And it just goes to show the spirit and certainly the admiration 
of many people in northern Saskatchewan towards their own. 
And I for one am very proud of the examples of Garry Tinker of 
the Pinehouse hockey team and so on and so forth. 
 
A number of years ago the person that we continue to admire in 
northern Saskatchewan, Lawrence Yew. He also inspires a lot 
of people in northern Saskatchewan. And to this day since his 
passing, a number of people still mention his speeches and still 
mention some of his leadership. And I want to again today 
certainly pay tribute to Lawrence who was the first Aboriginal 
member in this House and certainly the member that inspired 
me to get into provincial politics. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Belanger: — La Loche and Garson Lake, Mr. Speaker, 
another fine example of two communities working hand in 
hand. They built the Garson Lake road. It took them 13 years, 
and time and time again the village and the small community of 
Garson Lake worked to try and make the reality of the Garson 
Lake road happen. 
 
And I’m pleased to report today, as a result of their 
determination, their work, and their ethics, April 1 we’ll have 
the grand opening of the Garson Lake road. And, Mr. Speaker, 
it’s a small community but that road will offer many, many 
benefits to the 40 or 50 people that live in Garson Lake. 
 
And I can say today now that the people of Garson Lake do not 
have to pay $130 to have a plane fly in their groceries on a 
weekly basis. So I think that without question that’s a tribute to 
the Dene people of the community of Garson Lake and 
certainly of the other people that have helped out. 
 
I want to talk a bit about Alex Shatilla. Alex was a dear friend 
of mine and he passed away this past summer. And I want to 
certainly publicly thank the entire family for having me as a 
honorary pallbearer. Alex really inspired me as well in politics. 
And I think the important thing is that since his passing, him 
being a veteran and a community activist and certainly 
somebody that cared about the northern folks, I think I also 
want to share some of his accomplishments and recognize him 
here in the Assembly today. 
 
Several days ago I spoke about the national Aboriginal 
achievement in terms of number of people that really made their 
mark as Aboriginal people. And again without going through 
the whole motion of mention the names and their contributions, 
we know who they are, and again my hat is off to them. 
 
I want to recognize back home the Sakitawak Development 
Corporation. Wendal Desjarlais and company are doing a fine 
job trying to create jobs at the local community of 
Ile-a-la-Crosse. They fundraised a total amount of $60,000 over 

a period of a couple of years to get the corporation moving and 
now they’ve created a tremendous amount of jobs. They’ve got 
some dollars in the bank. 
 
I don’t want to elaborate because it might give more pressure to 
Wendal to spend more money. But I can almost guarantee you, 
Mr. Speaker, it is a far cry from the $60,000 that we started 
with. 
 
I want to talk about the inspiration that I received as the MLA, 
from some of the workers working at the northern mines. Mr. 
Speaker, many people would be surprised to hear that young 
people like Don Merasty travels a number of miles from 
Ile-a-la-Crosse to La Ronge to catch a plane. And I believe the 
distance across is three, three and a half hours on a gravel road 
to catch a plane each week that he goes up to the Far North to 
work at some of these mines. 
 
So there is no connecting flight between the Ile-a-la-Crosse 
point that Don lives in, and La Ronge. So what Don does every 
time he comes out is he hitches a ride there and he hitches a ride 
back, and then he flies to the northern mine. And Don is being 
paid seven fifty, eight bucks an hour while at this mine. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there’s thousands of examples of people in the 
North that add to the fabric of Saskatchewan. We don’t want to 
be viewed any further as a place that is out of sight and out of 
mind. We don’t want to be viewed as a welfare state. We don’t 
want to be viewed in the sense that we are simply an attachment 
to the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
What we want is to be recognized as a real part of 
Saskatchewan with the people that have the spirit, co-operation, 
and determination to make a difference in all of our lives. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Belanger: — So, Mr. Speaker, in closing on some of the 
achievements, there are many I wish to talk about. But there’s a 
couple of other points that I want to raise. 
 
In terms of our veterans, I want to recognize them today. I 
know there’s a couple of them watching today. So I want to 
make a point that not only have we contributed currently in the 
present, that we’ve also made a contribution as northern 
Aboriginal folks throughout time. 
 
So again in recognition of my being here and all of us being 
here in this democratic state of Saskatchewan and this great 
country of Canada, we owe our veterans special note. 
 
And that includes Louis Roy of Beauval . . . (inaudible) . . . 
Morin of Ile-a-la-Crosse, Thomas Chartier of Buffalo Narrows, 
Gilbert McCallum of Ile-a-la-Crosse, and my father Leo 
Belanger of Ile-a-la-Crosse. These people are still all with us. 
We’ve buried a number of other veterans. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that every year we have a 
celebration in honour of the veterans that give us the democratic 
right to stand and speak today. But I can say today that it’s one 
day we celebrate their achievement, but it’s all year round that 
we certainly benefit from their accomplishment and their 
sacrifice to our country. 



202 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 1999 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Finally, Mr. Speaker, in terms of recognizing 
distinct individuals, I called a grandmother today and I asked 
permission if I can read a poem. This poem has been written by 
a young lady, Leslie Aubichon. And Leslie has been battling 
cancer for 11 years of her 17 years, and this past Monday Leslie 
was laid to rest. 
 
So she wrote a poem that I think is really neat in terms of her 
struggles, and I promised her grandmother I would read it 
today, and I wish to do so. The poem goes as follows: 
 

Blue moon on the rise 
Come down on my eyes 
Cause in my world 
I can live without drugs 
Without doctor’s unhappy shrugs 
To dream of what can be 
What I could have been 
Smelled, tasted or seen 
The something which 
Will never become of me 
Blue moon on the rise 
Come down on my eyes 
 

And that was a poem written by Leslie Aubichon of 
Ile-a-la-Crosse. And it really dictates and really indicates of the 
struggle that she had, and the sacrifice and certainly the 
heartache associated with, you know, with her life. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, I want to say hello to an elder back home. 
This elder worked for a number of years when he was younger, 
in Hay River. He was a very, very strong physical person. Some 
of the stories of him being able to pick up motors with his bare 
hands and being called a human forklift, and on and on and on. 
 
He worked many, many years for many, many people in the 
Territories and he is originally from Ile-a-la-Crosse. But 
recently he had a stroke and he is now sitting at home. And at 
61 years of age, he still thinks he’s 21, and he wants to wrestle 
with me all the time, but of course, I’d be able to beat him now. 
But I want to take off my hat to Leo Maurice as well, who is out 
there, I know, and I hope is listening. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, you can tell from the North that the northern 
people are very dynamic people. They work, they pay taxes, 
they’ve suffered, they’ve had heartache, they’ve had 
celebration, they’ve had promises, and they’ve had hope. 
 
And I guess, as the MLA for that particular area, I want to point 
out that there is a lot of people in northern Saskatchewan once 
again, screaming at the top of their lungs to be included. And 
certainly I hope that the rest of the province recognizes them as 
a people and as a region. 
 
So in closing, in terms of some of the things that we want to 
point out, is I tell all the young people back home, young 
people that may be watching, is to never forget who we are. 
And the people that have sacrificed before us, and certainly the 
people that continue building northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Once we don’t forget who we are and we realize what our 

challenges are, then we know where we have to go. And at this 
point in time, it is still, still a very tough struggle getting our 
young people to really get involved with the economy, the 
politics, the business, and the likes. 
 
I want to turn my attention briefly to the Saskatchewan Party, 
and certainly I respect all the MLAs that make this particular 
job their life. While many families are home having supper, 
many of us are on the road travelling. While many people are 
watching TV in the evenings relaxing, many of us are at 
meetings arguing. So to a large extent we certainly have to 
respect each other in this Assembly, and that respect will 
continue being shown by me. 
 
However there is still some challenges that, you know, that 
have to be addressed. And I’m very, very disturbed again by the 
apparent onslaught of the Tory party on the Aboriginal folks. 
Throughout time I was not pleased with some of their responses 
and some of their attacks, and I can say at this point in time that 
the Aboriginal folks do not appreciate being used in that 
capacity. 
 
We have the right to be a part of Saskatchewan. We have the 
right to take part in forums such as this nature. And we have the 
right to suffer through growing pains, Mr. Speaker. We have 
that right. 
 
Many of us are just getting involved with self-government. 
There are challenges; there are mistakes. But we have the right 
to make mistakes, to learn from those mistakes, so we can 
become our own bosses and to create our own destiny. 
 
And as a result of that, I am encouraging all the Aboriginal 
people from across Saskatchewan to come out and vote. Come 
in the hundreds, come out in the thousands to make their impact 
known. 
 
And I say to every Aboriginal people in northern Saskatchewan 
that you can no longer disclaim your role in terms of getting out 
to vote. The Aboriginal people can control 22 constituencies . . . 
can have impact on 22 constituencies and five federal ridings. 
So the Aboriginal folks and the Aboriginal vote is very, very 
key to the formation of a democratic system in Saskatchewan. 
 
So I say to all the Aboriginal folks back home and that may be 
listening, is come out and vote, vote, vote and exercise your 
democratic right. 
 
And as well I’m disturbed at some of the spread of 
misinformation. Recently in northern Saskatchewan there’s talk 
about the hospital closure to the northern communities. When, 
in fact, the opposite is happening. And I’m very, very pleased to 
hear the Minister of Health come out and say point blank that 
this will not happen. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that is some of the things that is wrong with 
the Saskatchewan Party — the Tory Party — and I ask you, on 
behalf of the Athabasca constituents, to stop this politics that 
divides Saskatchewan, that divide the Aboriginal and 
non-Aboriginal folks, that divide rural and urban Saskatchewan, 
that divide North and South, that divide the elders from the 
youth. 
 



March 23, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 203 

Mr. Speaker, we need a party that brings us together and I’m 
very happy to say that I’m in that party that does exactly that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1600) 
 
Mr. Belanger: — And the other point, Mr. Speaker, is that I’ll 
also ask the Tory Party to stop the nonsense that Aboriginal 
people do not pay taxes. As was indicated today, there are three 
distinct Aboriginal groups in the province. There are the Metis, 
there are the non-status, and of course there are treaty. 
 
And as indicated earlier today, there is a number of things that 
people have to know. Aboriginal people do pay taxes. Many of 
the people that I’ve spoke about today have paid taxes all their 
life and they will continue paying taxes, Mr. Speaker. So stop 
the nonsense that the Aboriginal folks do not pay taxes. They 
do and they have and they will continue doing so, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And day in and day out I hear them complain about the 
highways; I hear them complain about taxes; I hear them 
complain about the Aboriginals; I hear them complain about 
health care. And the list goes on and on and on and on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the question I have, in coming from northern 
Saskatchewan, how come you never hear the Tory Party 
complaining about the debt? How come you never hear the 
Tory Party complaining about the interest of $2 million per day 
that we pay as a Government of Saskatchewan? We never hear 
them bringing those issues up, Mr. Speaker. Why is that? Why 
is that? 
 
And they sit here and they talk about the rural problems in the 
province, saying that you guys created . . . that this government 
created those problems. Well, Mr. Speaker, the injustice to the 
province of Saskatchewan is that $2 million that we pay every 
day in interest as a result of the Tory administration of the 
1980s. And if people in Saskatchewan are tired of hearing about 
that $2 million per day, well the Saskatchewan taxpayers are 
tired of paying that $2 million per day. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Belanger: — So, Mr. Speaker, that debt is not going to go 
away. That interest is not going to go away. And I can say with 
all pride that the thing is that the people that made the debt 
shouldn’t complain about the problems that we have a tough 
time at times balancing on this side of the House. And that was 
a direct result of some of their mismanagement. 
 
So the Tory Party should stop trying to play the role of being 
the guys that are complaining about everything and trying to 
bring justice to the province of Saskatchewan when in fact the 
greatest injustice to this province was created by them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, I want to just quickly, as my 
final shot at the Tory Party, I want to talk about a March 18, 
1999 clipping in which they often make reference to the 
province of Alberta. And I want to quote Peter Hrynewich from 
Saskatoon, and these are two separate quotes, Mr. Speaker. 

The first one: 
 

When my wife and I returned to Saskatoon after living in 
Alberta, we noticed a significant improvement in both our 
quality of life and standard of living. Alberta is not heaven 
on Earth by a long shot. 

 
Now the second quote from the same letter, Mr. Speaker, quote: 
 

A bit of objective homework might suggest Albertans need 
those tax breaks to keep up with Saskatchewan and the rest 
of Canada, to pay their medicare premiums, higher 
housing/rental and insurance costs and generally higher 
living costs. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, if the Tories are so pleased with Alberta, 
they’re so happy with Alberta, well there’s a road, there’s a 
number of roads happening at this point in time, that they don’t 
live in Alberta. 
 
At this point of time we are living in Saskatchewan, we have to 
make a Saskatchewan difference. We can’t continue comparing 
our province with those provinces that seem to have it all when 
in fact they don’t. This is the best province in the best country 
to live in, Mr. Speaker, and people have to begin to realize that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Belanger: — My quick note to the people of northern 
Saskatchewan, my message to them as the MLA for Athabasca, 
is we have to be patient. I must again ask for more patience. 
While there is growing optimism and real progress, there is no 
overnight solutions to the many problems that northern 
Saskatchewan have. We will remain on this steady course of 
planning, building, and seeking ideas. 
 
Number two, that we must balance our economic plan with 
protection of our environment. We cannot nor should we 
compromise either opportunity. 
 
Number three, that we must undertake a serious effort to 
diminish the lines that divide the northern people if we want to 
grow. As a region we’re relatively small in numbers. Any 
further attempt to further break into special interest groups will 
further erode our common strength. 
 
Number three, that we understand and respect each other more 
and appreciate the challenges of our First Nations, our Metis, 
and our non-Aboriginal members of our communities. We all 
face the same problems each day in northern Saskatchewan. We 
are not immune because of who we are or where we live. 
 
Number five, that we begin the work of co-operating between 
communities, between businesses, between community 
development corporations, and private enterprises, and to 
understand the roles and responsibilities of all the players 
involved with economic development. 
 
Number five, that we make every effort to target our elders for 
special support in repairing their homes; and recognizing their 
simple health needs, such as a wide-card coverage for their 
medicines; and recognizing the need to respect them in their 
final days. These people have worked all their lives: they’ve 



204 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 1999 

paid taxes, they raised their families, they’ve struggled through 
lean times; and all they ask for, Mr. Speaker, is a little help in 
their old age. 
 
Finally, my message to all the young people out there listening 
and to all the people in general in northern Saskatchewan, is do 
not exclude yourself from the political process that shape 
policies that impact our lives. Whether it’s local elections, band 
elections, Metis elections, or avenues of provincial politics, I 
say to you that there is nothing here to fear. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in closing, the government recognizes the 
challenge that this government has in governing this great 
province of Saskatchewan. And the reason why we support this 
government, Mr. Speaker, and the reason why the North stands 
tall, side by side and in pride with this government, is for a 
couple of reasons. 
 
Number one, that this government is committed to balanced 
budgets that reduces on a constant basis our current $11.6 
billion debt, that has consistently reduced taxes, and has 
consistently enhanced services. Fighting for a balanced budget 
is very tough to do, and I want to take my hat off to my new 
colleagues who throughout the year, and throughout the years, 
have shown discipline and dedication. That was required to 
achieve this balanced budget process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other important strength is that this 
government is not involved in the fire sale of our Crown 
corporations, the corporations that create wealth, service, and 
employment for all of Saskatchewan. Saskatchewan is 
positioning its Crowns to effectively compete in our western 
Canadian economy. The North recognizes that. And I believe, 
as many people in northern Saskatchewan believe the Tory 
strategy in the 1980s was to break the province so bad that it 
had to sell the Crowns. Sell the Crowns and not make anything 
happen in Saskatchewan. But the only thing, Mr. Speaker, they 
did not count on was an NDP government that was going to 
make a real difference in balancing our budgets. 
 
And third, Mr. Speaker, that the health care continues to be a 
high priority for this province. No question challenges remain. 
Health care is a national issue as we hear all the provinces 
struggling with health care. Saskatchewan is not immune to 
federal budget cuts and yet continues to commit serious efforts 
to our health care system. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, the biggest reason that we’re very 
happy to be part of this government was the willingness to work 
together in a common sense, forward-looking, and realistic plan 
of action for the North, for the northern people, and for all of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
As we all know, Mr. Speaker, change is all around us, happens 
everyday. In the North, I guess my final message, my final three 
points, is clear. 
 
Number one, northern Saskatchewan, all we need is our fair 
share — nothing more, nothing less. Number two, is we too 
have dreams, hopes, and aspirations of our children and our 
grandchildren; we have that ability to also dream. And number 
three, the North, the Aboriginal people are not going anywhere. 
We are part of Saskatchewan’s dream; we are proud of who we 

are; and we have and will continue to sacrifice and contribute to 
this great province and to this great nation. 
 
And in closing, Mr. Speaker, on a short smile, I had a dream 
several days ago. And in that dream, Mr. Speaker, I was about 
to be shot by a firing squad. In fact there was two of us. There 
was the member from Cannington and myself — both tied to 
stakes. 
 
And the member from Cannington and I were both tied, about 
to be shot by this firing squad when the captain of the firing 
squad walked up to both of us and first asked the member from 
Cannington, what’s his last wish. And of course the member 
from Cannington replied, I want to hear three-hour speech from 
Elwin Hermanson on fiscal responsibility and health care — our 
commitment to health care. 
 
So the sergeant of the firing squad walked up to me and asked 
me what my last wish was, to which I responded shoot me first. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, I want to thank all the 
government caucus for their gracious welcome to their caucus. I 
want to thank the member from North Battleford for his kind 
comments of several days ago. And I also want to thank the 
constituency of Athabasca; to tell them today that you won’t see 
me speaking very much in the Assembly simply because I’m 
part of the government that has to defend its current direction in 
northern Saskatchewan. 
 
We will be in your home communities. We will be at your 
meetings. We will be making a real difference back in 
Ile-a-la-Crosse, Beauval, La Loche, Patuanak, Pinehouse, and 
the list goes on. 
 
So again on behalf of the constituents of Athabasca, I humbly 
take my seat with the Government of Saskatchewan on behalf 
of the great northern constituency of Athabasca. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As always, it’s a 
privilege and with a great deal of humbleness I enter into this 
debate on the occasion of the reply to the Speech to the Throne. 
 
It must be difficult, I would find, to at one point in time be on 
the criticizing side of this House and then to turn around and 
then go on the defensive. That must be very difficult. That’s an 
experience that I’m not sure how one might handle. 
 
Nevertheless, Mr. Speaker, today I’m pleased to welcome the 
communities of Balcarres and Melville from my constituency. 
As you well know, Mr. Speaker, and thanks to your efforts, 
Balcarres has joined the list of many communities across the 
province who can now watch the proceedings of this Assembly 
live in their homes. It is my hope that this service will be well 
used and, once in a while, they will in fact turn to watch the 
proceedings and perhaps their MLA in action. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to take this opportunity to speak a 
little bit about my constituency. The hon. members know that I 
represent the constituency of Melville and area. I believe that 



March 23, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 205 

this is one of the very best in the entire province. It is certainly 
one of the most representative constituencies in Saskatchewan, 
with a mix of rural and urban interests. 
 
(1615) 
 
Since coming to office in the summer of 1995, it’s been a 
privilege to work on a variety of projects and programs that 
help to improve the quality of life in our area. Helping people to 
attend to their needs when they come looking for assistance. 
 
A number of important events have taken place in the 
constituency these past years. I would like to extend sincere 
congratulations to all the special and numerous individual 
accomplishments and the new community and business 
ventures that have taken place. 
 
Business plays a very important role in the Melville 
constituency. Melville and area show some of the greatest 
amount of entrepreneurial spirit in the entire province. In fact, I 
would like to mention a few like the expansion of Babcock & 
Wilcox bringing new jobs to the area, the creation of Melville 
Seed Processors, and the nearing completion of Terminal T-22 
at Balcarres — all massive undertakings as a result of 
individual entrepreneurship needed, so desperately needed to 
keep rural Saskatchewan alive. 
 
I commend the small-business people who have opened shops 
and offered goods to the people of those small communities 
where the government has taken away employment and services 
for the people that need it, for the people that are at the heart of 
this great province. If it were not for the hard work and the 
initiative of the people who live in our smaller villages and 
towns, rural Saskatchewan could not survive. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to single out a new small business in 
Lebret. It’s a small tea and craft house called Fair’s Fair. I 
single them out, Mr. Speaker, because there is a slogan 
stencilled just below the ceiling, which I have often felt was 
particularly true of this particular government. It says: a vision 
without action is a daydream and action without a vision is a 
nightmare. I often think, Mr. Speaker, that the members 
opposite have spent too much time acting without a vision 
which has resulted in a nightmare for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I’ve heard from this government at different times that jobs and 
the economy are a priority; that health, education, and social 
programs must be protected; that highway and transportation 
issues are important. And yet not once, not once, Mr. Speaker, 
have I seen a clear vision for long-term plan from the members 
opposite. Not once have I heard a plan of direction, but rather, 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve only seen and heard of poor, piecemeal, 
band-aid solutions for health, highways, for job creation, for 
education, and a myriad of other areas. 
 
Crisis management which is the most costly to all the people of 
this province — that’s the type of management we have under 
the NDP government. 
 
Like all of Saskatchewan, Melville depends greatly on the 
farming economy. This year has been particularly hard on 
farmers with rising input costs and poor grain prices. I’ve spent 

considerable time talking and listening to our farmers. When 
farmers are hurting, we are all hurting. We in rural 
Saskatchewan are always very mindful of that but I’m not so 
sure if the members opposite are aware of this. They are in 
charge, yet what are they doing to alleviate the pain and 
suffering in our agricultural community? Not a great deal. 
They’re dickering with the federal government. 
 
Apart from business and agriculture, you cannot speak of 
Melville without talking about one of the city’s longest 
employers, Canadian National Railways, which gives the city a 
distinctive flavour of which its residents are fiercely proud. 
 
Now just a little bit about some of the people in my 
constituency. Those people that I represent, that are the most 
important part of my life as an elected representative, their input 
helps me make decisions that affect them. They allow me to 
serve and they allow me to serve them and they allow me to 
serve the people of this province. I know to whom I am 
responsible and to whom I am accountable — and that’s to the 
electorate of my constituency. 
 
Melville enjoys a wide variety of people, hard-working 
individuals who are willing to pull together and work together 
and include me in some of the decisions and some of the 
decisions and initiatives to make the area a great place to be. 
People are our priority, Mr. Speaker. There’s nothing we can do 
as legislators if we do not understand that people are in fact the 
future of our province. 
 
In the Year of the Older Person, I think it is important to 
mention that there are many seniors in my constituency who 
continue, continue to make important contributions to their 
communities. They want the best we can provide for their 
children and grandchildren. And they keep me mindful that 
decisions that we make here in this House affect the changes in 
the types of issues and costs that affect their lives. These are the 
people that have been referred to as having worked all of their 
lives, having built this province, having paid their taxes, and 
now, in my humble opinion, deserve the VIP (very important 
person) treatment unfortunately to which they do not have 
access. 
 
I’m also proud to say that my constituency includes six First 
Nation’s communities: Peepeekisis, Okanese, Star Blanket, 
Little Black Bear, and Standing Buffalo First Nation as well as 
a portion of Sakimay First Nation. And I know first-hand the 
First Nation’s communities in my constituency are working 
very hard to overcome past hardship and provide bright futures 
for their people. 
 
I was pleased to recently be involved in the opening of the 
Okanese community centre, initiatives like homes for seniors in 
those First Nations communities, health care centres for First 
Nations people, community halls for young people to come and 
meet. 
 
I’d also like to tell you a little bit about the people in my family 
that have allowed me to participate in political life. First and 
foremost, Mr. Speaker, my wife Barbara. Just recently we 
celebrated 31 years of marriage, and for that many years . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



206 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 1999 

Mr. Osika: — For that many years, Mr. Speaker — thank you 
— she has been a source of steady support to me no matter what 
change I have made or what adventure I have led her on. 
 
I’m constantly reminded of what I want this great province of 
Saskatchewan to be as well when I visit my daughter, Kim, and 
her husband, Kevin, in Melville who, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased 
to announce for the first time in this House are expecting my 
first grandchild next month. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — And before — it is the Year of the Older Person, 
no question about it — but before I move on, I think that we 
need to be reminded that there are many Saskatchewan people, 
some from my constituency and some from others, who no 
longer live in this province but would be willing to come back 
and contribute if this government and its policies had not lost 
the Saskatchewan way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, every day I appreciate and trust the responsibility 
that the people of the Melville constituency have bestowed 
upon me. And, Mr. Speaker, I always enjoyed meeting and 
speaking with them whether in my office, on the street, at a 
social event, or anywhere. But, Mr. Speaker, I find now, and it 
troubles me, that they no longer seem to have the same time to 
visit. Instead when I see my constituents, they have many 
serious concerns. They are preoccupied because they feel that 
they’ve been abandoned. 
 
The treatment that the people have received from this 
government have caused them these additional undesirable 
stresses and concerns. They have become frustrated at the way 
they are being treated by their own government. Many feel they 
are being abandoned and betrayed to an unfeeling system. They 
fear the unavailability of care for their health when they need it. 
They fear for the lack of facilities when they get older and they 
require them, that they may as well . . . may not always be 
available as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier often talks about changes and how, as 
Saskatchewan people, we must not be afraid of change. And, 
Mr. Speaker, I must say Saskatchewan people are very resilient 
people and they do adapt to change, Mr. Speaker. But all people 
have a breaking point and that is where we stand today. Change 
has not been a friend to Saskatchewan over the past eight years. 
 
We hear reference to “The Saskatchewan Way” often 
throughout the Throne Speech. Mr. Speaker, do the members 
opposite believe that closing hospitals, allowing Saskatchewan 
people to languish on waiting lists, underfunding education, 
allowing the infrastructure to crumble, forcing farmers off their 
land — is that what the members opposite mean by the 
Saskatchewan way? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government of the day’s priorities are wrong. 
Four years ago in my maiden speech here in this venerable 
Assembly, I said that far too often in the past politicians in this 
province have played political games with people’s lives rather 
than coming up with sound policies. Four years later this 
government has learned nothing and done nothing to change 
this. 
 

As I said previously, there are serious issues facing the 
province. Many times, over the past four years, I’ve been 
disturbed at the state of affairs and the actions of the members 
opposite. How those elected to represent the well-being of 
Saskatchewan people have treated them so callously, so 
shabbily. It is common knowledge that the NDP’s wellness plan 
has not benefited rural Saskatchewan with hospital closures, 
longer waiting lists, fewer specialists, and less accountability. 
 
This is a government that has stopped listening to the people. 
It’s become tired and arrogant and uncaring. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier admits mistakes have been made in 
health care reform but not once — not once — have we heard 
him apologize in this House to the people of Saskatchewan for 
their suffering, a suffering that’s been induced by this 
government. 
 
Time and time again during the last session, we stood in this 
House and brought to the attention of the members opposite the 
severe shortages that have been appearing in our health care 
system. There are people, hard-working Saskatchewan people 
who’ve worked all their lives, waiting weeks and weeks for 
critical tests and then months and months for surgery. 
 
Why is there such a long waiting list for these facilities, Mr. 
Speaker? Because the government opposite does not have a 
comprehensive plan. They’ve not had a comprehensive plan; 
it’s been crisis management. They’ve got expensive study after 
study but no plans. 
 
Rather than admit to the problem, Mr. Speaker, it has been 
easier for successive ministers of Health to downplay the 
serious state of health care in our province by accusing this 
opposition of playing politics. 
 
Well I’ll tell you who’s playing politics. It’s the NDP members 
opposite. The Minister of Health’s predecessors turned a deaf 
ear to over 100,000 people who signed petitions and attended 
rallies last year to protest the closure of the Plains hospital and 
medical care to southern Saskatchewan. 
 
She herself was not aware of the nursing shortage — can you 
believe that? — until recently. And yet her own Associate 
Minister of Health, member for Saskatoon Eastview, had spoke 
of it several years ago. And still, still, Mr. Speaker, the member 
from Regina South has the audacity to stand in this House and 
accuse the opposition of playing host to the Jerry Springer 
show. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, unfortunately there’s scarce good news 
stories in health care. Health care is not working in this 
province and has not been working for some time. And it’s time 
that the Premier and his government keep some of the 
commitments that they have made to the people of 
Saskatchewan about health care. 
 
The Premier had promised last spring there would not be one 
more bed closed in the Regina Health District. And guess what? 
This spring 60-plus beds were closed, adding to the already 
300-plus beds that were closed previously. 
 
Then he said there would be no more hospitals closures, and yet 



March 23, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 207 

his associate Health minister, who obviously spoke out of turn, 
said hospitals in rural Saskatchewan would be changing. 
 
So what does this all mean, Mr. Speaker? Well lately I’ve 
noticed that instead of making promises and instead of 
answering questions put to the Health minister in this 
Assembly, she has begun quoting statistics. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
I have some statistics to quote as well. 
 
Closure of 53 rural hospitals, and who knows how many more 
on the chopping block. The fact, Mr. Speaker, that over 6,000 
people languish on waiting lists, and yet the member from 
Regina Coronation Park proudly told this House how then 
premier Blakeney called his Health minister on the carpet and 
told him to do something about waiting lists when the number 
reached 2,000. Well, Mr. Speaker, just one health district alone 
in this province has almost 1,900 people waiting. 
 
The elimination of 968 acute care beds and more to come, more 
to come, member from Lloydminster, if one believes the 
Associate Minister of Health. The elimination of 467 long-term 
care beds. Almost 600 less nurses than when this government 
came to power, despite promises from the Health minister to 
hire 200 more nurses. 
 
(1630) 
 
And I’ve lost count. We’ve all lost count of the millions, or tens 
of millions of dollars of cost overruns with the consolidation of 
the two remaining hospitals in Regina. And I’m not sure if there 
appears to be a light at the end of the tunnel as far as any sight 
for completion of the construction at the Regina General 
Hospital. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Health minister says, wait for the budget to 
determine our commitment to health care. And yet, Mr. 
Speaker, no matter how much money the NDP come up with in 
an election year for health care, it doesn’t take the place of a 
health care plan or a vision or a direction, and it doesn’t take 
away the hurt of the last eight years. Action without vision — a 
nightmare. And that’s what we’re faced with. 
 
I just want to end my comments on health care with the fact that 
last June the previous Health minister, I’m not sure, number 
five or six, promised us that Melville would be the site of a new 
hospital in 2001. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my sincere hope is that the current minister 
understands what a priority this is for the people of my 
constituency. For more than 10 years individuals and groups 
have planned, fundraised, and waited for an announcement. 
This facility would centralize acute care, home care, and 
supportive care under one roof. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my constituents in the North Valley Health 
District are still waiting a definite funding amount for the 
project and they deserve an answer after this budget. I hope to 
have good news for them. 
 
And before I leave the topic of health care, I wish to commend 
and thank all those front-line health providers, especially those 
in the North Valley Health District, that do such a good job for 
us despite the situation and the conditions that they have to 

prevail under. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another area where there has been no direction is 
Highways and Transportation. I’m stopped weekly on the 
streets by people who have had to travel on our highways, 
report potholes, report damage to their vehicles, their 
undercarriage, their springs. I’m constantly embarrassed by the 
government’s record. 
 
The road system in this province, especially with the weather 
conditions we have during the winter season, is not surviving 
the ongoing destruction and abuse that the road system has 
taken because of the lack of action and inadequate funding by 
the government. 
 
The current government has taken almost $200 million from the 
highway budget since coming to power and is presently 
spending less on maintenance than the government of the day 
did 10 years ago. And presently, less than 50 per cent of the fuel 
tax the government collects is invested back into highway 
budget. 
 
The neglect of our highway system is jeopardizing jobs, the 
safety of those who must travel on them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last year over 30,000 Saskatchewan people signed 
a Liberal-sponsored petition urging the government to begin the 
process of twinning the Trans-Canada Highway. And how did 
the government respond? Well with such a lack of commitment, 
such a pathetic beginning to construction, that it was a slap in 
the face to the safety of Saskatchewan taxpayers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the past 12 months, I’ve travelled across 
Saskatchewan and I’ve met many people, and with that 
travelling I came across some pretty pathetic roads — or at least 
that is what the government calls them. In fact, driving on 
Highway No. 310 in my constituency, Mr. Speaker, I would 
have to say that the Highway minister has found some common 
ground with the member of the official opposition. Travelling 
on Highway 310 it makes me wonder whether the Highway 
minister agrees with the member from Saltcoats that some 
highways would be better off if left to gravel. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, as I’m travelling through my constituency 
avoiding the potholes, I do see many good individual and 
community achievements. I visit schools throughout my 
constituency. I’m always impressed with the quality of existing 
programs, the innovation of educators and the enthusiasm of 
students. And although I’m always impressed by their 
innovation and creativity I’m disappointed at the lack of support 
they receive from this government. 
 
Educators tell me that more and more children need more than 
just learning the three R’s. Expectations around education have 
grown. Education professionals are finding more and more 
children need some form of special education, whether it be in 
the form of special programs and support services for learning 
disabilities, or social or emotional or behavioural difficulties. 
Educators believe that between 20 or 30 per cent of students 
need some form of special education, and yet this government 
only funds at a rate of 2 per cent of students. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the education system is dealing with more mental 



208 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 1999 

and health and social and physiological issues than ever before, 
with less social support and funding from this government. The 
education system has seen little or no improvement with the 
introduction of the wellness program. In many cases schools are 
already doing preventative parenting. So why has this 
government not provided the resources where they are most 
needed? Why do we only hear about co-operation between 
health and social services and education, but never see any 
evidence of this? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m told that when school districts are creative 
enough to find savings in their budgets they are not allowed to 
reinvest it in front-line programming in their division. It just 
doesn’t seem to make sense. Again this government and its 
members have their priorities all wrong. 
 
A good education is one of the best investments we can make 
for our children and our grandchildren. When will the 
government start investing at home in our own people. Mr. 
Speaker, I believe that there is still hope. I believe in new 
beginnings. My vision of the Saskatchewan way is of 
co-operation, community, and shared efforts in making this 
great province truly terrific. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m so very pleased to have announced in this 
House, in less than a month, I’ll be a grandfather. And Mr. 
Speaker, in a few months or in several months, when the 
Premier dares call an election, to run on a pitiful record, a 
record created by a government that forgot what it was elected 
to do which was to serve the people of Saskatchewan, to make 
them the priority. Mr. Speaker, when this election happens, I 
will start a second term as the elected member from Melville, 
along with many new Liberal MLAs from across the province 
and together we will give hope back to the Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
Because we in the Liberal Party have not forgotten the 
Saskatchewan way and we have always made the people of 
Saskatchewan our priority. This government has abandoned 
health care, highways, education, and in short, Mr. Speaker, 
they have abandoned the people that depended on them the 
most. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, you may feel that I have neglected the Tory 
Party that sits to the right of me. But Mr. Speaker, I’ve given 
them the same amount of thought and consideration they gave 
their constituents when in the dead of night and concerned only 
for their own preservation, they joined together to form a new 
Tory Party. Mr. Speaker, I don’t need to send a message 
because come election time their constituents will send them a 
message loud and clear, the only kind they’ll understand. 
 
Mr. Speaker, because this Throne Speech does not address the 
priorities of my constituents or the people of Saskatchewan, I 
cannot support it. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The division bells rang from 4:44 p.m. until 4:49 p.m. 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 

Yeas — 11 
 
Toth Bjornerud D’Autremont 
Draude Julé Osika 
Hillson McPherson Aldridge 
McLane Goohsen  
 

Nays — 29 
 
Romanow Flavel Calvert 
Wiens Shillington Upshall 
Goulet Johnson Whitmore 
Lautermilch Cline Kowalsky 
Crofford Van Mulligen Bradley 
Trew Renaud Sonntag 
Scott Nilson Langford 
Murray Hamilton Stanger 
Kasperski Ward Belanger 
Murrell Thomson  
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
indeed my pleasure to rise on behalf of my constituents in 
Regina Sherwood and to participate in the fourth Throne 
Speech debate since I was elected in 1995. It’s indeed a 
pleasure to be back again here in this esteemed Legislative 
Assembly and to see all my colleagues on both sides of the 
House. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I first of all would be remiss if I didn’t set 
out a few welcomes to yourself and members of the Legislative 
Assembly. I want to, as other members have done, I want to 
thank you for your continued outreach activities although I 
think my outreach this year brought me into the legislature with 
one of our classes as opposed to you coming out to our school, 
but nonetheless that was a very interesting experience and 
certainly very rewarding for all those that were involved. 
 
I’d also like to say hello and welcome the officers of the 
Assembly, the Clerk, the assistant Clerks and to say hello to 
them as well. And also our Sergeant-of-Arms. 
 
I also send greetings to my friends in Hansard. They will note 
that I have now made a habit of providing translations when I 
give statements in other languages. In the statement I did in 
French last week I think they had a translation. I’m planning to 
do one in Polish and in German a little later on this spring and 
I’ll make sure that they get the proper translations. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — I’d also like to take this opportunity to 
welcome all new communities that have been added to the 
legislative broadcast network and certainly convey on behalf of 
myself and all of us here a welcome to them tuning in to our 
facilities and to our debates. 
 
I would be remiss, Mr. Speaker, if I did not send special 
greetings to a new colleague of mine, the member for 
Athabasca. It was great to . . . We’ve been out on a couple of 
outreach activities together and it’s certainly a great pleasure to 
be with him and working with him here in the legislature on the 



March 23, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 209 

government side of the House. 
 
Finally, in my introductory remarks I want to compliment my 
esteemed colleague, the member from Redberry Lake, on the 
fine job he did in moving this Throne Speech. And also 
compliment my colleague, the member from Battleford-Cut 
Knife, for the job she did in seconding the Throne Speech here 
last week. It was a fine job and has started off what is a very 
fine debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Mr. Speaker, I’d first of all like to take a 
couple of minutes and talk a little bit about my constituency of 
Regina Sherwood, and I’d be remiss if I didn’t pay some . . . or 
offer some description of the area I represent, its people, and its 
neighbourhoods. 
 
As I’ve explained before, Mr. Speaker, Regina Sherwood, is 
prominently a residential constituency with very . . . I only have 
one large and one small commercial shopping centre so it’s a 
neighbourhood residential area that consists of about I think six 
community associations and I’d like to maybe take a minute to 
talk a little bit about them and explain just exactly where they 
are. 
 
Starting on the southern part of Regina Sherwood, we have the 
Dieppe Community Association in an area that lies totally 
within Regina Sherwood. Moving north from there we have the 
community association of Rosemont-Mount Royal. The Mount 
Royal section lies within the constituency of Regina Sherwood; 
the Rosemont section lies within the constituency of my 
colleague, the member for Regina Elphinstone. 
 
Moving north from there, Prairieview Community Association 
is another area that I share with another member, in this case the 
member from Regina Qu’Appelle Valley. She has the western 
part of Prairieview which is West Hill and I have the eastern 
part of Prairieview. 
 
Moving north from that, the entire area of what we know as 
Normanview West lies within my constituency. Moving a little 
west from that or east from that we have the community of 
Normanview, where I reside and my family, and that’s another 
area that I share with another member. The northern part of 
Normanview is in Regina Sherwood although the southern part 
of Normanview lies within and is represented by the member 
for Regina Elphinstone. 
 
Moving north from that, I also have another shared area. It’s the 
area of the city called Walsh Acres. The eastern part of Walsh 
Acres is represented by my esteemed colleague the member for 
Regina Coronation Park and I have the western half. And 
finally the last area that’s within my constituency is called 
Sherwood Estates, McCarthy Park. I have the section of 
McCarthy Park, and Sherwood Estates is shared by my 
colleague, the member for Regina Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 
As I indicated a little earlier, Mr. Speaker, Regina Sherwood is 
almost exclusively a residential area. The only major 
commercial establishment we have is the Normanview 
Shopping Centre, and also a smaller strip mall at the corner of 
Sherwood Drive and Dorothy Avenue. 

And I single out a little bit the Normanview Shopping Centre 
because, Mr. Speaker, just this past Saturday I was very pleased 
to attend an important function at the Normanview Shopping 
Centre. For the 10th year in a row, the Normanview Shopping 
Centre, which is owned by Harvard Developments of Regina 
here, has had what they call the . . . has the volunteer wall of 
fame. And this, Mr. Speaker, is a wall that’s on one of the 
hallways in the shopping centre where for 10 years they have 
pictures and descriptions of volunteers from the West Zone 
Board in the area of the city which I represent, and they 
recognize three volunteers a year and have a ceremony where 
they are presented with a plaque and an award. 
 
And this past Saturday, I was very, very pleased to attend as the 
local MLA to see three volunteers receive the 1999 awards and 
take their place on the volunteer wall of fame at the 
Normanview Shopping Centre. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these members . . . if I could just get my notes 
here . . . The three people that were nominated this past year 
and presented with . . . and put onto the wall were Judy 
Zawyrucka, who is a licensed practical nurse at the Pasqua 
Hospital and was named outstanding community leader for her 
years of service with the Rosemont-Mount Royal Community 
Association and other groups. 
 
The second volunteer recognized was Carol Biberdorf, who has 
been a volunteer on the Dieppe Community Association for 
over 20 years and was named outstanding volunteer. Finally, 
Ian Stavness, a grade 12 honour student and student leader at 
O’Neill High School, was named outstanding youth for his 
work and volunteer activities, athletics, music, and his church. 
Mr. Speaker, my congratulations and those of all my 
constituents I’m sure to these three members and newest 
additions to the Normanview Shopping Centre volunteer wall of 
fame. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have lots of other topics I’d like to raise. And I 
talked a little bit earlier in my member’s statement about the 
economic growth that’s been taking place here in the city of 
Regina in the past year or two which is, to say the least, the 
economic situation in this city here is quite hot. I would 
however like to take a little bit more time to do this and getting 
that it’s getting towards the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, this 
may be as good a time as any to bring to a conclusion these 
remarks. And therefore I’d ask to adjourn debate at this time. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:55 p.m. 



 

 


