





























































Hansard: March 15, 1999


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2139 
 March 15, 1999 
 
The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

INTRODUCTION OF NEW MEMBER OF THE 
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY 

 
The Speaker: — I hereby inform the Assembly that the Clerk 
of the Legislative Assembly has received from the Chief 
Electoral Officer a certificate of the election and return of 
Buckley Belanger, Esquire, as member for the constituency of 
Athabasca. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have the honour to 
present to you, Mr. Buckley Belanger, member for the 
constituency of Athabasca who has taken the oath, signed the 
roll and now claims the right to take his seat. 
 
The Speaker: — Mr. Belanger, I want to say welcome to the 
Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan and I hope that your 
time here will prove to be one of honour to you personally and 
as well to your constituents. Welcome back to the Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Let the hon. member take his seat. 
 

ANNOUNCEMENT 
 

Resignation of Members 
 

The Speaker: — It appears the hon. members are enthusiastic 
about the new session but before we get there we’re going to 
have to prorogue the previous sitting. 
 
Hon. members, I also wish to inform the Assembly that I have 
received the resignations of Mr. Ed Tchorzewski, member of 
this Assembly for the constituency of Regina Dewdney, 
effective January 18, 1999, and Mr. Robert Mitchell, member 
of this Assembly for the constituency of Saskatoon Fairview, 
also effective January 18, 1999. 
 

TABLING OF COMMUNICATION 
 
The Speaker: — I have a message from the Lieutenant 
Governor regarding membership on the Board of Internal 
Economy. I’ll ask all hon. members to rise. 
 
It is dated October 14, 1998. 
 

Dear Mr. Speaker: 
 
Pursuant to Section 68.7 of The Legislative Assembly and 
Executive Council Act, I hereby inform the Assembly of 
the membership of the Board of Internal Economy 
effective October 7, 1998: 
 

The Honourable Glenn Hagel, Chairperson (Speaker) 

The Honourable Eldon Lautermilch (Executive Council 
nominee) 
The Honourable Joanne Crofford (Executive Council 
nominee) 
Mr. Myron Kowalsky, M.L.A. (Government Caucus 
nominee) 
Mr. Grant Whitmore, M.L.A. (Government Caucus 
nominee) 
Mr. Ben Heppner, M.L.A. (Opposition caucus nominee) 
Mr. Harvey McLane, M.L.A. (Third Party caucus 
nominee. 

 
Yours sincerely, 
J.E.N. Wiebe 
Lieutenant Governor 
Province of Saskatchewan 

 
I am also advised that His Honour is here for prorogation. 
 

PROROGATION 
 
At 10:06 a.m. His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber and took his seat upon the Throne. 
 
His Honour was then pleased to deliver the following speech: 
 
Mr. Speaker, 
 
Members of the Legislature: 
 
It is my duty to release you from further attendance at the Third 
Session of the Twenty-Third Legislature. 
 
In thus relieving you, I would like to thank you for the work 
you have done. 
 
This Session’s work is a positive step towards charting a course 
for Saskatchewan’s journey into a new year, and beyond into a 
new century, and a new millennium. 
 
You have successfully introduced legislation that continues to 
invest in people, local communities, and the larger community 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
In keeping with your strong commitment to Saskatchewan 
children and low income families, you passed The 
Saskatchewan Assistance Amendment Act, 1998. 
 
This legislation enables the development and implementation of 
the Saskatchewan Child Benefit and the Saskatchewan 
Employment Supplement programs, and provides hope and a 
better future for thousands of low-income families and their 
children. 
 
You maintained your commitment to the people of 
Saskatchewan in regards to protecting society from repeat and 
serious offenders. 
 
Among other measures related to this priority you passed 
several Bills - all of which are aimed at updating or 
strengthening elements of provincial law enforcement and 



2140 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 1999 

corrections. 
 
The Wildlife Amendment Act, 1998 increases the fine levels 
for hunting offences and changes the forfeiture provisions to 
include vehicles. 
 
The Vehicle Administration Amendment Act, 1998 allows the 
use of the provincial driver licensing system to enforce payment 
of outstanding fines for Criminal Code driving offences. 
 
You also passed The Automobile Accident Insurance 
Amendment Act, 1998, which permits SGI to recover from 
thieves and vandals moneys paid out in respect of thefts of 
vehicles and vandalism to vehicles by means of license 
suspensions. 
 
The Correctional Services Amendment Act, 1998 provides that 
the rules of the correctional facility receiving the inmate from 
another facility should apply during a transfer between 
facilities. 
 
Also, The Enforcement of Judgments Conventions Act was 
passed, which provides a process whereby civil judgments that 
have been made by the courts in one country may be recognized 
and enforced in another country without requiring the parties to 
re-litigate the matter in its entirety. 
 
Saskatchewan is built on the values of our people - community, 
equality, co-operation, compassion, and common sense. 
 
You have rewarded the business sector and the people of 
Saskatchewan for their hard work and sacrifices by passing The 
Income Tax Amendment Act, 1998. 
 
This Act reduces the basic personal income tax rate from 50 per 
cent of Basic Federal Tax to 48 per cent. 
 
This Act also introduces a 15 per cent, non-refundable Research 
and Development Tax Credit, a refundable Film Employment 
Tax Credit, and a non-taxable Saskatchewan Child Benefit. 
 
You have recognized that Saskatchewan no longer competes on 
cost alone and that innovative, high-quality products are the 
future for our whole economy, including our foundation 
industry - agriculture. 
 
You passed The On-Farm Quality Assurance Programs Act 
and The Animal Products Amendment Act, 1998 to help give 
Saskatchewan producers an important competitive advantage in 
export markets. 
 
The On-Farm Quality Assurance Programs Act addresses 
hazards associated with food production and processing of 
animal products. 
 
This Act also helps create effective partnerships with industry 
for their delivery and enables the government to eventually 
consolidate all meat inspection regulations under one act. 
 
The Animal Products Amendment Act, 1998 provides 
Saskatchewan with the ability to develop modern, cost effective 
and efficient inspection systems. 

You recognized the importance of Credit Unions by passing 
The Credit Union Act, 1998. This Act modernizes business 
powers to allow credit unions to offer a broad range of financial 
and other services to members and non-members, and ensures 
that members retain control over credit union affairs. 
 
You continued to implement the key recommendations of an 
extensive review of Crown Corporations by passing The Crown 
Corporations Amendment Act, 1998. 
 
This Act eliminates the mandatory requirement that the Minister 
responsible for a subsidiary Crown corporation serve as 
chairperson of that Crown’s board of directors. 
 
You are continuing your work to ensure these publicly-owned 
assets remain productive engines of our economy, and benefit 
all Saskatchewan citizens. 
 
During this Session, you continued your commitment to 
high-quality public education by passing The Education 
Amendment Act, 1998. 
 
This action will further strengthen Saskatchewan’s public 
education system and provide the necessary leadership and 
support for locally determined school division restructuring. 
 
To ensure safety in the work place, a right which workers 
expect and deserve, you passed The Workers’ Compensation 
Amendment Act, 1998. 
 
As further progress towards democratic reform, you passed The 
Election Amendment Act, 1998. 
 
This Act formally institutionalizes the traditional independence 
of the office of the Chief Electoral Officer by making this 
position an officer of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
To facilitate a provincial commitment to the environment, you 
passed The Parks Amendment Act, 1998. 
 
This action designates the MacDowell Bog as a protected area 
and adds approximately 1,300 hectares of native land to 
Douglas Provincial Park. 
 
Finally, in taking leave of you, I wish to thank you for the 
diligent manner in which you have devoted your energies to the 
activities of the Session, and wish you the full blessing of 
Providence. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Speaker and members of the 
Legislative Assembly, it is the will and pleasure of His Honour 
the Lieutenant Governor that this Legislative Assembly be 
prorogued until later today, the 15th day of March, 1999, at 
2:30 p.m., and this Legislative Assembly is accordingly 
prorogued. 
 
His Honour then retired from the Chamber at 10:14 a.m. 
 


