





























































Hansard: April 09, 1999


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 477 
 April 9, 1999 
 
The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I have a petition to present on behalf of the 
Saskatchewan disenfranchised widows association. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to have the Workers’ 
Compensation Board Act amended whereby benefits and 
pensions are reinstated to disenfranchised widows and 
whereby all revoked pensions are reimbursed to them 
retroactively with interest to April 17, 1985. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition come from the 
communities of Manor, Redvers, Sinclair, and Antler. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, I also have petitions to 
present today. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to have the Workers’ 
Compensation Board Act amended whereby benefits and 
pensions are reinstated to disenfranchised widows and 
whereby all revoked pensions are reimbursed to them 
retroactively with interest to April 17, 1985. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from Carlyle, Manor, 
Redvers, Christopher Lake, across the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present today. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to have Workers’ Compensation 
Board Act amended whereby benefits and pensions are 
reinstated to disenfranchised widows and whereby all 
revoked pensions are reimbursed to them retroactively with 
interest to April 17, 1985. 
 
And as is in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The petitioners, Mr. Speaker, are from the community of 
Manor. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 

people asking for review of parental rights. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide a review process with respect to family 
intervention to ensure the rights of responsible families are 
not being violated. 

 
Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are all from the 
community of Melfort. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
once again to present petitions on behalf of people concerned 
with the education of exceptional children in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And I’ll read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide essential funding and ensure the delivery of 
scientifically proven, diagnostic assessment and 
programming for children with learning disabilities in 
order that they have access to an education that meets their 
needs and allows them to reach their full potential. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, today the people who have signed this petition are 
from Grayson, Broadview, Prince Albert, and Dubuc, 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud to rise 
today on behalf of people of this province in presenting a 
petition. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call on federal and provincial 
governments to dedicate a significantly greater portion of 
fuel tax revenues toward road maintenance and 
construction so that Saskatchewan residents may have a 
safe highway system that meets their needs. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition has been signed by people from the 
communities of Midale, Arcola, and Kisbey. And I so present. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I bring forward a 
petition today in regards to the farm crisis: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call upon provincial and 
federal governments to immediately take steps to end 
unfair world trade subsidies and provide farmers with 
prompt relief from declining income and act as watchdogs 
against rising input costs which are harming rural 
economy. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 



478 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 1999 

Mr. Speaker, the people who have signed the petitions are from 
Glentworth and Mankota areas of the province. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I present petitions this morning. 
The prayer of relief of which reads as follows: 
 

That your petitioners call on this Hon. Assembly to call on 
the federal and provincial governments to dedicate a 
significantly greater portion of fuel tax revenues towards 
road maintenance and construction as Saskatchewan 
residents in order that they may have a safe highway 
system that meets their needs. 
 

Your petitioners come from Regina, Saskatoon, Denholm, 
North Battleford and Whitkow. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present a petition 
on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan and the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call upon provincial and 
federal governments to immediately take steps to end 
unfair world subsidies and provide farmers with prompt 
relief from declining incomes and act as watchdogs against 
rising input costs which are harming the rural economy. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

The signatures on this petition are from Goodeve, Melville 
and Grayson.  
 
I so present. 
 
Clerk:  The following petitions for private Bills are hereby 
presented and laid on the Table: 
 

By Mr. Wall — Of the Saskatchewan Co-operative Credit 
Society Limited and Saskatchewan Co-operative Financial 
Services Limited, in the province of Saskatchewan; and 

 
By Ms. Lorje — Of the Saskatchewan Foundation for the 
Arts, in the province of Saskatchewan; and 

 
By Ms. Lorje — Of the Saskatchewan Medical 
Association, in the province of Saskatchewan; and 

 
By Ms. Murray — Of the Group Medical Services, in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 

 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 
Clerk:  According to order the petitions presented at the last 
sitting have been reviewed and found to be in order. And 
pursuant to rule 12(7) these petitions are hereby received. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day 19 move first reading of a Bill, An Act to Repeal 
the Resumption of Services (Nurses — SUN) Act. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Celebration of Weyburn’s 100th Year Anniversary 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Speaker, I was in Weyburn 
Wednesday, April 7, celebrating a great milestone. Weyburn 
kicked off the celebration of its 100th year anniversary at the 
Soo Line Historical Museum. Over 250 people attended this 
birthday celebration. There was an unveiling of a mural painted 
by 11 Weyburn artists working together. It is a 15 foot by 42 
foot mural of a First Nations encampment northeast of the 
Signal Hill area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we are reminded of what our pioneers went 
through in order to begin a society on this often hostile, 
somewhat barren, certainly imposing landscape, we are once 
again filled with awe and admiration at what they endured and 
what they accomplished. Our ancestors knew that they were 
working for their children and grandchildren because it would 
take a least a generation to get it established. In other words, 
what they did, they did for us and we should never forget that. 
 
And look how Weyburn has grown and look at what has been 
accomplished. Mr. Speaker, Weyburn has given to Canada the 
largest grain-gathering point in Canada. And of course very 
important people, such as W.O. Mitchell, Isabelle Eaglesham, 
and of course, Tommy Douglas. The history of Weyburn’s past 
has laid a strong foundation for an optimistic future. 
 
I stand here again to congratulate the city of Weyburn on this 
historic milestone. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Health Care Debate 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well last night I 
had the privilege of attending another one of the series of 
meetings that’s been held across the province, particularly in 
the communities where their hospitals have been threatened by 
the statements of the associate Health minister, and it was a 
well-attended meeting, Mr. Speaker. We also had quite a 
number of nurses that were picketing — were outside — and 
then later on attended the meeting as well, and they very 
strongly supported the Saskatchewan Party position. Quite 
hostile toward what the present government is doing. 
 
The interesting thing was that also the NDP (New Democratic 
Party) candidate, Mr. Roy was there and had his shins severely 
kicked in that particular debate, as a result of which that when 
the meeting was over, he was the first one out in the parking lot 
and headed for home. 
 
It was a serious meeting with lots of good questions. There was 
however a note of levity added to it, Mr. Speaker, and that is 
when the associate minister, associate Health minister’s letter 
refuting all her former statements was read. That did bring a 
note of levity to it but other than that it was a serious meeting 
and a lot was accomplished. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



April 9, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 479 

Estevan Bruins Win Championship 
 
Mr. Ward: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is now very clear 
why the member opposite was so eager to congratulate the 
Humboldt Broncos when they won the north division 
championship of the Saskatchewan Junior Hockey League. That 
was about four games ago, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Four games ago, they began the provincial championship series 
with the Estevan Bruins. And a lot can happen in four games — 
all good for Estevan, too bad for Humboldt. 
 
As everyone knows, no horse is a match for a bear. The final 
game showed Estevan 9, Humboldt 3; game, set, and match. 
Perhaps the Broncos should look at a name change. 
 
I do want to congratulate the Bruins under Coach Glen Watson 
on winning the first MemberCare Cup — the SJHL’s 
(Saskatchewan Junior Hockey League) new championship 
trophy. Next is the Anavet Cup with the winners of the 
Manitoba league, then the National Royal Bank Cup in 
Yorkton, May 1 to May 9. 
 
And I want to congratulate all the teams in the SJHL for a very 
successful season and thank them for the entertainment that 
they bring to this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Views of Nurse from Shaunavon 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Our backs ache, our emotions are spent, and any 
professional idealism that has been battered by the constant 
need to do more with less. 
 

That, Mr. Speaker, is a quote from Rhonda Thompson, a nurse 
from Shaunavon who today is the target of this government’s 
heavy hand. Rhonda summarized the difficulties which this 
government created for all our nurses. Quote: 
 

New grad nurses are travelling to the States, to other 
provinces, where working conditions, benefits, and wages 
far surpass Saskatchewan’s own. I came from Alberta and 
took a wage and benefit setback. A new degree nurse in 
Alberta will graduate making a starting wage comparable 
to a RN who has worked 30 years in this province. 
 

Mr. Speaker, Rhonda like many other nurses across this 
province enjoys her work but she says she can’t give the 
patients the care they deserve. She worries that it will be 
difficult to impossible to recruit nurses. Mr. Speaker, she closes 
her comments by saying it is unacceptable, quote: 
 

That the government of this province expects the people 
who care for our loved ones to work in such an 
environment. 
 

Clearly a government that denies nurses their rights then 
threatens them with legal action is one that has its priorities 
dead wrong. Mr. Speaker, this is a letter that showed up in The 
Shaunavon Standard only a few days ago and I think really sets 

out the situation today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Great Canadian Geography Challenge 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
Saturday, March 27, I was pleased to be the quizmaster for the 
finals at Martin Collegiate here in Regina for the Saskatchewan 
finals of the Great Canadian Geography Challenge. Although I 
did an admirable job, I don’t think Alex Trebek’s going to lose 
his job in the near future. 
 
But anyway the Challenge is organized, Mr. Speaker, by the 
Canadian Council for Geographic Education, with the help of 
numerous local teachers and volunteers. I particularly want to 
recognize Gail Smith, the provincial coordinator here in 
Saskatchewan who is a constituent and a teacher at Ruth M. 
Buck in my constituency. 
 
This year the two winners were Cory Redekop from Herbert, 
and Jeannot Ouellette from Laval High School here in Regina. 
Cory and Jeannot will take part in the national finals over the 
May 24th weekend in Ottawa, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And Ottawa, as you may or may not know and for members, is 
the large city in eastern Canada on the borders of the provinces 
of Ontario and Quebec, southeast of Montreal and somewhat 
northwest of Toronto. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Larry Warwaruk Novel Wins Award 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Another 
Saskatchewan success story is emerging in the 
Rosetown-Biggar constituency, this time in the literary field. 
Larry Warwaruk’s fictional novel, The Ukrainian Wedding, has 
recently been honoured with a nomination for the Saskatchewan 
book awards and I’m proud to say that this novel went on to 
win the SaskPower award for fiction. 
 
This is his third novel. The first two of his novels, Red Finns on 
The Coteau and The Rope of Time were based on his wife’s 
Finnish heritage. Larry is making a significant contribution to 
the telling of the stories of the many people who built this 
province. 
 
The Ukrainian Wedding is based on a 1940s murder that 
occurred east of Winnipegosis, Manitoba. Larry has woven 
stories from his mother’s childhood into this tale to highlight 
Ukrainian experiences and tradition. 
 
Larry’s life is deeply rooted in the community. He’s been a 
lifelong teacher, writer, administrator, producer of dramas, and 
might I say, winner of awards in both Beechy and Outlook. He 
was awarded the best director for the Snakebite Players’ 
production of The Shipbuilder at the Saskatchewan Community 
Theatre Festival in 1989, which play also won a number of 
other awards. 
 
I would like to congratulate Larry for adding his nomination for 
the Saskatchewan book award and the winning of the 



480 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 1999 

SaskPower award for fiction to his list of achievements. This 
recognition is well-deserved, a great Saskatchewan contributor 
to the arts and to the community. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Wilkie Farmer Raises Alpacas 
 
Ms. Murrell: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to inform the House 
today about an innovative and unique farm operation near 
Wilkie, Saskatchewan named La Palma Sunrise Alpacas. 
 
Alpacas are native to South America and they have been raised 
for centuries by different cultures and civilizations. Today 
alpacas are raised worldwide. 
 
Gordon Waldner decided to try raising these animals a few 
years ago. Today this operation is well established and proves 
to be a wise investment. Alpaca breeding provides an excellent 
investment opportunity and they are the source of one of the 
world’s most highly-prized fibres. 
 
Scarcity of alpacas and demand for their luxury fibre has kept 
alpaca breeding and sales strong worldwide. This interest makes 
these easy-keeping animals a great prospect, even on small 
acreages. 
 
Worldwide demand for alpaca fibre isn’t close to being 
satisfied. Fibre prices are rising over 25 per cent in the last year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, La Palma Sunrise Alpacas will be hosting their 
first annual Alpaca Spring Fleece-off on May 8. This will 
include an educational seminar about the animals and 
information about the production of finished garments from 
their fibres. 
 
I would like to congratulate Gordon Waldner on his enterprise 
and wish him all the best. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

The Wall Street Journal Touts Saskatoon 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Mr. Speaker, on Tuesday of this week a 
remarkably flattering article about Saskatoon appeared in the 
investors’ Bible, The Wall Street Journal I think it’s called. The 
article was interesting and flattering for at least two reasons: 
one economic, one social. 
 
Primarily the article touted Saskatoon’s economic advantages 
and opportunities, especially in the ag-biotech field. It mentions 
what we already know, that Saskatoon is one of the “world’s 
leading centres for agricultural biotechnology” that Saskatoon 
offers, quote, “opportunities that are hard to find elsewhere,” 
and that, quote, “recruiters and companies say they never forget 
the lure of Saskatoon’s low costs.” 
 
We all know that, but it’s good to be recognized by the world’s 
leading business journal. 
 
On the social side, The Wall Street Journal comments on our 

reasonable housing costs, our fine and inexpensive golf courses, 
our low crime rate, and of course our brisk winter weather. 
 
The most remarkable statement though should remind us of 
how lucky we are to live here. Saskatoon, the article says, is, 
quote, “safe enough that small children commonly walk to 
school.” 
 
The next time we feel like complaining about our supposed 
disadvantages, we might remember this comment. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Nurses’ Strike 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
my question is for the Premier. Mr. Premier, we now have a 
clear understanding of your management philosophy: the 
beatings will continue until morale improves. A court 
injunction; that’s your answer. A court injunction. 
 
According to the deputy minister of Justice, that means you’re 
going to round up nurses and throw them in jail. That’s your 
answer. You’re going to turn nurses into criminals, throw them 
in jail, and that’s going to improve the health care system. 
 
Mr. Premier, have you lost your sense of what’s right and 
wrong? Do you really think throwing nurses in jail is going to 
fix the problems in the health care system? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I understand 
the member of the Saskatchewan Party or the Tory Party 
attended the nurses’ rally last night at the Centre of the Arts. 
And I’m wondering if the member would care to report how 
people treated him, because I understand that he was told and 
berated, that that outfit, if they were in place, would be ten 
times worse than the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a law-abiding population in 
Saskatchewan. We have citizens who obey the laws. And the 
law as of yesterday indicated that it was important for registered 
nurses in the province to return to work. And we are asking, we 
are calling on registered nurses to go back to work, Mr. 
Speaker, because we’re advised that the system, the health 
system, has very little capacity to continue with the work 
shortage or work stoppage, and it could lead to further 
difficulties for the public safety. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Indeed I was 
very pleased to be able to attend the nurses’ rally last night and 
many, many nurses came up to us and thanked us for the 
position we took yesterday. And yes, there was one NDP hack 
there. Mark Stobbe said it was his brother who did complain. 
He said I don’t like Roy but I don’t like you guys either. 
 
Mr. Premier, you just don’t get it. Nurses are caring, 
law-abiding citizens. They don’t defy you because they’re 



April 9, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 481 

criminals. They defy you because you’re making their work 
conditions completely intolerable. I have heard nurses say going 
to jail won’t be so bad. It would be better than the working 
conditions they have now. 
 
Mr. Premier, you’re mismanagement has created this crisis and 
now your solution is throw nurses in jail. Mr. Premier, it’s 
lunacy. Do you really think turning nurses into criminals is 
going to solve this problem? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just wanted 
to remind the public that this party presently has on the order 
paper The Trade Union Amendment Act which repeals 
successor rights as well as The Saskatchewan Right to Work 
Act which means, which means, Mr. Speaker, that people in the 
province of Saskatchewan would be able to go back to work if 
their union was taking job action and their union could take no 
sanctions, Mr. Speaker. This is the kind of legislation that we 
see in Alabama and Georgia where they have the worst 
conditions and trade union legislation in North America, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
What I want to say to the members opposite is this; this is what 
I want to say. This opposition party, this opposition party left 
this government with a tremendous amount of debt and deficit 
— $2 million a year . . . or $2 million a day . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Next question. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister 
goes on with the NDP rhetoric of blaming somebody else. Mr. 
Speaker, two days ago the Premier decided to step in and fix the 
nurses’ dispute. Twenty-four hours later we had a 
province-wide nurses’ strike; 48 hours later we have a 
province-wide nurses revolt. And now he’s going to start 
throwing them in jail. Mr. Premier, you still don’t get it. Nurses 
are overworked. They’re burned out. Patient care is suffering. 
And what’s your answer? Back-to-work legislation that 
guarantees three more years of exactly the same terrible 
conditions. 
 
Your legislation ended any hope that conditions might improve 
in Saskatchewan hospitals. You can’t take away people’s hope, 
Mr. Premier. That’s why nurses are defying this legislation. Mr. 
Premier, what do you think? Do you really think nurses . . . 
turning nurses into criminals is going to solve this problem? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the people 
that are working presently in the system have indicated that 
they have very little capacity to continue on. I’m talking about 
the nurse managers and the physicians and the emergency 
medical technicians that are providing services right now to the 
people of this province. 
 
We have a situation, Mr. Speaker, where we want to ensure that 
patient safety continues in the province of Saskatchewan. My 
question to that member is, do you support the notion of people 
violating legislation that is there to ensure public safety? Is that 
what this opposition party is saying? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Patient safety 
and patient care has only become an NDP concern on 
Wednesday, when the Premier met with SUN (Saskatchewan 
Union of Nurses). Up until that time, they were ignoring the 
nurses’ calls because the Premier still doesn’t get it. 
 
You have made working conditions for Saskatchewan nurses 
intolerable and now you’re saying, go back to work in those 
intolerable conditions. And that’s why nurses are saying, no. 
These nurses are law-abiding citizens, but today they are 
breaking your law because they can’t take it any more. 
 
Mr. Premier, it didn’t just happen overnight. Seven years of 
NDP mismanagement has created this health crisis, and 
somehow you thought that passing back-to-work legislation 
would make it all go away. It was arrogant and it was wrong. 
 
Mr. Premier, do you really think this is going to solve the 
problem? Do you really think your back-to-work legislation 
was going to solve the problems that you created in health care? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The Minister of Finance introduced a 
budget that laid forward a $195 million increase in health 
spending. As a result of that, Mr. Speaker, we have people 
indicating we need more money for highways, more money for 
education, more money for municipal government, more money 
for everything, and further tax reductions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We cannot afford a 22 per cent increase. We have said to the 
nurses we can deal with their issues in the workplace. Mr. 
Speaker, it was there. All the nurses had to do was come back 
and meet with the Premier at 8:30 in the morning. But instead 
they went on strike, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask the members again: do you support the 
notion of violating public safety and patient safety in the 
province of Saskatchewan? Are these people indicating to 
nurses that they should continue to violate the laws of the 
province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, 
Mr. Premier, it’s time for you to take responsibility. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, 
it’s time that you took responsibility for this and stopped hiding 
behind the Health minister’s skirts. Mr. Premier, you have been 
the author of this horror story from day one. You closed 52 
hospitals. You closed the Plains hospital. You introduced the 
health reforms that have destroyed working conditions and 
patient care in Saskatchewan. You made the decision to order 
nurses back to work under those intolerable conditions. And 
now the health system is on the verge of collapse and you are 
responsible. 
 
Mr. Premier, stop blaming the nurses; stop blaming everyone 
else. Mr. Premier, admit that you have failed, that you have 
created the health care crisis in Saskatchewan. 



482 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 1999 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I think we need to continue the history 
lesson from yesterday. When we became the government, we 
had a billion dollars in deficit because of them. We had a $15 
billion debt because of them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, presently today, even while paying down the debt, 
we pay $2 million a day; 730-some-odd million dollars each 
and every year flows out of this province. Think about it, Mr. 
Speaker — $730 million. We could afford to give many people 
a pay increase, Mr. Speaker. We could afford to reduce taxes. 
 
I ask the member again; I ask him again: is he encouraging 
nurses in this province to break the law? Is that the position of 
his party? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Eight years of 
power; eight years without responsibility. It must be a real 
testosterone rush for the Premier when he grabs that lever of 
power, because he certainly doesn’t take any responsibility. 
 
Mr. Premier, other health care workers are now . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Now all hon. members will 
recognize that the hon. member for Cannington is not located 
far from the Speaker’s chair, and the Chair is having some 
difficulty being able to hear the question being put. And I’ll ask 
for co-operation of members on both sides of the House. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, 
other health care workers are now planning strike action. SGEU 
(Saskatchewan Government Employees’ Union) workers at the 
Allan Blair cancer clinic and the North Central Health District 
could walk out today. Are you going to legislate them back to 
work? 
 
Ten thousand SEIU (Service Employees’ International Union) 
support workers in Saskatoon, Moose Jaw, Swift Current, and 
other centres could walk out tomorrow. Are you going to 
legislate them back to work? 
 
Is that your answer to everything, Mr. Premier? Continue the 
beatings until morale improves. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I go back to my previous 
question. Does this member support registered nurses breaking 
the law of the province of Saskatchewan for $9,000 a year pay 
increase. Is that what it’s all about, Mr. Speaker? 
 
We cannot afford a 22 per cent pay increase, Mr. Speaker. We 
have told the nurses we can deal with their issues in the 
workplace — their issues of recruitment and retention; their 
issues of workplace. But he says they don’t believe it. It was 
there, Mr. Speaker, and they know it was there. Their 
representatives know it was there. We could not pay $9,000 a 
year pay increase in this fiscal year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I go back. Does this member support nurses violating the law of 
Saskatchewan, not abiding by the laws of Saskatchewan that 
would ensure patient safety in order to receive a $9,000 a year 

pay increase? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, 
two days ago you stepped into the middle of the dispute and 
turned it into a full-blown crisis. Right now every hospital in 
southwest Saskatchewan is closed down because of you; 8,400 
nurses are off the job because of you; 10,000 health care 
workers could walk off the job tomorrow because of you. 
Health care system in this province is collapsing because of 
you. It’s hard to believe one person could screw things up so 
much in two days. But you’ve done . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. Order. I think the 
hon. member will recognize he’s used language which has not 
been considered traditionally acceptable in parliamentary debate 
and I’m sure he’ll want to withdraw his remark and proceed 
with his question. Order. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I apologize for 
that remark and withdraw it. 
 
It’s hard to believe that one person could mess things up so 
much in two days. But you’ve done it, Mr. Premier. Mr. 
Premier, you created this crisis. What are you going to do to fix 
it? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — What we’re not going to do to fix it, 
Mr. Speaker, is encourage nurses to remain off the job and not 
abide by the law of Saskatchewan. We’re encouraging nurses to 
return to work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people who are presently in the health system 
that are trying to manage nursing care in the province of 
Saskatchewan have told us that they can’t stay with it much 
longer, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We are urging nurses to return to the workplace to provide 
patient care for the people of this province. Mr. Speaker, on the 
top of mind for the province and on the top of mind for the 
government, is the safety of the people of this province. We are 
urging people to go back to work. And I can’t believe, Mr. 
Speaker, that the duly elected Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition 
would encourage people to not abide by the law of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Before recognizing the hon. member for Arm 
River, the Chair would like to ask the co-operation of members 
on both sides of the House. Personal insults being shouted 
across the floor do not assist the purposes of the . . . Order . . . 
the purposes of the function of this House and I say that to 
members on both sides of the House. 
 

Back-to-Work Legislation 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, are 
you happy? You really did it this time. Mr. Speaker, the 
Premier has taken the backbone out of our health system, our 
nurses, and today is making them into political prisoners with a 
court injunction. The Premier took the health system, made it 



April 9, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 483 

into a problem, then turned it into a crisis, and now has created 
a catastrophe. 
 
Mr. Premier, your heavy-handed approach has soured health 
care in this province for years to come. Mr. Speaker, I ask the 
Premier, explain please if he can, how is fining and turning our 
nurses into your political prisoners going to help a failing health 
care system in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I want to thank the member for the 
question, Mr. Speaker. As the people of this province will 
know, this province has been under tremendous pressure 
because of debt and deficit, Mr. Speaker. We now have the 
deficit removed; we’re still dealing with the debt. And each 
year we send out about $730 million on interest on the public 
debt. At the same time, Mr. Speaker, we have a federal 
government that has also been dealing with its debt and deficit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that means that the federal government, beginning 
in 1995, has withdrawn over $200 million in transfer payments 
to the province to pay for health and post-secondary education. 
Because of the work of the Premier, we now see a restoration of 
some of those funds — $67 million in this fiscal year. That is a 
tremendous help, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In this budget we have $195 million. We cannot repair 
everything overnight. We cannot afford a $9,000 a year pay 
increase at this time. We know that issues that nurses face, 
workload issues, need to be addressed. Mr. Speaker, we can 
address those issues. 
 
I urge nurses, go back to work; go back to the bargaining table. 
We can address those issues, Mr. Speaker. We just can’t pay 
$9,000 a year for the nurses in the province at present. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The government has 
money to fund two Health ministers and neither one of them 
seem to be doing anything so maybe we could use their salary 
to pay up on the nurses there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, ordering electrical workers back, ordering nurses 
back to work, is this the Saskatchewan way that the Premier 
talks about? Is it the Premier of Saskatchewan’s way to trample 
the right of workers? Is it the Premier’s way to fine and jail any 
worker who dare disobey the Premier? 
 
Mr. Premier, how come your government has ordered more 
workers back to work than the Ontario Conservative 
government of Mike Harris? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — You know, Mr. Speaker, when you 
become an elected member of the legislature and when you 
become a member of the government, we come to here . . . we 
come here with different points of view. We come here from 
trade union perspectives, from legal perspectives, from teaching 
perspectives, farming perspectives, small business perspectives, 
all of these perspectives, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And when you come to this office you take an oath. And it’s an 

oath to the people of this province. It’s not an oath to our 
special interest groups, it’s not an oath even to our party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is an oath to the people. It is an oath to the 
people who have democratically elected us to be here. It is our 
solemn oath that we are going to protect the public. We are 
going to make sure the public does not go without electricity in 
winter. That is a public safety issue, Mr. Speaker. And our oath 
to the public is to ensure public safety. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I will uphold that oath any day of the week. 
We cannot afford $9,000 a year. We’d like to; we want to; but 
we can’t do it in this fiscal year, 1999. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday the 
Minister of Health said she was concerned for people’s safety 
as the reason for legislating nurses back to work. She said it 
again this morning, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Also this morning the Premier said if the nurses defy his order 
he will throw them into jail. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of Health. Madam 
Minister, if your Premier throws the nurses into jail what 
happens to your concern about the safety of people if the nurses 
are off the job because your Premier threw them all into jail? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, obviously the Liberals 
didn’t have anybody attending the press conference because of 
some of the violations of the budget process, and so their Mr. 
Urbanoski wasn’t there, so they don’t have the details of the 
Premier’s press conference. 
 
What I can say to the public, Mr. Speaker, is this. We have a 
situation in the province of Saskatchewan, particularly in our 
big centres where people who are the most acutely ill are treated 
and cared for, where the few people who are out of scope who 
have nursing skills and the physicians and the emergency 
medical technicians, along with the nurses that have been 
provided by SUN for essential services, they can’t continue to 
cope with the situation the way it is. 
 
As I said earlier, our oath is to the people of this province. That 
is the oath that we took when we came to this legislature. And, 
Mr. Speaker, I’m urging the nurses, I am urging the nurses, 
please return to work; we can bargain your issues. We can 
bargain your issues but we cannot afford at this time to give you 
and pay you $9,000 a year increase. We’d like to. We want to, 
but we can’t. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 
Premier’s Involvement in Health Negotiations 

 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, I 
warned you of the implications of you getting involved in . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order. Now the Chair is having 
a great deal of difficulty being able to hear the hon. member for 



484 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 1999 

Wood River, and I’ll ask for the co-operation of all members of 
the House. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you for bringing them into control, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Now the hon. member knows — he’s a 
veteran member — that it’s highly improper to be commenting 
on the ruling of the Chair. And I’ll ask him to just continue with 
his question. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Premier, for two days I’ve been 
warning you of the implications of you getting involved in the 
free and fair collective bargaining process which you thought 
was your political best move. You have now set a precedence. 
It’s been warned that for every dispute from now on they’re 
going to be calling you to the table and no one else because 
you’re the boy that can make it all happen. 
 
So tomorrow SEIU can go out on strike. They are saying, Mr. 
Premier, I want you at the table. Are you going to be there? Are 
you going to meet with them? Or are you going to legislate 
them back to work? Yes or no? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, what can you say to 
a question like that? Mr. Speaker, you know the ministers of the 
Crown try and get up and answer the questions. But I have to 
say, Mr. Speaker, that as a female member of this legislature I 
often find the behaviour of that member to be tasteless and 
bullying, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what I can say to the member is that I understand 
that SEIU, SEIU and the employer SAHO (Saskatchewan 
Association of Health Organizations) are continuing to bargain. 
And we are hopeful that they can arrive at a collective 
agreement that meets the needs of their members, meets the 
needs of their taxpayers, and meets the needs of the public. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The hon. member for Wood River from his 
seat shouts comments regarding the conduct of the Chair, and 
he knows that that’s highly improper in this Assembly. And I’ll 
ask him to withdraw his remark and apologize to the House. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — I withdraw my comment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The hon. member will recognize as well that 
the Chair requested him also to apologize to the House. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — I apologize to the House, Mr. Speaker, for 
asking for another question. 
 
The Speaker: — The hon. member will recognize of course 
that when the Chair requests an apology and a withdrawal of 
remark, that it’s to be unqualified, and I’ll ask the hon. member 
will provide an unqualified withdrawal and apology to the 
House. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — I withdraw and apologize, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Job Creation 
 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question this morning is for the Minister of Economic 
Development. Mr. Speaker, the first Friday of the month is 
usually a black day for those trying to find a job in 
Saskatchewan, and unfortunately this month is no different. 
 
The March job figures were released this morning, Mr. Speaker, 
and once again they show the number of jobs in Saskatchewan 
has dropped like a stone. In March there were 2,100 fewer 
people working in Saskatchewan compared to one year ago. 
That compares to 56,000 more jobs in Alberta, over 8,000 in 
Manitoba, and even 10,000 more people working in 
Newfoundland over 1998. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government’s economic policies continue to 
kill jobs and we saw no hope of relief in their budget. To the 
Minister of Economic Development: has it finally become 
obvious, Madam Minister, that your high tax policy is 
squeezing the economic life out of Saskatchewan and costing us 
jobs? What more proof do you need? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I welcome this question. From 1992 to 1997 under the 
current tax regime, Saskatchewan led Canada in economic . . . 
(inaudible) . . . every other province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Led . . . 1998 the economy began to 
slow down and people have been universal in telling the 
members opposite why. Sask Trends Monitor, low commodity 
prices — that’s the only thing wrong with the Saskatchewan 
economy. And the other point made by the Canada West 
Foundation was this. Twenty years ago the level of commodity 
prices and oil prices would have meant a recession for 
Saskatchewan. 
 
This economy is continuing to grow because of the work of our 
business and co-op leaders in diversifying our economy. 
 
My final point is, we are like the business people of this 
province. We’re optimistic about 1999. The Conference Board 
of Canada said Saskatchewan is going to grow in 1999 and 
grow faster than Alberta. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Why is the hon. member 
on her feet? 
 
Ms. Lorje: — With permission, Mr. Speaker, for introduction 
of guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Ms. Lorje: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker and I thank all members 
of the House for indulging me and allowing me to introduce a 
very fine gentleman seated in the west gallery. Mr. Speaker, 
Mr. Al Gooding of Saskatoon has travelled down to observe the 



April 9, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 485 

proceedings today. He is a constituent of mine, a father of two 
very fine, very active young boys who are often in my office 
creating chaos and a delightful noise, and the husband of Jackie 
Nettleton, also a very fine woman in Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members of the Assembly to join 
me in a round of applause for a good and loyal friend, Mr. Al 
Gooding. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Prince Albert 
Carlton on his feet? 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also would like 
to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, I just wanted to back the 
member from Saskatoon Southeast and welcome Al Gooding to 
the Assembly. I want to mention also that Saskatoon got such a 
good citizen simply because he was raised in my constituency, 
Mr. Speaker, in Prince Albert. Welcome, Al. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the Associate Minister of Health on 
her feet? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — I’d also like leave to introduce a guest. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d 
like to introduce my daughter, who is up in the gallery, if she’d 
stand up. This is her first time at the Legislative Assembly and 
I’m sure she’s enjoying the remarks of everyone. And she’s a 
new resident in Regina and a new homeowner. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With leave to 
introduce a motion to debate a matter of urgent and pressing 
necessity. 
 
The Speaker: — Under rule 46 . . . the Leader of the Third 
Party under rule 46 requests leave to introduce a motion of 
urgent and pressing necessity. I’ll ask the Hon. Leader of the 
Third Party to very, very briefly outline the matter he wishes to 
bring to the attention of the Assembly to set aside the normal 
proceedings, and to very briefly advise the House of the motion 
he wishes to recommend. 
 

MOTIONS UNDER RULE 46 
 

Labour-Employer Relations with Saskatchewan Nurses 
 

Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I believe that in the 
interest of brevity as you’ve asked, that the motion itself if read 
into the record will indicate to the House the importance and the 
urgency of the need to debate this issue: 
 

That this Assembly call upon the government to 
immediately restore a co-operative, positive environment 
for labour-employer relations for Saskatchewan nurses, 
which is today being destroyed as a result of NDP 
back-to-work legislation that is now seriously jeopardizing 
our health system by immediately dropping government 
business and allowing for leave to introduce second 
reading of the Liberal private member’s Bill, The 
Resumption of Services (Nurses — SUN) Repeal Act. 

 
Leave not granted. 
 

Waiving of Penalties 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also wish to bring a 
motion before orders of the day pursuant to rule 46 and again 
by . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Again I’ll recognize the hon. member and 
advise him to very briefly outline the reasons he wishes to bring 
it and why it should set aside the orders of the day, and the 
motion which is introduced to give notice. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think again if I read 
the motion that will explain both the import of the motion and 
the necessity of why orders of the day should be set aside to 
deal with this pressing matter: 
 

That this Assembly call upon the government to 
immediately take steps to keep nurses in Saskatchewan and 
halt the severe personal harm being done to nurses by the 
heavy-handed, back-to-work legislation that is inflaming 
an already tense situation, which imposes fines of $2,000 
per nurse and $400 thereafter per day for each day a nurse 
protests Saskatchewan’s working conditions, and by 
immediately waiving those penalties now being unfairly 
imposed by the NDP government. 
 

I so move, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave not granted. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Kowalsky: — From a government that’s open, 
accountable, and responsible, Mr. Speaker, I submit the answer 
to question 38, and request leave of the Assembly to submit the 
answer to questions 39, 40, and 41 simultaneously. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
The Speaker: — The answers are provided to item 1, question 
38; item 2, question 39; item 3, question 40; and item 4, 
question 41. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Motions for Interim Supply 
 



486 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 1999 

The Chair: — I will call to order the Committee of Finance to 
deal with interim supply. I will recognize the Minister of 
Finance and ask him to introduce his officials please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
would like to introduce my officials. 
 
Sitting to my immediate left is Bill Jones, who’s the deputy 
minister of Finance. And beside him, to his left, is Mr. Len Rog, 
who is the assistant deputy minister in the revenue division. 
 
And right behind me is Mr. Kirk McGregor, who is the assistant 
deputy minister of taxation and intergovernmental affairs. And 
to his left is Mr. Jim Marshall, who’s the executive director of 
economic and fiscal policy at the Department of Finance. And 
to the right of Mr. McGregor is Mr. Glen Veikle, who is the 
assistant deputy minister of the Treasury Board branch. 
 
And I think that’s all the officials that are sitting on the actual 
floor of the Chamber. And there are some other officials at the 
back if we need further assistance, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And now I would like to move resolution no. 1, and resolution 
no. 1 is: 
 

That a sum not exceeding $387.646 million be granted to 
Her Majesty on account for the twelve months ending 
March 31, 2000. 

 
So I will submit that resolution to the Chair. 
 
And I would like also to distribute some department summaries 
to members of the opposition for their information, and I’ll send 
these over for my colleagues in the opposition. 
 
And so I make that motion, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and welcome to Mr. Jones and the other officials from the 
department. And thanks to the minister for receiving this 
interim supply summary. And as you can appreciate, it was just 
placed in my hands as I was . . . a moment to rise. So please 
excuse me if some of the questions are obvious on the 
information you’ve provided because it has not been an 
opportunity to review it in any depth. 
 
Mr. Minister, I understand that what you’re asking for is 
one-twelfth of the proposed budget. Is that allocated on a strict 
one-twelfth formula, or are there adjustments for special 
considerations in any of the departments? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — To answer the question specifically, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and I thank the member for the question. 
Aside from what are known as statutory amounts, in other 
words amounts of money that are allocated to various 
government departments and agencies by way of statute as 
opposed to through the estimates in the budget, but aside from 
that, basically what we are doing is allocating one-twelfth of 
what is proposed to be the budgeted amount in the estimates for 
each department and agency, without any variation from that 
other than what we see by way of statutory amounts. 
 
And if I could . . . Having answered the question I think fairly 

specifically but just to add to it, if I could ask for all members’ 
indulgence, I just want to explain — and I think members will 
be aware so I’ll try to be brief — that this process of interim 
supply is designed to enable the government and the agencies 
and third parties that rely on money from the government to 
carry out day-to-day business while the budget is being 
reviewed. 
 
The end of the fiscal year has occurred — that was March 31 of 
1999. No money is actually formally voted, if I can put it that 
way, through the budget until we get through the budgeting 
process. And we will go through several weeks or maybe even 
several months, for all I know, going over the estimates in the 
budget. And that’s when the budget will be passed. 
 
And when the budget is passed, that will give money to the 
departments and agencies. But in the meantime they don’t have 
any money. And they ran out of money at the end of the fiscal 
year, which is March. So what we’re trying to do is say that in 
the interim until the budget is passed, we will give the 
departments some money for their own purposes, plus it will 
enable them to give money to the third parties like foster 
parents and crisis intervention services and school lunch 
feeding programs for children and so on. 
 
(1100) 
 
And we need the approval of the Assembly to get that kind of 
funding to the foster care families and the children in need and 
various groups and individuals around the province who would 
suffer greatly if their payments were delayed. 
 
And so what we’re doing is basically doing what we’ve done in 
other years. And that is to say, while we’re giving all members 
of the legislature, whether government or opposition, full 
opportunity to debate the Estimates, to ask questions about what 
we’re doing and so on, in the interim we’d like to take one 
month, in effect, of the amount to be voted in the budget and as 
a interim measure get that money out to the departments and 
agencies that rely upon the money so that the business of the 
legislature does not hold them up from doing the important 
work they do on behalf of the people of the province. 
 
Now to help all members of the House understand the numbers 
I’ve — as the member from the opposition correctly pointed out 
— I’ve just distributed the summary and he hasn’t had an 
opportunity until just now to look at it. But basically what it 
does, is it sets out what they should get for the year and then it 
sets out what one-twelfth of that amount is. 
 
And the Department of Finance, I guess — I think I’m 
anticipating what may be the next question — but we’ve been 
assured by the departments and agencies that they can manage 
within the figure of one-twelfth of their annual amount. So 
that’s what we’re proposing to do. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. In addition to that 
. . . excuse me . . . I notice that the total of that one-twelfth of 
the amount to be voted is $385 million. And there are some 
extra amounts under loans and advances that are required in 
some individual departments — as I read it almost two and a 
half million dollars. Are those special requirements of those 
individual departments? 



April 9, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 487 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes. In addition to budgetary expense the 
$2.3 million refers to loan programs. So that for example, in 
Agriculture and Food, we’re to vote eighteen million four 
hundred dollars, which I think relates largely to the hog loan 
program but other loan programs as well, perhaps a few smaller 
ones in the Department of Agriculture. And so that they can 
carry out their business in the month of April, there’s $1.53 
million; and so on for the other departments that would be 
providing some basically loan capital to people, it enables them 
to operate for one month. 
 
And I would refer the member also to just the Estimates book at 
pages 130 and 131, and what that does is detail what these loans 
would be. And in particular I see for example for Agriculture 
and Food at page 130, there is $400,000 to be voted this year 
for investment in Crown agricultural land held for resale; $8 
million for advances to the agri-food equity fund; and $10 
million for the short-term loan hog program; for a total of $18.4 
million. And then the amount shown, one-twelfth of that, would 
be voted for the month of April. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. One of the issues that 
businesses always consider is the issue of cash flow. And when 
you made your remarks anticipating a question about will the 
one-twelfth be sufficient to meet the needs of the individual 
departments, I take it that that also addresses the issue of cash 
flow within the department. And it would seem to me that not 
all departments’ expenditure profile would be an equal 
one-twelfth in any given month, that there would be weighted 
months that would require greater amounts and lesser amounts. 
 
On the cash flow side, are the departments then able to move 
money within their department for individual programs so that 
their cash flow requirements are met? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — The answer is yes. A department can take 
the one-twelfth of their budget that they receive and if one 
priority is more important than another in that month, they can 
move money from one area to another within the department as 
long as they don’t spend more than one-twelfth. And we’re 
advised, as we were last year, that they can manage within that 
one-twelfth. 
 
And I recall having the same conversation with the member last 
year. And these are very good and valid questions. And last 
year we did find that what we had indicated in this process was 
correct, that in fact they were able to manage with the interim 
supply that the legislature voted. And I’m advised by the 
departmental officials that the same is true this year, that the 
departments and agencies say that they can manage within the 
one-twelfth. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. And I do appreciate 
that this is the second time we’ve had the pleasure of this 
conversation. It’s about the third time that I’ve had the pleasure 
of it. 
 
And I think part of the process is also important for the people 
that are watching and trying to understand how the finances of 
government work. So I think we have a responsibility to a 
broader audience as well. So I certainly don’t consider it 
repetitious in the sense that you and I may understand this very 
well, but I think other people are very appreciative of the 

opportunity to understand it. 
 
On the expenditure side, some of my colleagues, I think, want 
to ask individual questions in their own respective critic areas 
about individual departments, so I’ll stay away from that. 
 
I’d like to turn, if I could as well, in picking up the theme of 
cash flow. The other side of the equation, of course, we’re 
talking about expenditures. The other side of that equation is, of 
course, income. And I guess I would start off by asking, does 
the income stream move forward in pretty much a consistent 
basis of on a one-twelfth basis, and how does the overall cash 
flow — not looking at the individual departments but looking at 
the bigger picture, the General Revenue Fund — how does that 
translate in terms of a steady flow? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well I want to say first of all, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that I respect what the member is saying about the 
need to go over some of these questions that we’ve gone over 
before. And I think the member is right — that it’s good to go 
through the process and have a dialogue with all the people in 
the province that are watching and may be interested. 
 
I didn’t mean to suggest that the member’s questions are unduly 
repetitive just because they were asked last year, because I think 
the member is correct. We should have this discussion and 
make sure that we’re accountable in the sense that the procedure 
we’re following is the correct procedure. And sometimes it can 
be improved, and the member may have some suggestions for 
improvement, and I would welcome them because we can 
always do things better. 
 
To answer the question specifically, I’m advised by the officials 
that generally speaking we do get approximately one-twelfth of 
our revenue on a monthly basis throughout the year but not the 
same amount each and every month, and that we receive our 
instalments from the federal government, the provincial income 
tax and other federal payments that come back are in several 
instalments throughout the year. But generally speaking we 
receive roughly one-twelfth of our revenue each and every 
month throughout the year. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Minister, issues like personal income tax 
and things of that nature that essentially get filed once a year, 
what is the relationship with the federal government? I believe, 
of course, that the money is filed and processed through the 
federal government and then the money rebated, the provincial 
share of the income tax process would be rebated. Is that a 
pretty lump sum amount that comes in once a year because of 
the nature of the requirement of filing tax on an annual basis 
rather than on a monthly basis? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I would answer the question this way. That 
what the federal government does is not so much to look at the 
income tax that is now being completed for 1998 for example, 
they will throughout 1998 estimate what they think may be 
received from the people of the province who pay income tax 
throughout the year. And they, on the basis of that estimate, will 
send us a certain amount in instalments throughout the year. But 
they don’t really know what the amount of personal income tax 
or corporate income tax that may be paid will be, but they try to 
guess that, I guess, or estimate, is a better word. 
 



488 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 1999 

And then in the next year they will do the same thing. But at the 
same time, when they actually know how much provincial 
income tax has been paid in the year, they will on an ongoing 
basis adjust what they pay us. But they will not wait until they 
actually know what we're paying, to pay us. They’ll try to 
estimate it and then they will make adjustments on a 
year-to-year basis as time goes on. 
 
And I think what you see sometimes is a year or two after the 
fact, after the actual year, you’ll see them adjusting what we 
received for personal income tax or corporate income tax, and it 
has nothing to do with what’s actually happening in that current 
year. They’ll be making an adjustment for what may have 
happened a year or two ago. 
 
But that’s what they try to do. They make an estimate sort of 
going into the year. And throughout the year on the basis of that 
estimate they will give you a certain amount of what they think 
you will be collecting in that current year. But they will also 
add to that or subtract from it if they find out that their estimate 
for previous years was incorrect. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. And I know this isn’t 
Finance estimates but last year you undertook to give us a pretty 
detailed breakdown of your estimated income side, things on 
the small-business income tax, the corporate tax, and a 
breakdown in more detail than what is shown in the Estimate 
books. Would it be possible to ask for that breakdown again for 
the past year and for the year under review? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, certainly, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I don’t 
have that here with me today but we’ll undertake to produce 
that for the member, and to provide that to the member. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much. And when we look 
at the income side, would we be able to look at other sources of 
revenue, for example the Liquor and Gaming? And I recognize 
in the general revenue side the amount that you move into the 
General Revenue Fund is a decision in terms of what you want 
to transfer out of Liquor and Gaming fund if you like. Would 
you also be able to break down some of those numbers for us? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I’d like to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
any information, you know, within reason that can be produced, 
should be produced and provided to the member. 
 
And I do want to point out that on page 66 of the Budget 
Address book there is an estimate for all of the sources of 
revenue for the province broken down. And I won’t read it all, 
but it’s quite a long, lengthy list of everywhere that the revenue 
is expected to come from. 
 
And it estimates what we expect to receive form each type of 
tax: corporation capital tax, corporation income tax, fuel tax, 
individual income tax, sales tax, and so on. And then it shows 
what we got last year from that tax and also what we estimated 
a year ago. So those numbers are there. 
 
With respect to the Liquor and Gaming Authority dividend, 
there is a background or paper that came out with the budget 
that breaks down the Liquor and Gaming income into liquor 
operations, video lottery terminal funding, and the 
Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority. So in other words 

liquor, VLTs (video lottery terminal), and casino money. And it 
shows what is estimated to be received this year, what we 
actually received last year, the present forecast, which will of 
course be finalized when the Public Accounts are provided in 
August or September of this year, and what we budgeted last 
year. 
 
(1115) 
 
So the numbers are pretty much set out in the budget and in 
some of the background information. However there may be 
some additional detail that is required by the member. And any 
detail with respect to any of these sources of revenue that is not 
here that the member needs to have, I’d be happy to undertake 
upon a question about which detail is required, to get that 
information, and to provide it to the member. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Minister. Certainly 
we have no philosophical opposition to the needs of 
government functioning on an ongoing basis, and one-twelfth is 
certainly very appropriate. 
 
I guess a concern — we’re into April 9 already and this would 
be funds that would be required as of April 1, given that the 
operating year end is March 31. Is there any concern or is it 
repetitive in nature that you may have to, within two and a half 
weeks or so, have to come back for another one-twelfth for the 
month of May? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well that’s certainly a possibility. It will be 
determined by the House Leader from the government in 
co-operation with your party’s House Leader and the House 
Leader from the Liberal Party and also the independent 
members. I would say that last year for example we were doing 
the first Appropriation Bill on April 6, so we were through, I 
guess, three days ahead of today, and then the second was April 
28. 
 
So if we get toward the end of April and the budget is not 
passed, which would not be unusual, or the estimates are not 
passed, then we will probably be coming back for a second 
Appropriation Bill to make sure that we have funds for May and 
perhaps June for the organizations. 
 
And as the member knows, traditionally what we do in the first 
Appropriation Bill is agree to allocate one-twelfth of the money 
on an interim basis. And the second Appropriation Bill, which 
normally I see here in other years has come on April 28, April 
29, or May 2, or April 30 in past years, I think if we get to the 
end of the month and we haven’t passed the estimates, then we 
will again be asking the legislature to allocate probably another 
two-twelfths, as has traditionally been done. 
 
And I would imagine, subject to the agreement of all of our 
House leaders and the independent members of the legislature, 
that in the normal course of events would be what we would be 
asking. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much. Thank you, Minister. 
On the general tone that . . . with that information you’ve 
undertaken to provide supplies me with the information I need. 
I now defer to my colleagues with some specific answer to 
question. 



April 9, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 489 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and 
Mr. Minister. Welcome to your officials as well. A few 
questions this morning, Mr. Minister, on the two areas of both 
education K to 12 and post-secondary area as well. 
 
You’ve mentioned, Mr. Minister, I believe you’ve mentioned it 
last year as well and I know in education estimates last year 
with the now Health minister but former Education minister, we 
raised the issue on behalf . . . or I raised the issue on behalf of 
boards of education as to a way of improving the situation that 
we’re in right now. 
 
And I’m just going to indicate to anyone who is watching right 
now, the process that boards of education do undertake, and the 
government’s fiscal year of course beginning as you’ve 
indicated on April 1. 
 
Boards of education find that already in the month of April 
they’re four-tenths of the way through their expenses for the 
calendar year. And that’s the difference, Mr. Minister. 
 
As I indicated to you last year, boards of education operate on 
the calendar year, and the government operates on the fiscal 
year April 1 to March 31. And what has been happening, Mr. 
Minister, as you’re well aware of, is that many boards of 
education are in a position of not having large surpluses to rely 
on, on the fact that they could use surplus money to operate. 
They are in fact overdrawn at their financial institutions. 
 
So as a result of having had to pay January expenses, and 
March and April and very soon May expenses, they’re 
four-tenths, because of course not a large amount of expenses in 
the months of July and August. And they’ve had to spend 40 
per cent of their revenue. And when we look at ways of 
improving, Mr. Minister — and I know your response last year 
was, well we can look at that, and I think the Minister of 
Education said we can look at that as well — is there a process 
that we can alleviate the financial burden on boards of 
education? 
 
Because we’re looking at a one-twelfth expenditure. I’m sure 
that the Department of Education is going to be transferring 
one-twelfth. And that one-twelfth is actually making up for the 
expenses of January. And they’re still going to be behind 
significantly. 
 
Has your department or has your department in co-operation 
with the Department of Education made any progress in trying 
to alleviate the financial pressure on boards of education? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — The answer to the member’s question, Mr. 
Chair, is yes. We have taken steps to resolve the issue raised by 
the member. And I want to compliment the member, because I 
do recall last year that the member raised this same issue. And 
partly as a result of the member’s intervention — but there was 
also other concern, but certainly the member deserves some 
credit — we were able to come up with the solution to this, 
which is an interim solution. Perhaps we would want to have a 
legislative change. 
 
But what we did was this. Basically the member is correct that 
because the school year, the fiscal year of the school starts in 
January but we don’t start paying them the foundation operating 

grant until April, they’re relying on a line of credit and therefore 
paying interest because they don’t have the money from us. 
And that is still the case. 
 
But what we do . . . what we did last year and what we will do 
again this year is that when we get into the April, May, and 
June period, we will accelerate some of the money that we give 
them, so that we will pay them two-twelfths of the foundation 
operating grant in April and four-twelfths in mid-May. So that 
if you can follow this reasoning, by the time they’re four and a 
half months into their fiscal year, they will have received at 
least six months of their operating grant money. So that they get 
some of their money early and thereby are able to take 
advantage of some interest they could get on some of that 
money plus have some interest savings at that time. The 
objective is that they come out of it even. In other words, they 
lose a little bit, yes, in January to March because they’re 
borrowing money and paying interest, but then they gain in 
April, May because we give them some of their money early. 
 
And I think that, and I’m told, that this will save the school 
boards and be a cost to the province, if you will, about $800,000 
a year in interest costs. Now I’m not sure that this is a final 
solution in the sense that if there were changes to the legislation 
to incorporate this, then we wouldn’t have to use this system. 
But until there’s legislative change, we are thinking that we will 
use this system to try to, in effect, pay them back the interest 
that they pay at the beginning of the fiscal year. 
 
And I’m sorry that that’s slightly complex by necessity, but I’ve 
tried to express it in relatively easy to follow terms and again, I 
do thank the member for raising it. I undertook to try to deal 
with it and with the then minister of Education, we were able to 
come up with this solution. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minster. I 
appreciate that comment because even though it is a complex 
situation, I’m sure boards of education and the administrators 
and directors of boards of education will understand your 
comments very well. 
 
And if indeed that type of process is going to be put in place 
that will result in interest savings to boards of education, they 
will be appreciative of that because, as you are aware, Mr. 
Minister, education dollars are very, very tight and when we 
start to look at being able to reduce costs that are not in the 
control of the board of education, they’re in, in your control and 
the Department of Education. I thank you for that. And I’m sure 
boards of education will appreciate that very much. 
 
Mr. Minister, one other area in the K to 12 funding, of course, 
deals with capital expenditures. The minister, the current 
Minister of Education, indicated that — I think about two 
weeks ago — that the request for capital projects in 
Saskatchewan is, you know, unbelievable in terms of the 
numbers and the amount of dollars required to satisfy those 
requests. There isn’t enough money in the education capital 
budget to satisfy them. And there maybe isn’t even enough 
money in the entire process of capital . . . in government to 
satisfy that. 
 
He also indicated at that time, I think, that six major projects 
were probably going to be awarded this year and about a 



490 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 1999 

hundred what he referred to as minor projects that will be dealt 
with. So a significant number of projects. And I guess when we 
look at a one-twelfth allocation which will include of course 
one-twelfth for capital, and being that the capital budget for K 
to 12 education is only $24 million, that’s not a significant 
amount. 
 
And I know boards of education have lobbied your department, 
Mr. Minister, and the Department of Education, for years now 
to be up front with their allocations and their . . . sorry, not 
allocations but their announcements of capital projects so they 
can get engineers put in place and the architects put in place and 
get busy, get busy now. 
 
Will the one-twelfth funding restrict the capital announcements 
from the facilities department? Or will there be a process in 
place that will allow all of the announcements to take place, and 
is this a sufficient amount of funding for those capital projects? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well I think there’s two questions there. 
One is with respect to the process and whether they can proceed 
to do what they need to do to get ready with the one-twelfth. 
And then the second part of the question is, is the $24 million in 
capital money sufficient. Maybe the member wasn’t asking the 
second question. 
 
But if he’s more interested in whether the process, the 
one-twelfth, is sufficient, we’re advised by the Department of 
Education that yes, it is sufficient; that the capital projects will 
not depend upon all of the money for the capital projects being 
made available to those school boards that are undertaking them 
all at one time as long as they have the approval through the 
process whereby they prioritize the projects and decide which 
they’re going to do. 
 
If the school board has the approval for that project, the school 
board will proceed to hire the, you know, consultants and 
architects and engineers or contractors, whoever is required to 
go ahead with it. They won’t need to have 100 per cent of the 
funding to pay for it in order to proceed. The Department of 
Education says that if they get the one-twelfth allocation to 
them, they can work with the school boards to have those 
projects that should proceed go ahead. And as the member says, 
I think there’s roughly somewhat over a hundred of them — a 
smaller number of them being major — and as the member 
says, I think about a hundred of them being more of a . . . under 
a hundred thousand dollar type of price range. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. You alluded to a 
second part of my question. And I think you agree — and I 
wasn’t asking for you to confirm what the Education ministers 
have said — because the Education minister has said very 
clearly that 24.2 million isn’t enough for capital. And I mean, I 
know you agree with that, and we have to move in that area 
very quickly because when we look at the fact that your 
government was spending 70 million on capital — both capital 
and interest — back in 1991-92 and 60-some million in ’92-93, 
that’s not sufficient when we look at an overall budget of both 
interest and capital being only 30 million this year. 
 
So the other question though — and I think you’ve clarified it 
too somewhat, Mr. Minister, is — my question was regarding 
whether or not the one-twelfth is a sufficient amount to 

announce all of the capital projects now or indeed will they 
have to delay some of the capital projects into the summer? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, well my answer is that the one-twelfth 
— and if there’s a second appropriation Bill, another 
two-twelfths, whatever — will be sufficient to allow the 
Department of Education to do what they normally do. They 
can go through the process of prioritization. I frankly don’t 
know where they’re at in that process; that would be a detailed 
question for the Minister of Education, although I’d be happy to 
undertake to get more information for the member. 
 
But the long and the short of it is they go through the process, 
they can proceed, and the one-twelfth appropriation will not 
prevent them from proceeding in the normal way that they 
proceed each and every year. And that’s what we want them to 
do. 
 
(1130) 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister, just a 
couple short questions in the area of post-secondary education, 
if we could turn to that, Mr. Minister. You’ve indicated of 
course, that one-twelfth of the amount necessary in all of 
post-secondary is going to be allocated. 
 
When we look at post-secondary of course, we’re talking about 
the universities, and we’re talking about regional colleges, 
SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology), and a number of issues. Some have received 
additional funding by way of the budget, some have not. And 
we have seen now reports of course from the university of 
Saskatoon . . . Saskatchewan, the University of Regina, 
whereby tuition fees are expected to increase significantly. 
 
With the allocation of one-twelfth, Mr. Minister, what kind of 
process do you see happening or occurring at the university 
levels; and I guess at the SIAST level as well, even though the 
SIAST amount of funding has been increased by about $4 
million. But when we look at the University of Regina, just as 
one specific example, we only see an increase over . . . an 
annual increase of only about $600,000 in operating for the 
entire University of Regina operating expenses. 
 
How do you expect the university to be able to cope now as 
well with the fact that they are only are going to be getting a 
one-twelfth allocation of expenses? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I appreciate the way 
in which the member has put the question because I think it 
reminds us of something we need to remind ourselves of, and 
that is when we’re talking about post-secondary education, I 
find quite often — not the member, because his question refers 
to SIAST and the regional colleges and so on — but I find quite 
often in the public or the media, they’re only focusing on 
universities, the University of Saskatchewan and the University 
of Regina. 
 
And that’s just part of post-secondary education as the member 
knows in this sense. But I know that when I graduated from 
high school, I believe that about 15 to 20 per cent of the 
graduating class attended university, mostly at the University of 
Saskatchewan. And that tells me, obviously, and I think about 



April 9, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 491 

20 per cent of our population gets a university degree, but 80 
per cent of the people do not. But they are going to need to be 
trained and educated and get jobs, work, and support their 
families also. 
 
And they get their training through the SIAST, the regional 
colleges, the apprenticeship, the JobStart, and Future Skills. 
And the reason I like the way the member put the question is 
he’s referring to the whole system and not just the universities. 
And please, no one should misunderstand me. The universities 
are important parts, very vital parts of the post-secondary 
education system, but so are SIAST and the regional colleges, 
the apprenticeship programs, and so on, that serve all of the 
people that need to be trained. 
 
Having said that, in answer to the member’s question, I’d like to 
say last year the SIAST and regional colleges did not get very 
large increases at all in last year’s budget. The universities at 
that time got a 5 per cent increase to operating, and I believe a 
very, very large increase in capital. 
 
Now it is true that this year the universities are getting a smaller 
increase in operating but they’re still getting a large 
commitment on the capital side, and SIAST and the regional 
colleges are getting a larger increase. And there has been some 
complaint about that, but last year the situation was reversed. 
The universities got more and SIAST and the regional colleges 
got less. So we have to try to support all of these institutions as 
best we can with the funds we have available. 
 
In answer to the member’s specific question, will the 
one-twelfth allocation to post-secondary institutions enable 
them to deal with their tuition situation, the one-twelfth 
allocation will not speak directly to that issue one way or the 
other. They will be looking at the total allocation of money that 
they will receive and then making a decision as to what they 
need to do on the tuition side. If we allocate the one-twelfth to 
post-secondary education today, that will not impact, I would 
suggest, one way or the other what the institutions would do on 
tuition, although I will concede to the member that certainly the 
amount of the operating grant may. 
 
Having said that, we have to remember that last year when the 
universities received the 5 per cent increase they still found it 
necessary in the case of the University of Saskatchewan to 
increase tuition by, I think, about 6.9 per cent; in the case of the 
University of Regina, about 2 per cent. 
 
What I’d like to do quite frankly is to, you know, have some 
discussion with the universities about the level of tuition fee 
increases that they need to have going into the future, and I 
hope that it’s not too much. 
 
There has to be some discussion and dialogue, I think, at the 
level of the board of governors of the two institutions and 
perhaps between the institutions and the Post-Secondary 
Education department as to what their ongoing needs are. And 
we have to be cognizant of the tuition fee situation. At the same 
time we have to recognize that just because we give an increase, 
it does not necessarily mean no tuition fee increase because we 
don’t directly control that process. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. You know you’ve 

raised a lot of concerns and I know we’ll be dealing with them 
in the estimates in Post-Secondary. And I’m not going to get 
into all those kinds of things right now because there are a 
number of questions that have to be asked regarding the whole 
process. I mean, we’re looking at an 8 per cent suggestion for 
tuition fees across the universities. That is a huge increase and I 
think we’re starting to see the backlash from students. 
 
One question yet, Mr. Minister, and that is in the area of also 
. . . I think all students, as you’ve indicated — not the 25 per 
cent only that go to universities, but those who attend regional 
colleges and SIAST, etc., rely on student aid . . . the student 
assistance fund. And this year in your budget, Mr. Minister, 
you’ve indicated that that amount of money that’s going to be 
spent on student financial aid is being reduced by $1 million, 
the amount from last year to this year. 
 
And when we look at a one-twelfth expenditure, I wonder, you 
know, for your Appropriation Bill, Mr. Minister, two questions. 
One, how will students who require additional funding . . . 
probably because of projected 8 per cent rate increases in tuition 
fees and cost of living increasing, etc., students will require 
more money. We know that there are students right now who 
are not accessing the student aid because of limitations on 
family income, and there needs to be a broadening of that 
program. I think the Minister of Post-Secondary Education has 
alluded to that already. 
 
And on the other side, your government has chosen to reduce 
the aid to students by $1 million. How does that all tie together 
with the fact that now also you’re asking for only a one-twelfth 
allocation of expenditures for a year in which the old 
expenditures in the student aid are much higher? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well I want to say to the member, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that when you’re dealing with the issues of 
student aid you can’t simply look at the estimates that are 
coming from the General Revenue Fund, because there is 
another fund which is the Student Aid Fund, which is outside of 
the General Revenue Fund in the sense that there is a fund of 
money sitting there to provide student support. And I will get 
the member the exact numbers. 
 
But I had a conversation just as a matter of fact with the deputy 
minister of Post-Secondary Education yesterday. And in fact he 
pointed out to me that we will be this year putting considerably 
more money into student support programs than we did last 
year. I don’t recall the exact amount but I believe it was in the 
range of something approaching 8, 9, $10 million more into 
student aid. 
 
And the reason that that is not reflected in the estimates is 
because more money will be drawn down from the Student Aid 
Fund to give to students than perhaps was the case last year, and 
less money from the General Revenue Fund. But the point is the 
total amount of money that will go to students will be 
considerably higher this year than last year, and that’s why in 
the budget speech I referred to more support for students. 
 
And there are two specific areas that we’ve been concentrating 
on last year and this year. The first is students who have 
dependants — they may be spouses; they may be children. But 
the amount of living allowance that those people receive has 



492 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 1999 

gone up. 
 
And the second thing that we’ve done last year and this year is 
to look at students on the basis of need. And if they are needy in 
the sense that their expenses are higher and their income is 
lower, we increase the amount of money they get by way of 
bursary. And if my memory serves me correctly, I believe there 
can be bursaries of up to $3,500 for 6,000 students — 
something like that. 
 
And we want to keep building on that. Next year as I 
understand it, the federal government’s millennium scholarship 
money is also becoming available, and we may be able to build 
on that some more. 
 
But the simple answer to the question is, although the estimates 
show that out of the General Revenue Fund may be somewhat 
less money going to student aid, overall relying on the Student 
Aid Fund which exists, more money will be going into student 
loans and student support. 
 
And I might also indicate that I was advised by the deputy 
minister of Post-Secondary Education yesterday that the 
Saskatchewan program for support to students he thought was 
second to none in the country; that we were providing as good a 
program as anywhere else in the country and better than most. 
That’s the information I have. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I think you’ve 
indicated some areas that we need to explore with the Minister 
of Post-Secondary Education. If indeed the Estimates are not a 
complete document, we will have to have much more 
information from the Minister of Post-Secondary Education, 
and as I indicated earlier, from the Minister of K to 12 
Education. 
 
With that, I’d like to thank you for answering the questions that 
I have posed to you this morning. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good morning to 
the minister and his officials. 
 
And I note that as we moved into the budget the issue arose as 
to whether we would continue to link our income tax rates to 
the federal government. Of course the province of Quebec has 
an independent income tax, and now Alberta and possibly other 
provinces are moving in that direction. 
 
I note that the minister gave an indication that Saskatchewan 
was considering that. And if I may in preface to the minister say 
that there is nothing necessarily wrong with us having an 
independent income tax Act and formulation, that would not 
simply be a marginal rate for the federal tax. 
 
But I have to ask the Minister of Finance if one of his concerns 
is that under the present system, when the federal government 
reduces its income tax, the Saskatchewan tax has automatically 
and unilaterally also been lowered, as happened in February. 
We hear that the federal government is committed to long-range 
reductions in income tax. 
 
Is the Minister of Finance’s concern here that Ottawa is 
embarked on lowering the federal income tax and he wants to 

make sure that Saskatchewan taxpayers don’t receive a benefit 
therefrom and that that is why he is looking at de-linkage. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — No. In a word, no. That is not our concern. 
It never has been our concern and it isn’t the concern of any 
other province in Canada. 
 
For the information of the member, the idea of de-linking the 
provincial income tax system from the federal income tax 
system is something that all of the provinces have been working 
on for several years, I think going back probably to the mid 
1980s. 
 
And in December of 1997, the provinces received permission 
from Paul Martin, the federal Finance minister, and the federal 
government to de-link their tax systems from Ottawa as early as 
the year 2001. 
 
And as the member has correctly pointed out, the province of 
Alberta has already announced that they are going to do that in 
the year 2002. And I understand that some other provinces have 
expressed an interest in doing this as well, particularly the 
western provinces. And our province is no exception. 
 
I have expressed an interest and our government has expressed 
an interest in de-linking our system from the federal system. 
Not in the same way that Quebec has done, because Quebec has 
set up their own . . . they’ve always had their own, I think, 
administration of income tax; we do not want that. So that 
there’s no misunderstanding, we want Revenue Canada to still 
administer the income tax system and collect taxes on behalf of 
Saskatchewan residents. 
 
If the federal government reduces income taxation, as they did 
in the recent federal budget, we welcome that. We think that as 
the fiscal situation not only of Saskatchewan but Canada 
improves, to have some income tax relief for Canadians, and in 
particular middle-income Canadians, is welcome. And I have 
made that statement on several occasions. 
 
We have no objection whatsoever to the recent tax reduction 
from the federal government which also results in a tax 
reduction at the provincial level. That is not our concern and we 
would not be talking about de-linking out of that concern 
because we really haven’t been concerned about it. We have 
welcomed it. 
 
Our concern is along other lines and in particular that we have 
had to buy into, if you will, a very complex income tax system 
which is designed for all of Canada which has meant that . . . 
and not just Saskatchewan but every province in order to have 
the kind of taxation system they think is fair and reasonable for 
their particular province, each province has had to have an array 
of tax, complicated tax reductions scenarios — and anybody 
filling out their income tax form will know what I’m talking 
about — and a complex system of surtaxes. 
 
(1145) 
 
The reason we have those things in Canada, whether 
Saskatchewan, Manitoba, Alberta, British Columbia, or any 
other province, other than Quebec which has their own system, 
is because we’re required to do things in that way by Ottawa 



April 9, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 493 

pursuant to the agreement we have with Ottawa. And we value, 
I should say, a co-operative relationship with the federal 
government. And I think the federal government is being 
co-operative with the provinces in the sense of saying we can 
allow you to go to a simpler system. 
 
The reason we would want to go to a tax-on-income system as 
opposed to a tax on federal tax system which we have now, is 
because it could be simpler, easier for people to understand. We 
think perhaps it could be fairer. And I have said publicly this 
week to the chamber of commerce in Saskatoon when I spoke 
to them on Wednesday I believe it was, that we also believe that 
if we reformed our income tax system to go to a tax-on-income 
system, we would probably have to couple that with a tax 
reduction. 
 
Because the experience in other jurisdictions, including the 
proposal in Alberta, is that you have to save some flexibility to 
cut taxes when you’re de-link and bring in a new system so that 
you can ensure that everybody gets some kind of benefit from 
the new tax system. 
 
That would also be the objective of this government. We have 
no intention whatsoever and no desire to go to a new system 
that will increase taxes for people. We want to decrease taxes. 
But we also believe that if we de-linked from Ottawa, we could 
have a simpler and fairer tax system. That is the objective. 
 
So I thank the member for the question and I hope I have 
clearly set out the objectives that we have in this regard. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Yes, Mr. Chairman. I was somewhat reassured 
to hear those answers. So you are saying then very clearly that it 
is not the intention of Saskatchewan to set up its own 
bureaucracy to administer income tax collection. I want to 
confirm that. 
 
And the other thing is: would you also then confirm that as the 
federal government reduces income tax, that there will be 
commensurate reductions of the provincial level? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, very briefly. We are supportive of the 
notion that the federal government should be collecting the tax, 
as it is now. We have absolutely no interest whatsoever in 
setting up a new provincial agency or bureaucracy to collect 
income tax. We want that to continue to be done at the federal 
level and with that we are in agreement with what the federal 
government also wants. They want to simplify things by trying 
to help one administration to collect not only the income tax but 
I think they’re interested in expanding that, and conceptually 
we have no problem with that subject to agreement on any 
details but to answer the question this way, we are not 
interested in increasing the provincial bureaucracy or the civil 
service to collect income tax. We want to work co-operatively 
with the federal government as we have done, I guess, for 
several decades. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, I’m also pleased to hear the 
point about simplifying income tax and, of course, we got into 
the graduated income tax on the theory that it would be socially 
more fair. Now we’ve ended up with a system that is not only 
complicated, but some economists argue it isn’t even 
particularly fair. 

It strikes me that one of the reasons we’ve gotten into this is 
that we use income tax for social purposes as well as for the 
obvious purpose of raising revenue for the government. I mean, 
the first purpose of income tax is to . . . to have all citizens 
contribute according to, or commensurate with their income. 
 
But there’s a secondary purpose and that is that we have used 
the Income Tax Act to encourage various good measures 
whether it is movie production, or donation to a favourite 
charity, or whatever. 
 
Is the Minister saying that we ought to be moving away from 
using income tax for social purposes as opposed to revenue 
collection? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — No, I’m not saying that. I think that any 
taxation system, whether it’s a sales tax, income tax, or 
otherwise, will have the purpose of collecting revenue for the 
needs of the people of the province — whether it’s health, 
education, highways, or whatever. And at the same time, any 
taxation system should be designed with several issues in mind: 
one of them being social policy; one of them being fairness; one 
of them being competitiveness; one of them being economic 
development and so on. 
 
And there are an array of issues that have to be considered when 
we’re developing our taxation policy and I don’t think that will 
ever cease to be the case. I think that’s always been the case and 
I think it always will be the case. You can’t make decisions 
about taxation without trying to take into account all of the 
impacts that that may have on society, on the ability of society 
to have an education system, an health care system, a highways 
system, or to achieve any of the other objectives that the 
member is referring to. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — On budget day, I submitted a written question 
asking if the government could provide any information on the 
effects of cross-border shopping on this province. And of 
course the answer came back that no, we’ve done no work in 
that area. So I have to ask the Minister if not, why not? And 
will he consider undertaking that? 
 
And of course the government has said that now moving the 
provincial sales tax to 6 per cent makes us actually among the 
lowest, if not the lowest, of all the sales taxes in the country. 
 
Coming from the western side of the province I appreciate that. 
But of course the difficulty is that we live next door to a 
tax-free province. And for businesses, especially in the western 
strip of the province, this is a tremendous problem. 
 
I have to concede, Mr. Chairman, that if Saskatchewan was 
located anywhere else in the country, a 6 per cent sales tax 
wouldn’t look too bad. But pending a move of the province to 
some other locale, the reality is we’re here and we live next 
door to a tax-free jurisdiction and that is putting enormous 
pressure as you know on small business especially. 
 
So I have to come back to it and ask the Minister: why have we 
not done some work to see what is the net impact? I also want 
to know not only what we are losing in shopping revenue — 
retail revenue — but I also want to know if it might be that we 
have fewer people leaving the province to make their purchases 



494 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 1999 

as a result of the three point reduction in the sales tax. 
 
If I may in that regard, Mr. Chairman, note that when we had 
the two point reduction in the sales tax, there was the forecast of 
I believe $160 million of revenue that would be lost to the 
provincial government. That was the forecast in the budget. 
When the year ended in fact we had lost about half of that. We 
did far better on revenue from provincial sales tax than what we 
had forecast. 
 
Now there’s one of two possible explanations. The one would 
be that we had a good retail sales year and so an increase in 
retail sales accounted for the additional revenue. But there’s 
another possible or related explanation and that is that in the 
western part of the province we simply had more people who 
were no longer taking the drive of an hour or two into Alberta 
and so all that really happened is more of our people were 
staying home. 
 
And I want to know if the government has done any work on 
that; or if the answer’s no, if they would undertake some studies 
on that to see the economic impact of cross-border shopping. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I thank the 
member for his comments and there are various questions in 
there. 
 
Part of the difficulty I guess, and it certainly is not any attempt 
to evade the question of the member, but I acknowledge the 
member did ask, for example, what would be the amount of 
money that people would spend buying their fuel in another 
province? 
 
And the difficulty is, you could spend more money sort of 
monitoring people going, coming back across the border from 
Alberta or Manitoba or wherever they are and how much gas 
they bought while they were in another province than it would 
be worth in the sense that we’re not going to start stopping 
vehicles and asking them how much fuel they bought in another 
province or how many goods they bought in another province 
and so on just because (a) it wouldn’t be welcome I think by the 
residents of the province, and (b) it wouldn’t be a very good 
way to spend our money. 
 
So not to evade the question, but I’m saying to the member I 
don’t think we should be hiring people to keep track of how 
much gas and how many goods people are buying in other 
provinces. 
 
But I’d like to go on and say to the member this isn’t just a 
one-way street. And if you go to the city of Yorkton for 
example, where I sometimes go and I’m sure the member goes 
there on occasion too, you will see at the Superstore in Yorkton 
or at the mall at Yorkton many cars from eastern Manitoba, 
people that live in smaller communities in Manitoba that come 
into Saskatchewan to shop. 
 
And so that you lose some revenue I suppose when people are 
driving in other provinces and purchasing goods in other 
provinces as they will and as they should, because this a free 
country where we visit our friends and relatives in other 
provinces and they visit us, and it will always be that way and 
so it should. 

And our people will go shopping because, unlike me, some 
people do enjoy the activity of shopping and think that’s 
actually an enjoyable activity, which I don’t. They’ll do it in 
other provinces and they’ll do it in Saskatchewan. But where 
we lose in some ways, I think we gain in others. 
 
Now to move on to another aspect of the question, the member 
alluded to the fact that our sales tax is now the lowest of any 
province with a sales tax — of course Alberta has none, 
although they have health care premiums — and it is the lowest 
sales tax. But more significantly I think it is a sales tax in 
Saskatchewan on the narrowest range of goods. 
 
When we had . . . Well I’ll just put it this way. Manitoba has I 
think now a 7 per cent sales tax, but it is on many, many goods. 
And the average amount of money that the average person will 
spend in Manitoba in a year in sales tax will be somewhat 
higher — the material actually is in the budget book — on sales 
tax than a resident of Saskatchewan will because they charge 
sales tax on many things that we don’t. 
 
For example if you were a two-income family in Winnipeg 
earning $50,000 a year with two people working and you had 
two children, in Winnipeg it is estimated that your retail sales 
tax would be $886 — that’s what the average family might pay. 
In Saskatoon that would be $613. 
 
But to go on to the next aspect of the member’s question, the 
answer to the question whether the reduction in sales tax is 
totally responsible for an increase in retail sales is a very 
complex answer. And when you talk to the economists of which 
I think we have some very good ones that work in the 
Department of Finance, and the reason I think they’re fairly 
good is consistently when they’ve told us what they think is 
going to happen, they’ve turned out to be fairly accurate. They 
do a good job. 
 
But they tell me, and I accept their advice and others outside the 
government have told me, that the level of retail sales depends 
on many, many factors, including just how the economy is 
doing for a variety of reasons. And a retail sales tax cut is 
certainly a positive factor which will encourage people to buy 
more but it’s not the only factor. Now having said that, it’s my 
hope and I know it’s the member’s hope, that the reduction of 
the tax will encourage economic activity, retail sales, and so on. 
And that that will have a positive impact in the economy. 
 
To quantify that is very, very difficult not just for me, but 
actually for anybody because I’m not sure that there’s anybody 
in the province who can come forward and say that a cut in the 
retail sales tax will mean X dollars more retail sales and X per 
cent more in terms of economic activity. Personally, my opinion 
is that things like farm commodity prices and oil prices will 
have a much bigger impact in the sense that what we really need 
right now, or as soon as we can in Saskatchewan, is higher oil 
prices, higher grain prices, higher beef prices, higher hog prices, 
and so on. That’s what we need; that’s what we’re all hoping 
for. 
 
The sales tax cut, don’t misunderstand me, I think it’s positive, 
I think it’s good, I think it will help. But I think we need a lot 
more other things to happen as well. 
 



April 9, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 495 

The Chair: — Order, order. Before we proceed I just want to 
caution the members — I don’t want to restrict the questioning 
in any way — the members and the minister, that we seem to be 
pushing the borders of interim supply here to the limit. And I 
must remind you we are in interim supply, and estimates will be 
along later where you can get into the detail a little better. So I 
just remind members of that. 
 
(1200) 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to 
push the borders maybe to Medicine Hat. However. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I’d just like then to thank the minister for his answers. 
I’d like to say that I’m very much aware that Yorkton being on 
the eastern . . . near the eastern border, is of anything a benefit 
to that community, and I’m glad for them. I know that being 
near the border is no detriment to Yorkton’s growth 
whatsoever. 
 
However the sad and tragic fact is that being near the western 
border of our province is frankly a detriment to business and 
investment. And on behalf of my constituents, in the most 
non-partisan of spirit, I want to say thank you for getting the 
sales tax down those three points. I think that has had a 
beneficial effect and my constituents are grateful for it. 
 
However, that said, there are too many of my constituents who 
are now doing the mental arithmetic of what costs here versus 
there. And as I say, maybe if we were located some other place 
in Canada, it wouldn’t be as much of a problem. But we’re 
located where we are and we have the neighbours we have, and 
the developments we see going on in Alberta now are causing 
many, many people, especially in western Saskatchewan, to do 
some thinking that is not beneficial to our growth and 
development and people staying home and shopping here. 
 
So I just ask you to stay on top of the fact that there are some 
special challenges for those of us who live in the western part of 
our province. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I thank the member 
for his questions and I would just say that I think that what 
we’re doing is good in terms of the west side of the province in 
this sense, that we’ve reduced the sales tax from 9 per cent to 6 
per cent. The member has acknowledged that that makes a 
difference; and on the income tax side we are undertaking a 
review and we have some plans that I’ve discussed with the 
members. So those are very positive developments, I think. I 
think there’s some solace there for the member. 
 
And beyond that, I would just say that when you look at 
Saskatchewan as a place to live and all of the taxes and all of 
the living costs — I won’t go into all the details, although they 
are at pages 48 and 49 of the budget booklet; they’re set out 
there — Saskatchewan still remains a very, very good place to 
live and very competitive with respect to most places in the 
country. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
move resolution no. 2: 
 

That towards making good the supply granted to Her 
Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of the 
public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 2000, 
the sum of $387.646 million be granted out of the General 
Revenue Fund. 
 

And if I can just say, before you call the vote on that resolution, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to thank the members opposite for 
their questions and their co-operation with respect to the interim 
supply. And I’d like to also thank the officials from the 
Department of Finance for the work they do throughout the 
year, but also for their assistance here today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the resolutions be 
now read the first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the resolutions read a first and second 
time. 
 

APPROPRIATION BILL 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, I 
move: 
 

That Bill No. 24, An Act for granting to Her Majesty 
certain sums of Money for the Public Service for the Fiscal 
Year ending on March 31, 2000, be now introduced and 
read the first time. 
 

Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 
first time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly and 
under rule 55(2) I move that the Bill be now read a second and 
third time. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 
second and third time and passed under its title. 
 

ROYAL ASSENT 
 

At 12:10 p.m. His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber, took his seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 
to the following Bill: 
 
Bill No. 24 - An Act for granting to Her Majesty certain 

sums of Money for the Public Service for the 
Fiscal Year ending on March 31, 2000 

 
His Honour: — In her Majesty’s name, I thank the Legislative 
Assembly, accept their benevolence, and assent to this Bill. 
 
His Honour retired from the Chamber at 12:12 p.m. 
 
The Speaker: — And before adjourning the House, the Chair 



496 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 1999 

wishes for all hon. members an enjoyable time, a relaxing time, 
in your own constituencies and with your families this 
weekend. Have a good weekend and see you on Monday 
afternoon when the House will reconvene at 1:30. 
 
This House now stands adjourned . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Yes, and a happy Easter to those celebrating the orthodox 
rite this weekend. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:13 p.m. 
 
 



 

 


