





























































Hansard: December 10, 1999


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 105 
 December 10, 1999 
 
The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I have a petition to present on behalf of people who 
feel that the current automobile insurance Act infringes on their 
rights. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to repeal the provision of the 
personal injuries benefits contained in the automobile 
insurance Act and adopt a return to an add-on insurance 
system that would provide benefits on a no-fault basis to 
all victims without taking away the innocent victim’s right 
to seek compensation from the person responsible for the 
accident, but with appropriate modifications to reduce 
overall personal injury costs. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures to this petition this morning are 
from the communities of Bienfait and Estevan. I so present. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too stand 
today to present petitions on behalf of Saskatchewan citizens 
concerned about the provisions of the automobile insurance 
Act. The petition reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

That your Hon. Assembly may be pleased to repeal the 
provision of the personal injuries benefits contained in the 
automobile insurance Act and adopt a return to an add-on 
insurance system that would provide benefits on a no-fault 
basis to all victims without taking away the innocent 
victim’s right to seek compensation from the person 
responsible for the accident, but with appropriate 
modifications to reduce overall personal injury cost. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The petitioners on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from Swift 
Current and Estevan.  
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am also honoured 
today to be able to present a petition from the people from Swift 
Current and Estevan regarding no-fault insurance: 

 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to repeal the provisions of the 
personal injury benefits contained in the automobile 
insurance Act and adopt the return to an add-on insurance 
system that would provide benefits on a no-fault basis to 
all victims without taking away the innocent victim’s right 
to seek compensation from the person responsible for the 
accident, but with the appropriate modifications to reduce 
overall personal injury costs. 

The petition is signed by the good folks of Estevan. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is with great 
responsibility that I present a petition respecting the automobile 
insurance Act. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to repeal the provisions of the 
personal injury benefits contained in the automobile 
insurance Act and adopt a return to an add-on insurance 
system that would provide benefits at a no-fault basis to all 
victims without taking away the innocent victim’s rights to 
seek compensation from the persons responsible for the 
accident, but with the appropriate modifications to reduce 
overall personal injury costs. 

 
This petition is signed by the good folks of Estevan. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a petition to 
present to this House on behalf of the citizens of Saskatchewan: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to repeal the provisions of the 
personal injury benefits contained in the automobile 
insurance Act and adopt a return to an add-on insurance 
system that would provide benefits on a no-fault basis to 
all victims without taking away the innocent victim’s right 
to seek compensation from the person responsible for the 
accident, but with the appropriate modifications to reduce 
overall personal injury costs. 

 
The petitioners are from Swift Current, Estevan, and Saskatoon. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the petitions presented at the last 
sitting have been reviewed and found to be in order. Pursuant to 
rule 12(7) these petitions are hereby received, of citizens of the 
province petitioning the Assembly with respect to repealing the 
personal injury benefits contained in The Automobile Accident 
Insurance Act. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
to everyone in the Assembly, I’d like to introduce some very 
special people in the opposition gallery. My husband, Martin, is 
there; his brother, James, and his wife, Dianne, from BC 
(British Columbia) and their two daughters, Brenda and Lynn. 
 
Their family left Saskatchewan 10 years to get a job outside of 
this province like many people and they’re back right now for 
their son’s graduation. He’ll be graduating from the RCMP 
(Royal Canadian Mounted Police) on Monday. So I’d like 
everyone to welcome them to the Assembly and back to 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



106 Saskatchewan Hansard December 10, 1999 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s not very often 
that we get guests all the way from Prince Albert. So today, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s a special pleasure to introduce five guests from our 
area. 
 
First of all I want to introduce our constituency assistant, Rose 
Rothenburger, who is here with us today. Rose has been keenly 
interested in the political events in this province and is tuned in 
to us at the constituency office ordinarily at this time. I’m glad 
to see her here. And with her is Barb Falman-Martin, who is 
from Rosthern, and they’re both here to attend the SAHO 
(Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations) 
convention. 
 
While I’m introducing them, Mr. Speaker, I want to introduce 
three other guests in your gallery, three people I’ve associated 
with for some time, Stan Loewen, Dave Koester, and Trevor 
Klassen people prominent in business and political life in Prince 
Albert. And would all guests please welcome these five people 
to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I 
consider this next group, or at least this class, are regular 
visitors to the Legislative Assembly. And I would draw your 
attention, sir, to a group of grade 12 students who are seated in 
the west gallery. They’re from Balfour Collegiate and they’re 
accompanied here by their teacher Karen Scherle. I had the 
opportunity to meet with them before the session started today, 
and they had lots of good questions, like they do every year, 
and they take a keen interest in what we do here. And I would 
ask all members to make them feel very welcome here today. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, . . . and while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I 
wonder if I might just draw your attention and other members to 
two gentlemen who are seated in your gallery, sir. One of them 
will be known to most members here and that is a former 
Speaker of the House, John Brockelbank. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Seated . . . seated next to Mr. 
Brockelbank is a former engineer with the city of Regina. And I 
had the pleasure to do some work with him while I was a city 
councillor, Mr. Bill McLean. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Peters: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you, and 
through you my wife Shirley, my brother and his wife. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, I too want to take this opportunity to welcome 
John Brockelbank to the House. John ably represented 
Saskatoon Westmount for many, many years. Saskatoon 
Westmount is now my riding of Saskatoon Idylwyld. So 
welcome, John. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Ms. Jones: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Although recognition 
has already been paid to John Brockelbank, I too want to 
welcome him here as he is one of the constituents of Saskatoon 
Meewasin. So I add my welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join 
my colleague from Battleford-Cut Knife in welcoming his 
brother, Peter Peters to the legislature. As people will know, his 
brother is the former CEO (chief executive officer) of the 
Saskatchewan Cancer Agency. He’s had a stellar career serving 
people in the province when it comes to cancer treatment and 
cancer issues. So I want to join with my colleague in 
welcoming Peter Peters to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just want to join 
with others in welcoming the former Speaker, Mr. Brockelbank. 
But the Minister of Economic Development said that she 
represented the area that he used to represent. And that’s partly 
true but actually he also represented most of Saskatoon Mount 
Royal. 
 
And one of my first political experiences was actually having 
Mr. Brockelbank, when he was our MLA (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly) in Mount Royal, come and visit me as a 
very small child, and that was before I became a small man. 
 
But I want to say that the reason that Mr. Brockelbank 
represented my constituency, as well as the Minister of 
Economic Development’s constituency, is in those days the city 
of Saskatoon was divided up into six ridings, but two of them 
were so large, represented by Mr. Brockelbank and the current 
Premier and then four of them were very small. But the fact is 
Mr. Brockelbank represented just about all of the west side of 
Saskatoon at one time or another. And I’d like to join others in 
welcoming him here today as well. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Hon. members, I beg your indulgence to 
allow me also to welcome the former Speaker to this 
Legislative Assembly. And I will be under scrutiny; I appreciate 
that. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Welcome to the New Lieutenant Governor of Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday the 
Prime Minister announced that Lynda Haverstock will become 
Saskatchewan’s new Lieutenant Governor early next year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, while I’m not really fond of 
the Prime Minister’s practice of turning this position into 
simply another patronage position, if he was determined to pick 
a Liberal for the post he could not have made a better choice 
than Lynda Haverstock. 
 



December 10, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 107 

Ms. Haverstock has made a large contribution to the public life 
of our province. Becoming leader of her party in 1991, she led 
the Liberals to official opposition status before she resigned her 
position. She also served the constituents of Saskatoon 
Greystone ably for eight years. 
 
Prior to her time in politics, Ms. Haverstock worked as a 
psychologist and specialized in the area of farm stress — 
something we can certainly identify with today. Those who’ve 
heard Ms. Haverstock speak on this topic have nothing but 
praise for her. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Lynda Haverstock’s time in public life was 
marked with her desire to practice politics differently. She 
brought in a code of ethics for her party that is a good example 
of how we should all spend our time serving the people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the official opposition, I want to take 
this opportunity to congratulate Lynda Haverstock and wish her 
well in her new role. I know she’ll ably handle the duties well 
and will be a tremendous representative for Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, it’s true that in the past few 
weeks the federal government has made two announcements 
regarding the appointments of two outstanding Canadian 
women. First, Adrienne Clarkson was named Governor General 
of Canada. And yesterday, as we have just heard from the 
Leader of the Opposition, Lynda Haverstock, formerly of this 
Assembly, was named the next Lieutenant Governor of 
Saskatchewan — to assume her duties next February first. 
 
This morning, Mr. Speaker, I simply want to say two things — 
undoubtedly, more formal occasions will occur later — first, I 
want to thank and congratulate our current Lieutenant 
Governor, Jack Wiebe, for his five years of dedicated and joyful 
service as the Queen’s representative. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — He’s brought his own brand of 
Saskatchewan regalness to this position, and we thank him. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure, on behalf of our caucus, to 
congratulate and welcome Ms. Haverstock to her new position 
as Lieutenant Governor. Ms. Haverstock graced this Assembly 
for two terms in a style that engaged us in passionate and 
reasoned debate. She has spent much of her adult life in public 
service, first as a clinical psychologist with a specialty in farm 
stress, and then as political leader and MLA. 
 
We welcome her appointment. We welcome her back to this 
legislature in her new role. And we already look forward to her 
first excellent Throne Speech. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

CanGro Livestock Feed Manufacturing Centre 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am thrilled 
and delighted this morning that a cousin of mine has been 
named as Lieutenant Governor of Saskatchewan. As we all 

know, she has served this House and this province with grace, 
dignity, and flair, and we know she will continue to do so. 
 
However I also rise on some other good news this morning. 
Unfortunately I am missing a grand opening in North Battleford 
of CanGro Processors Ltd. CanGro Livestock Feed 
Manufacturing Centre is opening in North Battleford. It is 
valued at $10.8 million; it has created 15 new direct jobs, and a 
great deal more indirect jobs in our community. 
 
CanGro is going to develop a complete line of hog feeds and 
products for swine and other livestock. CanGro is processing 
Saskatchewan grain, in Saskatchewan, for Saskatchewan. 
 
Along with CanGro, we in the Battlefords recently welcomed 
new high throughputs by Pioneer, Cargill and Sask Wheat Pool, 
all erected and accounting for over $40 million in new 
construction. 
 
Walmart, Tim Horton’s, Canadian Tire, the Real Canadian 
Wholesale Store have also announced expansions. The Maple 
Leaf plant was recently expanded to be that company’s bacon 
processing plant for all of North America and Asia. 
 
And we are getting a new bison . . . I’m sorry I don’t have time 
to tell you all the wonderful things that are going on in North 
Battleford but it’s a great community for businesses to locate in. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Rivers School Division Logo Contest 
 

Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today it is my pleasure 
to rise in the Assembly on behalf of one of my constituents from 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Miss Danielle Bodnarchuk, is a grade 9 student in 
the Birch Hills high school, a school approximately 22 miles south 
of Prince Albert. Danielle took the initiative to enter the 
Saskatchewan Rivers School Division logo contest. 
 
Danielle’s creative use of colours in using blue and green in 
depicting the rivers and trees of the parkland-like setting of the 
Saskatchewan Rivers School Division enabled her to win the 
local contest ahead of 175 other entries. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask this Assembly and you to join 
me in congratulating Danielle Bodnarchuk on this achievement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Good News in Health Care 
 

Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have some good 
news in the area of our health care that I would like to 
announce. 
 
While some people continue to carp about the supposed 
deficiencies of our health system, the people who are involved 
in operating that system are quietly going about the business of 
helping make that system operate more effectively. As my 
colleague from Moose Jaw Wakamow said the other day, we 
are doing good works, not just thinking about them. 



108 Saskatchewan Hansard December 10, 1999 

A case in point. The magnetic resonance imaging system or 
MRI is a relatively new and very expensive diagnostic tool 
which offers a painless way to obtain information about the 
body, leading to early detection and treatment of a number of 
diseases and conditions. 
 
There are two MRIs in Saskatoon and one in Regina. When the 
MRI at the Regina General Hospital became operational in 
April of this year, it ran for eight hours a day, five days a week. 
Recently, with enhanced funding from Saskatchewan Health, 
the hours were increased to 12 a day. 
 
These extra 20 hours a week will allow approximately 4,200 
people a year to receive this service. The annual budget for this 
one MRI is how much? 1.1 million to operate this one. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I welcome this new addition to our health care 
system. I think the people will appreciate it. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Moosomin Hospital Operating Room Reopened 
 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, just to 
bring to the attention of this Assembly and commend the good 
folks of Moosomin and Rocanville, I’d like to comment on a 
couple of initiatives that have been moved forward. 
 
Most recently, Mr. Speaker, the Moosomin Hospital again 
reopened its operating room. And, Mr. Speaker, the reason the 
operating room was opened up for service is because of the 
initiatives taken by a group of doctors in the community as well 
as the chamber of commerce and some local community 
organizations, such as the legion. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when you think about it, the only reason the 
operating room has opened up is because groups like the legion 
and the community put forward over $120,000 for the 
equipment to provide a much needed service not only in the 
community and surrounding area of Moosomin, but certainly 
for this province. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, I look forward today to gathering 
together with the community of Rocanville for the official 
opening of their brand new clinic, totally done through 
community initiative. Again, Mr. Speaker, it just shows that 
there’s a Saskatchewan spirit working and well in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Riffel High School Project 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We move from good 
news in health care, good news in schools to back to good news 
in Riffel High School here in Regina, where they have an 
exciting ongoing project titled “The Transition Years.” 
 
This project started as an assignment from their psychology 
teacher, Mr. Ken Merk, and the grade 11 class quickly picked it 
up and realized that it was bigger, much bigger than that. 
 
What the project has done is interviewed grade 8 students 
across the north part of the city. They collated the results. They 

even went so far, with the help of Cable Regina, Mr. Speaker, 
they put together a video that’s available for parents, students, 
other schools, to help ease some of the fears that students have 
going from grade 8 into high school, grade 9 — those transition 
years which can be very tough. 
 
As a result of this project that includes also a booklet — there’s 
the video and the booklet — what they’ve found is that students 
entering grade 9 at Riffel have a much higher participation rate, 
Mr. Speaker. And I want to congratulate teacher Ken Merk, 
principal Joan McCulloch, Candice McIntosh of the students, 
and all the cast of hundreds at Riffel High School for their 
tremendous work, and I look forward to more in the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Canadian Pacific Railway Heritage Grants 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, every now and then you come across something that 
truly gives meaning to the expression “I didn’t know whether to 
laugh or cry.” It happened to me the other day when I saw a 
short article in one of our weekly papers. The article said, and I 
quote: 
 

Canadian Pacific has created a $2 Million fund to provide 
grants to communities to develop projects that preserve 
history . . .  
 
. . . (the) Heritage Grants will be distributed across Canada 
in communities where CP and its subsidiaries have a 
presence. (Or perhaps where the CPR once had a 
presence.) 
 

The announcement was made on the 114th anniversary of the 
last spike in 1885, the completion of a national dream of a 
railway from coast to coast. 
 
Can you believe the chutzpah, Mr. Speaker. Where should these 
grants go, do you think? How about a plaque almost anywhere 
in Saskatchewan that would read: here on this spot once ran a 
Canadian Pacific branch line contributing to vital communities 
along the way, saving wear on our highways, and providing 
employment both on and along the track. So much for the 
national dream. 
 
Or perhaps a small monument on the place where the first 
Saskatchewan farmer shook his fist at the sky and yelled the 
immortal words: blankety-blank the CPR (Canadian Pacific 
Railway). 
 
You can do a lot with $2 million, Mr. Speaker, about a 
millionth of what the CPR made in Saskatchewan. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Throne Speech 
 

Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, today my question is for the 
Premier. Yesterday the Premier said we should be asking 
questions about the Throne Speech. The Throne Speech talks 



December 10, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 109 

about a fundamentally new approach to government yet we 
have an Education minister who believes in the worst kind of 
old-style politics: promise one thing then do exactly the 
opposite. The Education minister freely admits his election 
platform was nothing but political rhetoric. He seemed almost 
gleeful that he was able to pull a fast one on the people of 
Saskatchewan. It’s no wonder voters are so cynical about 
politicians these days. 
 
Mr. Premier, that’s not a new approach to politics. It’s the worst 
kind of crass old-style politics, and it’s disgusting. Mr. Premier, 
how can you put up with this? Where is your new approach to 
government or was that just political rhetoric as well? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have said to the House 
before and I’ll repeat again, I believe the Speech from the 
Throne, being a first speech of the throne from a new coalition 
government, was a very progressive Speech from the Throne, 
which set out a very detailed course of action subject to 
legislation which will be tabled in due course subject to a 
budget which is being developed and which will be tabled 
sometime in the spring months. 
 
It is correct that in a coalition we have the Liberal Party and the 
New Democratic Party coming together. It is correct that we are 
finding areas of agreement, finding areas of agreement upon 
which we can act to respond in the interest of the province of 
Saskatchewan; in some areas where we may not be able to 
agree to respond. 
 
But when we do, we come together and present a government 
document like the Speech from the Throne, government 
legislation, a government budget, upon which we are prepared 
to defend and explain and to answer questions. That, I think, is 
opening up government and listening to government and is the 
new approach; it is a brand new day in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I have to admit it’s 
now clear — the Liberals did have a lot of influence over the 
Throne Speech. The Liberal leader admits his platform was 
nothing but political rhetoric, and as it turns out, so was the 
Throne Speech. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Liberal leader promised to cut government 
travel. He promised to cut government advertising. And he 
promised to cut ministerial staff. But now that he’s a minister, 
he likes government travel, he likes government advertising, 
and I heard him yesterday in person actually, he said he wants 
to increase — increase — his ministerial staff. 
 
Mr. Premier, how can you talk about a new approach to 
government when one of your own ministers has such little 
regard for the truth? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I believe that I have 
already provided the answer respecting the Speech from the 
Throne and the documents which will be coming from the 

duration of this coalition government. 
 
A coalition government by definition has, at least in this case, 
two parties coming together to find common areas where we 
can act in a progressive and positive way. Maybe not all areas, 
but in the large measure most of the areas that proceed. And we 
try very hard to be as faithful as we can to those two 
documents, and we may have to compromise. 
 
But while I’m on my feet and the Leader of the Opposition talks 
about new approach, I must say that the Leader of the 
Opposition is quoted on March 6, 1995 speaking to the 
Rosetown Eagle, saying the following in support of doing away 
with the Crow rate. He said, quote: 
 
There are benefits to losing the Crow benefit. 
Kindersley-Lloydminster MP Elwin Hermanson said it will 
encourage development in the West. There’ll be more incentive 
now not to ship grain out, is what Mr. Hermanson said. But 
today he says that he is in favour of not having done away with 
the Crow rate — before he was — today. So I think you have 
something else about . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Next question. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, just to set the record straight. 
I voted against the discontinuance of the Crow rate and I argued 
as to how the funds that were going into the Crow rate should 
be put into a trade equalization payment, which we call the 
trade distortion program. But the Premier never relates that part 
of the story. 
 
Isn’t it a little more than ironic that this debate is taking place at 
the same time that Lynda Haverstock is being appointed as 
Lieutenant Governor of Saskatchewan? Lynda Haverstock 
developed the Liberal Code Of Ethics which they supposedly 
still follow today. There’s a section in that code of ethics 
entitled, “Political Corruption and Impartiality.” That code of 
ethic says, and I quote: 
 

(I will not) countenance such immoral political practices as 
. . . deliberately misleading the public through false 
election promises. 

 
(1030) 
 
Mr. Speaker, false election promises are a direct violation of the 
Liberal Code Of Ethics. I’m sure this code of ethics meant 
something when Lynda Haverstock was the leader, but now it’s 
just political rhetoric. 
 
To the Minister of Education, will you stand up and explain 
your breach of the Liberal Party Code Of Ethics, or is the 
Premier going to have to explain that code for you? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I want to make one 
absolute . . . one thing absolutely clear to this Legislative 
Assembly at this stage of the game. And I say this with respect 
to you, sir, and I say this with respect to every member of the 
House. 
 



110 Saskatchewan Hansard December 10, 1999 

We will answer every question of government policy, 
government budget, government Bills, government legislation, 
and speeches from the throne, as government. We are not here 
to defend what the Liberal Party or NDP Party or what the 
Saskatchewan Party has to say with respect to this matter. 
 
This is a Chamber of government, and it is a Chamber of 
government where the government answers on its expenses. 
That is the rule of the House, with the greatest of respect, and 
that is what we are going to follow and we are going to preach. 
 
But while we are talking about a code of ethics for which the 
leader of the so-called Saskatchewan Party is talking about it, 
he might be well reminded to take a look at Ms. Haverstock’s 
codes of ethics and ask himself about his desk mate, who as part 
of that code of ethics, one of which is loyalty. Him the member 
from Canora, her the member from Humboldt, her the member 
from . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order please. Order. 
 

Hospital in Carrot River 
 

Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
for the Minister of Health. Madam Minister, it is hard to 
imagine how thing could get much worse with the NDP’s 
failing health care system. Hard, yes, but not impossible, thanks 
to the NDP’s disastrous mismanagement. 
 
Madam Minister, last March during question period in this 
Assembly, my colleague, the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena, warned you that the good people of Carrot 
River Valley were fed up with the NDP health care disaster. 
Well, things were bad back then but yesterday things in Carrot 
River got a whole lot worse. That’s because yesterday, Madam 
Minister, the people of Carrot River lost their hospital. 
 
Another NDP promise tossed on the scrap heap. 
 
Madam Minister, will you stand up today and apologize to the 
people of Carrot River and will you make a commitment to 
re-establish the hospital as you promised just eight short months 
ago? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, for the information of the 
public, the situation in Carrot River is this. That the physician 
that was providing services in Carrot River has returned, or is 
no longer in Carrot River. As I understand it, he has made a 
decision to return to South Africa. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at present there is one physician. The physician 
has indicated that he cannot provide 24-hour coverage and as a 
result the hospital has daytime hours. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is an ongoing problem. I had an opportunity 
to go on a retreat with a number of young family medicine 
residents in this province in July. And they advised me that the 
days of solo practitioners are over, that at the minimum they 
would like to see a practice of five family physicians in order to 

provide good quality service but also have a life for themselves. 
 
And so I think what’s important, Mr. Speaker, is that we 
recognize that solo doctors cannot provide 24-hour service any 
more. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Madam Minister, you’re starting to sound 
more like your new NDP (New Democratic Party) colleague, 
the so-called Education minister, who by the way as well, 
trekked out to Carrot River and promised them he would save 
their hospital. Apparently the Liberal leader isn’t the only 
member of the NDP government who thinks it’s all right to say 
one thing and then do the complete opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all NDP rhetoric aside, the bottom line is that the 
Carrot River Hospital has been reduced to the status of a health 
care centre. Madam Minister, the people of Carrot River are 
beginning to think this latest attack by the NDP government is 
just another part of a plan to systematically destroy their town. 
 
Since the NDP came to power in 1991, the town of Carrot River 
has lost its rural service centre; they’ve lost their crop insurance 
services; Department of Highways yards have shut down; 
offices of SaskPower, SaskEnergy, provincial environmental 
services removed. And now it’s going to lose its hospital. 
 
Madam Minister, will you commit today that this temporary 
loss of the hospital in Carrot River won’t become a permanent 
shutdown? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m really pleased 
that the members opposite can count to seven. It’s too bad that 
they weren’t able to count when they were in government 
between 1982 and 1991. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that the members opposite don’t want to 
hear the answer; that’s why they shout from their seats. But the 
answer is this. That I am told by physicians in this province that 
the days of a solo doctor are basically over. And the reason, Mr. 
Speaker, is that they are no longer prepared, as a lifestyle issue, 
to provide 24-hour coverage. 
 
In order for a hospital to operate as a 24-hour facility, you need 
to have 24-hour coverage by a physician. A physician has left 
the Carrot River area. There is one physician left, Dr. Fowler. 
Dr. Fowler has said as a lifestyle issue he simply cannot provide 
24-hour care. 
 
Now what I can assure the members is that the health district is 
continuing to look for a physician to come to Carrot River, and 
we are optimistic that the facility can return to a . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Next question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — The North-East Health District issued a 
notice on November 15 that the Carrot River Hospital would no 
longer provide obstetrical services as of the end of December. 



December 10, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 111 

Add to this the fact that Carrot River is now down to one 
ambulance, one doctor, and no hospital, and maybe you can 
start to understand why the NDP no longer represent Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — You are right about one thing. Carrot 
River lost its hospital because they can’t recruit a second 
doctor. And they can’t recruit a second doctor because nobody 
wants to work in the health care disaster your government has 
created. 
 
Madam Minister, as you should be aware, the provision 
obligating foreign doctors to practise for a minimum of three 
years in communities of 10,000 or less has been lifted by the 
college of physicians and surgeons. This makes it practically 
impossible for the community of Carrot River and a multitude 
of other rural communities to ever attract doctors. 
 
Madam Minister, you have the authority to require foreign 
doctors to work in rural Saskatchewan when they first come to 
the province. Will you take this action so that rural communities 
like Carrot River will not continue to lose their hospitals? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, listening to the member 
you would think that there will no longer be any services 
available in Carrot River. What I can assure the members is that 
nursing services, emergency services, lab and X-ray, 
community health services, wellness, home care, and 
observation beds will continue to be available in the Carrot 
River Hospital. 
 
What I can say to the member is that the health district is 
continuing to try and recruit a physician to the Carrot River 
district. Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, the physician that was 
there has made a decision to return to South Africa. And 
obviously, we can’t prevent people from returning to another 
community, in this country. That goes against the very 
principles of democracy. 
 
What I can say to the member, given the Sask Party’s 
commitment to fund health care at a freeze, the ongoing 
concerns that are being expressed about health services in this 
province would basically decline even further with a notion of a 
freeze when it comes to health spending. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Madam Minister, last night I spoke to 
district health board representatives from across the province 
attending the health board annual institute here in Regina. In 
one of their sessions, they were identifying columns of 
strengths, weaknesses, threats, and opportunities. This is what is 
known as the SWOT (strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and 
threats) analysis for strategic planning. These district health 
board members reported to me that the minister ended up on 
two of these lists — the weakness and threats column. Are you 
prepared to show some strength here and give the people of 
Carrot River some opportunity for survival? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s very interesting 
that we hear this coming from the member, because this 
member represents a political party called the Saskatchewan 
Party that has said very clearly that they would freeze health 
spending. In fact, Mr. Speaker, what they have said as their 
answer to health services in the province, that they would 
privatize — privatize — health services in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we believe in a publicly funded, publicly 
administered health system that is accessible to people. Mr. 
Speaker, they believe in a private health system and we see this 
in reports in our rural newspapers all across the province. They 
want to privatize health. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the question that the member is addressing is the 
issue of physicians in this province. We know that physicians 
are no longer prepared to practise as single practitioners in 
communities for lifestyle reasons, Mr. Speaker. They want to 
have a cadre of support to them. Physicians are not prepared to 
practise singly. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, please. Next question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Amendments to The Child and Family Services Act 
 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Social Services. Mr. Minister, 
last spring your government tabled and passed legislation 
amending The Child and Family Services Act. These 
amendments increase the maximum fine under provincial law 
for people who sexually exploit children, and they would also 
increase the maximum jail term from just six months to two 
years. 
 
Mr. Minister, I encouraged those amendments and I supported 
the legislation when it was passed. But, Mr. Minister, I 
confirmed yesterday that the amendments to The Child and 
Family Services Act have not yet been proclaimed. 
 
Mr. Minister, it has been some seven months since these 
amendments were passed in this House. Why has this Act not 
been proclaimed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the 
member for the question. The amendments, as I understand it, 
will be proclaimed next month. There is a normal time between 
the passage of legislation and the proclamation of legislation, 
because it takes us time to work with the various service 
providers and the police to establish the protocols that will be 
observed once the legislation is proclaimed. 
 
So this is a normal course of events that normally occurs with 
most legislation where we expect police or other community 
service providers to be living up to certain legislation. That is 
what’s taking place here. 
 
I would point out for the member that in the case of Alberta 
there was a period of a year between the passage of their 
legislation and when their legislation was finally enacted. We 



112 Saskatchewan Hansard December 10, 1999 

hope to do it sooner than that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Social Services and 
the NDP made much of the fact they had made these 
amendments last spring. They stated it was urgent. They have 
stated on other occasions that this action is not to be tolerated 
against our children. Mr. Minister, you highlighted in your 
published election platform that amendment as an 
accomplishment. You stated that you passed legislation to get 
tough on johns who sexually abuse children involved in 
prostitution. But since the Act has not been proclaimed, it is 
obviously not law. 
 
Mr. Minister, nothing has changed up to this point. How urgent 
is this matter to you? Children on the streets are still being 
exploited, suffering immediate and long-term trauma, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, you claim to be serious and caring about this 
issue. When will your government also stop contributing to the 
exploitation of this issue and proclaim the Act? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, it is precisely 
because the government and, I think, all members of the 
Legislative Assembly and all people in Saskatchewan consider 
this to be a very serious problem, and in a sense a blight in our 
society, that the government moved last year or earlier this year 
to put amendments forward to The Child and Family Services 
Act. 
 
But that’s only one thing that we’ve done, Mr. Speaker. We 
also, prior to that, had a concerted public education effort. 
We’ve also provided, I think, close to $1 million in funding to 
groups in Saskatoon, Regina, Prince Albert, and La Ronge to 
help those groups deal very substantially with the problem on 
the streets, problems that are occurring in their communities. 
 
We have always taken a position, Mr. Speaker, that once you 
have legislation, you have to set into place the procedures and 
the protocols for police and other people in the community who 
are working on this problem, for those protocols to be in place 
before the legislation is enacted. That is a normal course of 
events, Mr. Speaker, whenever legislation is put forward and 
we expect . . . 
 
(1045) 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Next question. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, as I’ve stated I’ve supported the 
amendments to The Child and Family Services Act when they 
were introduced last spring; and I have also gone on record 
pushing for even tougher penalties and tougher legislation. 
Tougher fines are needed to act as a deterrent discouraging and 
severely punishing people found guilty of sexual exploitation of 
children. 
 
Mr. Minister, you criticized my call for tougher penalties in the 
media, referring to the amendments passed last spring as proof 

of a recent action by your government on this issue. Mr. 
Minister, the action you have taken has not been quick enough. 
There have been Acts passed in this House in one day, and 
proclaimed, because your government deemed it necessary. Is 
this issue not as important? 
 
Mr. Minister, I ask you to see to it that this Act is proclaimed 
immediately. Will you do that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I indicated earlier 
that it’s my expectation that this Act will be proclaimed next 
month. We will have completed the process to set into place the 
procedures that the police and the various service providers 
need, to be able to enforce the legislation, Mr. Speaker. It’s no 
good having legislation if there’s no process set in place to 
enforce that. 
 
Now I know it makes great politics to stand here on the floor of 
the legislature and say, do something immediately. Mr. 
Speaker, more than doing it immediately, I want to make sure 
that this issue is attended to and dealt with well, Mr. Speaker. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Farm Equipment Manufacturers and Dealers 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question this 
morning is for the Minister of Agriculture. Mr. Minister, 
Saskatchewan’s farm equipment dealers are being forced by 
major manufacturers to drop their short-line inventory. And 
that’s bad news for dealers, it’s bad news for farmers, and it’s 
certainly bad news for an excellent farm equipment 
manufacturing industry here in Saskatchewan. Companies like 
Bourgault, Brandt, Flexi-coil, Degelman, Schulte, Morris, Leon 
Ram, and the list goes on. 
 
These Saskatchewan companies produce excellent product and 
they employ hundreds of people here in Saskatchewan, but they 
are at risk because of major manufacturing companies are 
allowed to impose restrictive and unfair contracts on 
Saskatchewan dealers. 
 
Mr. Minister, what are you doing to address this issue? We are 
prepared to introduce a piece of legislation here after question 
period and the important thing is that we’re also prepared to 
work with you on this issue because of the importance of the 
issue. But it must happen soon, Mr. Minister, because the 
contracts that they’re being asked to sign have to happen before 
December 31st. 
 
Mr. Minister, are you prepared to act on this important issue or 
are you prepared to support our private members’ legislation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I thank the member for the question 
because this is an issue that has been raised by a number of 
dealers, and the Department of Justice is working on this. I 
think the member will know as well though that there is not 
total support for which way to go within the industry itself. 



December 10, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 113 

And I would just mention to the member that he may want to 
meet with me and the association and the Department of Justice, 
because this is an important issue. But we want to make sure 
that the interest of all dealers and all manufacturers in the 
province is in fact dealt with, and that we’re not picking and 
choosing as to who wins and loses on this issue. 
 
But as to the regard of supporting your position or supporting 
my position, I think that’s an irrelevant point. What we need to 
do is talk this issue through so that when we have the policy, 
the winners are in fact the manufacturers and the dealers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, you are 
aware, and I’m sure your department is aware that the important 
consideration here is the December 31 deadline that the dealers 
are faced with, and that’s why there is a need to move as quick 
as possible. We have a piece of private members’ legislation 
and we’re prepared to present it. With your support we could 
move that through really fast, certainly with leave in the 
Assembly. 
 
If you have a piece of legislation that you are prepared to come 
forward with, we would be prepared to move very fast as well 
to give you leave to move it along quickly. But the important 
consideration here is obviously it has to happen before the end 
of this year. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you give the implement dealers of 
Saskatchewan and the implement manufacturers of 
Saskatchewan the assurance that this piece of legislation, either 
yours or ours, will pass this legislature before the end of the 
year? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I say to the member opposite that 
obviously what we need to do is pass legislation that’s good for 
all of the dealers and manufacturers, and to just . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . well, and time — that’s another important 
consideration. But just to say we’re going to pass a Bill and get 
it done right now sounds a little bit like your pressure to sign 
AIDA (Agricultural Income Disaster Assistance) last spring. 
That we pressure, pressure, get it done, and then you find out, 
then you find out that you have a piece of legislation that does 
damage to the very people you are trying to help. 
 
The commitment I . . . Mr. Speaker, there’s so much yelling 
from the members of the opposition that I can hardly hear, but if 
I . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well the member asks a 
question, then hollers from his seat, and I’d like to answer the 
question because it’s very important. 
 
But the issue here is, is sitting down together with the 
association, you and I and members who can support us from 
Justice, and drafting the legislation, and that is very important 
and my commitment to you is, we’ll do exactly that to make 
sure that the legislation, when it’s drafted, meets the needs of 
the manufacturers and the dealers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Post-Secondary Education 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the Speech from Throne this government 
announced its intention to consult the public on ways to ensure 
Saskatchewan people have affordable access to post-secondary 
education and skills training. Mr. Speaker, you will know that this 
is an important issue to the public and to this coalition 
government. I am pleased that the Minister of Education will join 
me as we will personally lead these consultations. 
 
As lead minister for the Council of Ministers of Education of 
Canada, I recently participated in the national launch of a 
wide-ranging review of barriers to the accessibility of 
post-secondary education. That project will identify ways of 
enhancing access to post-secondary education all across Canada. 
 
In social policies Saskatchewan has always been a leader. Four 
years ago when other provinces were following the federal lead 
in cutting funds to post-secondary education, Saskatchewan 
added money to protect the system. At that time Saskatchewan 
was just beginning its university revitalization initiative which 
continues to pay important dividends today. 
 
A year later we launched the Saskatchewan training strategy, 
and now we are turning our attention to improving access to our 
excellent universities and public training institutions. 
 
The question of student financial access is an important one 
because we are setting our public priorities. It’s important to 
every individual and every family in Saskatchewan because it’s 
about getting a high quality education and living and working in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Any changes we make to financial access must honour three 
principles. They must support quality, post-secondary 
education, while responding to the realities of student expenses 
in a way that is fiscally prudent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to acknowledge that today Saskatchewan 
has among the most generous debt forgiveness policy in 
Canada, for students, as Saskatchewan’s public education and 
training institutions also have among the lowest tuition rates in 
Canada. Internationally, these institutions are able to tell the 
world about Saskatchewan’s low cost of living and high quality 
of life. A key component of that high quality of life is access to 
education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is a good place in Canada to be a 
student. We believe we can make it better. We believe 
post-secondary education must be affordable for everyone — 
students, their families, and the taxpayers. 
 
The longest serving Minister of Education in Saskatchewan’s 
history and a former Premier, Woodrow Lloyd, was a champion 
of democracy. He firmly believed in the wisdom of the people. 
And Woodrow Lloyd said that the function of education is, and 
I quote: 
 

To produce people who can make the best of the present 



114 Saskatchewan Hansard December 10, 1999 

and who have the intelligence and the will to plan a better 
future. 
 

Mr. Speaker, part of Woodrow Lloyd’s legacy is a 
well-educated population that can make the best of the present 
and can help its province to build a better future. 
 
I look forward to our public consultations on student financial 
access. I invite every member of the Assembly and every 
citizen of Saskatchewan to make their views and ideas known 
through this public consultation process. We will be across 
Saskatchewan during the month of January and we will be 
listening carefully. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hart: — With leave to respond to the minister’s statement. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to respond to 
the minister’s statement because this is an issue that is very 
important to our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the state of our post-secondary education 
institutions and our students’ access to those schools will do a 
lot to shape the future of our province. 
 
Saskatchewan’s post-secondary education schools are 
something that all residents of Saskatchewan should be proud 
of. Both the U of S (University of Saskatchewan) and the U of 
R (University of Regina) are programs that are recognized 
nationwide. 
 
SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology) does a very good job of educating our youth in the 
increasingly important technical trades. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important to realize why student tuition 
and student debt has risen so much under this government. 
While much anger over rising tuition is usually directed at the 
institutions themselves, the fact of the matter is that provincial 
funding to those schools by this government has simply not 
kept up with the rising costs. And those costs have been passed 
along to the students. 
 
And so I hope the government is willing to discuss that when 
they are consulting around the province. 
 
Another thing I hope the government will be mindful of is the 
fact that tuition for many students is only a fraction of the true 
cost of attending a post-secondary education. For those students 
who are from outside the larger centres, the main costs are the 
day-to-day living expenses, and so I hope the government 
knows it must look beyond simply tuition costs and look at all 
the costs for all students. 
 
Another issue of course is the interest rates that students must 
pay on their student loans. These rates are often several points 
higher than the average borrower has to pay, and add immense 
cost to the overall cost of the student loan. Hopefully more can 

be done to work with the banks to bring this rate down. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, the best tool at students’ disposal for 
paying back the debt is a good job. Unfortunately for many, to 
find such jobs means leaving the province. If the government 
truly wants to do something to help our students, it will get this 
economy turned around so that we can improve our job 
situation here at home and allow our students not only to pay 
for their education, but also to apply their education right here 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Human Rights Day in Saskatchewan 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased 
to rise in my House today . . . in my seat today to commemorate 
Human Rights Day. But as this is my first opportunity to speak 
in the House, let me congratulate you on your election and I 
look forward very much to your wisdom and guidance in the 
next few days. 
 
December 10 has been proclaimed Human Rights Day in 
Saskatchewan. This proclamation commemorates the signing of 
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 51 years ago today. 
 
Saskatchewan, as we all know, has always been a leader in 
human rights protection. Indeed in 1947, 18 months before the 
passage of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the 
Douglas government passed The Saskatchewan Bill of Rights 
Act. 
 
Premier Douglas at that time said of Saskatchewan’s original 
Bill of Rights: 
 

Freedom, like peace, is indivisible. I must protect my 
neighbour’s rights in order to safeguard my own. 

 
This pioneering effort and commitment, Mr. Speaker, to human 
rights has ensured that everyone in Saskatchewan enjoys the 
freedoms they have today: freedom from discrimination, 
freedom of conscience, freedom of expression, freedom of 
association, and so on. 
 
Saskatchewan can be proud of the progress made towards 
fundamental rights to which all citizens are entitled. It’s truly 
important that all individuals have the right to be treated with 
respect and fairness. Human rights are indeed the birthright of 
everyone. 
 
Respect for human rights has become a genuine part of the 
spirit of our times, and our government has continued this 
commitment to human rights. Let me just give three more 
recent examples, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Our commitment to children’s rights is clear in Saskatchewan’s 
Action Plan for Children. The action plan priorities include 
reducing child poverty, strengthening early childhood 
development, supporting vulnerable children and families, and 
helping youth at risk. 
 



December 10, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 115 

Also, Mr. Speaker, we’re supporting the rights of children 
through the review of custody and access; and, just as the last 
example, Mr. Speaker, we’re reinforcing the rights and safety of 
individuals through The Victims of Domestic Violence Act. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker — Human Rights Day in Saskatchewan — 
is a recognition of how essential it is that human rights, 
tolerance, non-discrimination, and cultural pluralism continue 
to guide the future of Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1100) 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As Justice critic for the 
official opposition, I’d like to take this opportunity to respond 
to the minister’s statement; but, also would like to thank the 
Minister of Justice for providing an advance copy of the 
statement this morning. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the official opposition joins with the government 
in commemorating Human Rights Day. Mr. Speaker, we on this 
side of the House would also like to take this opportunity to 
acknowledge the dear cost of the rights that we enjoy today and 
to honour those who paid that cost. 
 
I would add, Mr. Speaker, that we believe those inherent rights 
of mankind can only be truly enshrined and protected through 
the responsibilities each of us accepts as individuals. Too often 
we speak about rights with no mention of responsibilities, Mr. 
Speaker. Human rights proclamations and pronouncements 
from governments alone will always fall short if we are not 
prepared to match deeds with words, if we as members of the 
human race are not prepared to take responsibility for our 
actions and our attitudes towards others. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would encourage members opposite to join 
with us this morning in taking a major step to ensure another 
important human right for Saskatchewan people. All members 
of the Assembly can take a concrete step in that direction, Mr. 
Speaker, in supporting a private members’ Bill sponsored by 
my colleague, the member for Cannington. 
 
Mr. Speaker, should they pledge that support, not only will they 
be supporting the property rights of Saskatchewan people but 
they will also be putting some action behind their words of 
opposition to Bill C-68. The Opposition House Leader’s Bill, 
Mr. Speaker, would ensure that every Saskatchewan person 
would have the right to acquire, hold, use, and sell property, and 
not be deprived of it, except in the accordance of fundamental 
justice which, for the purposes of that Bill, Mr. Speaker, 
includes fair market compensation for confiscation of any 
property. 
 
This would offer something more than just words in the 
struggle against, be it Bill C-68, one of the most significant 
affronts to the rights of Saskatchewan people being perpetrated 
by the Liberal government in Ottawa, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can think of no greater way for the government 
to celebrate Human Rights Day than for the minister and his 
colleagues to indicate their support for that private member’s 
Bill this very morning. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Agriculture Ministers’ Meeting 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker, and I rise today in the Assembly to report on a meeting 
of ministers of Agriculture in Toronto that I just returned from. 
And, Mr. Speaker, in light of the fact that yesterday’s Globe 
and Mail has a story on B27 which says “Wheat hits a nine-year 
low as global glut set to grow.” Nothing could continue to be 
more important than the issue of grain subsidies. 
 
And as I indicated yesterday, I took the opportunity to present 
the verbatim message as presented by 17 farm organizations 
and others that appeared before the Standing Committee on 
Agriculture here in the Assembly as well as providing other 
ministers with the speeches and comments made by members 
during the debate in committee as well as the emergency 
debate. I showed them the data developed by the farm coalition 
which clearly demonstrates the impact of the trade war on our 
export commodities and the impact it is having on farm 
incomes but more importantly on farm families. 
 
I also ensured that federal Minister of Finance, the Hon. Paul 
Martin, has received a copy of the verbatim of the motion 
unanimously passed by members of the Assembly here in 
Saskatchewan and the speeches that were presented so that the 
Minister of Finance is well aware of the issue and the high 
priority that we expect from that department when the budget is 
developed. 
 
At the meeting, Mr. Speaker, I asked the question of my 
colleagues across Canada and I said, why is the federal 
government not standing behind the grain farmers the way they 
stand behind every other industry in Canada, be it steel, 
forestry, auto industry. And I emphasized that they must stand 
behind and protect our grain farmers here in Saskatchewan. 
 
We also discussed safety net programs, programs such as crop 
insurance and NISA (Net Income Stabilization Account). And I 
might add very solid Canadian programs, although they need 
improvement, are the basis of some pretty good farm policy. 
And we had a frank discussion about the level of federal safety 
net funding and how it should be allocated across Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some provinces want to change the allocation 
formula, and I might add change it so that their province would 
get more at the expense of Saskatchewan and Manitoba . Now I 
indicated to my colleagues present, the ministers at that 
meeting, that not only could we not agree to any changes in 
allocation that would put our farmers at a disadvantage but that 
we could not conclude the discussion on safety nets until a 
decision was made on the trade equalization payment. 
 
I took the opportunity while in Toronto to meet bilaterally with 
the ministers of Agriculture from Ontario and Quebec. And I 
again explained to them why Saskatchewan farmers need a 
trade equalization payment. They are now more fully aware of 
the impact of the US (United States) and the US subsidies are 
having on our farm families. 
 
And I also made it clear to them that Saskatchewan farmers are 
not asking for support to be reduced to other farmers in Canada. 



116 Saskatchewan Hansard December 10, 1999 

And we argued and made the point that it’s the duty and 
obligation of the Government of Canada to make the trade 
equalization to Saskatchewan not at the expense of other 
Canadian farmers, and I think that’s an important part of what 
we’re discussing here in this Assembly. 
 
But we do want the federal government to stand behind our 
farmers and to put them on a level playing field so that relative 
to farmers in EU (European Union) and in the United States the 
way that they have stood and our federal government does stand 
behind other industries and other manufacturers in this country. 
 
While in Toronto, I also took the opportunity to meet with the 
editorial board of The Toronto Star. And I must say that it was a 
very interesting meeting because dealing with the editorial 
board of The Toronto Star is not automatic that they jump on 
the side of subsidies for Western grain farmers. But I can tell 
you that the interest shown in the differentiation between the 
way our grain farmers are treated and the way the auto industry, 
there was a very, very interesting and detailed analysis being 
done by that group. 
 
We also met with the report on business television channel and 
did a number of interviews outlining the outcome of the 
strategy meeting and the emergency debate here in the 
Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, ensuring that other Canadians are aware of our 
farm income situation and the need for our federal government 
to protect an important industry continues to be a priority of our 
government and, I believe, of the members of the opposition. 
And we commit ourselves to continuing to work with the farm 
coalition and with our colleagues here in the legislature to 
ensure that all Canadians become more aware of this situation. 
 
I want to also congratulate all members of the Assembly and the 
17 farm organizations and others that appeared before the 
Standing Committee on Agriculture on Tuesday. I believe that 
all should be commended for bringing forward a unified 
position on farm income issue here in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure on 
behalf of the official opposition to respond to the minister’s 
ministerial statement. 
 
Coming out of the meetings, what we had heard was very 
disturbing news to Saskatchewan farm families in this province 
when you have the federal Minister of Agriculture saying that 
there is no new money for farmers in Western Canada. And it 
is, after all of the efforts that have been made in Saskatchewan 
and in Ottawa, representing in Ottawa as well as the all-party 
delegation to Ottawa as well as the unprecedented step that was 
taken in the legislature having the farm groups come in here, it 
is disheartening to say the least, that kind of news coming out of 
the meetings that the minister attended. 
 
We have to wonder in this province: when is the federal 
government and when indeed is the provincial government 
going to put forward their plans on the direction of agriculture 
here in Saskatchewan. We have virtually no plan from this 

government with respect to a short-term bailout, short-term help 
for the farmers of this province, trade equalization payments . . .  
 
Yes, you’re calling on the federal government, but what is the 
province’s response in terms of supporting agriculture? We 
haven’t seen anything whatsoever with respect to a long-term 
safety net from the provincial government here in 
Saskatchewan. Is it going to be a tripartite type program? Is it 
going to be income support? Is it going to be risk management? 
What types of plans are you looking at, Mr. Minister, in your 
department? 
 
When will you be introducing as promised in the Throne 
Speech your special adviser on agriculture? We’ll be looking 
forward to that. We sincerely hope that we will not see some 
recycled NDP, old politician — perhaps the previous minister 
of Agriculture or the one before that or the like — coming 
forward. Because I think clearly, I think . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Could be the one before that. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Could be the one before that, the Premier says. 
Well I think clearly the people of Saskatchewan voiced their 
concerns about the previous couple of ministers of Agriculture, 
three or four that you’ve had in fact. 
 
Mr. Speaker, federalism is a two-way street — the Premier . . . 
and we’ve congratulated the Premier for his work at the federal 
level on a number of national issues — but it’s a two-way 
street, Mr. Premier. And you know it’s a two-way street. 
 
The farm groups and the farm families of this province are 
waiting for your response. Yes, you are going to help on 
national issues. But in return, the farmers of this province are 
going to wait and see whether federalism works for them. 
Because at this point there’s a dangerous mood starting to 
develop in Saskatchewan with respect to alienation. 
 
The federal government clearly has a role, yes; you clearly have 
a role as well. What is your plan for agriculture in this 
province? You have responsibility in terms of taxation; you 
have responsibility in some regard in terms of transportation; 
you have responsibility in terms of farm input costs, the ones 
that you can deal with. 
 
It’s time for the federal government to do the right thing. Mr. 
Premier, and Mr. Agriculture Minister, it’s time for you also to 
do the right thing for agriculture. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

The Agriculture Implements Amendment Act, 1999 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I move 
first reading of a Bill, Bill No. 209, An Act to amend The 
Agricultural Implements Act, 1999 of Saskatchewan. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 



December 10, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 117 

Ruling on a Point of Order 
 
The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, yesterday the 
Government House Leader raised a point of order concerning 
the language used by a member of the opposition during oral 
question period. At the time I reserved my ruling so I could 
review Hansard, and I’m now prepared to rule on this matter. 
 
Since the opening of this new session, the conduct of members 
during oral question period has given me some concern. Some 
of that concern can be attributed to the inexperience of members 
and their unfamiliarity with the rules of the Assembly — this 
Assembly. 
 
An example of this is the application of rule 28 which states in 
part that all members are to address their remarks to the 
Speaker. In particular, members are not to address their 
comments to another member directly but are to address each 
other in the third person, by their constituency, or portfolio. 
 
(1115) 
 
This rule has been frequently broken over the past three days 
and I would ask all members to follow the practice. 
 
A great concern also is a choice of language being used to 
describe colleagues. There were several instances yesterday 
when members of the opposition referred to the Liberal 
members of a coalition government as having been bought. 
Other inferences in the guise of humour were personal attacks 
and were not parliamentarian. It is not permissible to reflect 
upon the conduct of another member nor is it acceptable to 
impute to any member unworthy motives for their actions. I 
direct members to Beauschene’s, 6th Edition, paragraph 484(3), 
and to numerous rulings by previous Speakers. 
 
I bring these points to the attention of members in the interest of 
upholding the rules and practices of this Assembly. It is a basic 
principle of procedure that proceedings are conducted in terms 
of a free and civil discourse. By requiring that members address 
their colleagues by their constituency or portfolio, and by 
requiring that remarks are addressed through the Speaker, 
personal attacks on other members or direct heated exchanges 
are less likely to interfere with the flow of debate. 
 
Debate carried on in this way enhances public respect for this 
legislature and for the members without diminishing the passion 
that members bring to their debates. 
 
The point of order raised by the Deputy Government House 
Leader is not the only instance when unparliamentary language 
has been used. Therefore I will not single out the member for 
Saskatchewan Rivers. However, I caution all members today 
that in future I will not hesitate to intervene and apply 
appropriate sanctions should such language be used again. 
 
I remind members that these are not my rules. They are the 
Assembly rules. My duty is to interpret the rules and apply 
them accordingly. Any changes to the rules are made by the 
Assembly itself, and I have every confidence, my hon. 
colleagues, in all members that they will be diligent in ensuring 
a level of debate which reflects the dignity of this venerable 
institution. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, with leave . . . (inaudible) . . . to 
introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very happy to 
have the opportunity to introduce my cousin, Jack Wartman. 
Jack lives and farms up at Ridgedale, raises and trains quarter 
horses, and teaches riders. I haven’t seen him for a few years 
and it was very nice to see him up in the gallery there. 
 
Jack, welcome to our forum here, our Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Ms. Higgins, seconded by Mr. 
Addley, and the proposed amendment thereto moved by Mr. 
Hermanson. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in my 
reply to the Speech from the Throne, I wish to state that I am 
very proud to represent the constituency of Thunder Creek. 
 
Thunder Creek is a huge constituency. It extends almost from 
Regina to Swift Current, from east to west, and is no less than 
54 miles from north to south at its narrowest point. 
 
Thunder Creek, Mr. Speaker, is mostly an agricultural 
constituency consisting of terrain varying from the fertile, flat 
farmland of the Regina plains to rolling hills, to hundreds of 
square miles of native grass ranchland. 
 
The industrious, hand-working, determined farmers and 
ranchers of my constituency produce all of the major crops 
grown in the province and many specialty crops, as well as 
some of the finest beef cattle in the world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Thunder Creek people live on their farms and 
ranches and in several small communities, including 
Gravelbourg, Herbert, Hodgeville, Vanguard, Rouleau, 
Avonlea, Mossbank, Morris, Caron, Caronport, Waldeck, 
Chaplin, and my home community of Pense, as well as several 
other smaller villages and hamlets. 
 
Thunder Creek also contains such heavy industry as Saskferco, 
IMC Kalium, the Canadian salt plant at Belle Plaine, and 
Chaplin Lake sodium sulphate plant at Chaplin. We also attract 
many tourists to our parks, golf courses, and attractions such as 
the Claybank brick plant and the beautiful French community of 
Gravelbourg. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Thunder Creek surrounds the city of Moose Jaw. 



118 Saskatchewan Hansard December 10, 1999 

Moose Jaw is Saskatchewan’s third largest city and home to 
two packing plants, Canadian Forces Base, the Snowbirds, and 
considerable light industry, as well as the great Moose Jaw 
Warriors. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, I have seen the deterioration of 
our health care; the near destruction of our highway; the 
abandonment of our rail lines; the closing of our schools; the 
decline in our standard of living; the uncertain future of our 
farmers; the depopulation of rural Saskatchewan; the overtaxing 
of our people. And I have seen our young people leaving the 
province in ever increasing numbers to seek lower taxes and 
better opportunity in Alberta and elsewhere. 
 
I have three grown children, Mr. Minister, and two of them 
have already left this province. Unfortunately, that is pretty 
typical of our bright, educated young people these days. And, 
Mr. Speaker, I want my children back. We can’t force our 
young people to stay in this province. But I believe that we can 
create an environment in which they will want to stay here. 
 
It’s my opinion, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan has 
marvellous potential for growth and economic development. It 
is our duty as residents of Saskatchewan to see that government 
ceases to be master and tax collector and begins to be the 
facilitator for economic development and prosperity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Thunder Creek share a vision of 
what we think this province can be. We see a place where 
people are encouraged to invest. People from here and people 
from other places. These investors will build businesses and 
industries that will extract our oil and gas and minerals from the 
ground, build equipment and new plants and new homes, and 
process more of our crops and livestock here, reducing our 
transportation costs and enhancing the value of our greatest raw 
material of all — our agricultural produce. 
 
We see a place where Saskatchewan calves can be fed 
Saskatchewan grain in Saskatchewan feedlots by Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thus providing our farmers with local markets 
for their grain and our ranchers with local markets for their 
calves. 
 
We see more of these cattle being slaughtered in Saskatchewan 
packing plants. We see a place where more specialty crops will 
be processed in Saskatchewan, and Saskatchewan wheat will be 
milled in our own flour mills and durum in our own pasta 
plants, and a place for more Saskatchewan barley will be malted 
in Saskatchewan by Saskatchewan people, and a place where 
more of our oil seeds will be crushed here in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we see a place where our vast oil and gas reserves 
will be finally brought into production and heavy oil upgrading 
will be expanded. A place for our own oil and gas support 
industry will emerge as an equal to its Alberta counterpart. 
 
We see a place where steelmaking and manufacturing can 

flourish and support more Saskatchewan families. In this place 
that we can all visualize, our children and grandchildren will 
have good jobs and successful businesses. They will build 
homes and they will buy clothing and gas and cars and trucks, 
and they will be able to afford a rich family life filled with 
recreational activities, and they will help to keep our schools 
and hospitals going, and our roads in good repair. Then, Mr. 
Speaker, we’ll be able to afford our social programs. As we add 
more and more taxpayers, our taxes will decrease more and our 
tourism will flourish and even more jobs will be created, and 
more people will want to return to the Saskatchewan that we all 
love so much. 
 
But this vision that the people of Thunder Creek share is not the 
reality of today, Mr. Speaker. Today the people of Thunder 
Creek see businesses closing on the main streets of their 
communities; closing because of high taxes and a depressed 
economy. And, Mr. Speaker, the owners of these businesses 
that are in trouble on our main streets will tell you that it’s not 
just the taxes that they are required to pay that hurt them so 
much, it is all of the accumulated taxes that their customers are 
required to pay, and the back door taxation of this government 
through Crown utilities that is killing them. 
 
At this point in time, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is the second 
highest tax jurisdiction in North America and we have the 
poorest job creation record in this country. Worst of all, our 
people won’t stay and put up with it and are heading for 
neighbouring provinces in increasing numbers. I don’t see any 
cohesive plan in the Speech from the Throne that will even 
begin to turn this around. 
 
Our taxes must be brought in line with those of Alberta and not 
just income tax, but the PST, (provincial sales tax) corporate 
tax, utility rates, and every other form of taxation imposed by 
this government direct or indirect. 
 
Mr. Speaker, investment dollars are like water, they follow the 
course of least resistance. At the present time Saskatchewan 
offers the second highest rate of resistance to investment dollars 
in this country. Is it any wonder that we can’t repair our roads, 
that health care is crumbling, our small businesses and farmers 
are in crisis, and our best and brightest young people are 
leaving the province? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I see a government that is old and tired and totally 
bereft of new ideas. I see a government that is totally without 
expertise and even experience in modern agriculture. I see a 
government that has no understanding of how to stimulate an 
economy and I see a government that watches as our health care 
and highways deteriorate and does nothing about it. And I see a 
government that watches as our bright, energetic young people 
leave this province and doesn’t care. 
 
I see a government that will stoop to anything and cut any kind 
of a deal with anyone to hang onto power. I see a government 
that just doesn’t care any more. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, I believe that the decent, honest, 
earnest, hard-working people of Saskatchewan deserve better. 
 



December 10, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 119 

Mr. Speaker, I see a government before me that is out of ideas and 
completely out of touch with the people of Saskatchewan. I view 
the Speech from the Throne as nothing more than this government 
admitting to eight years of NDP mismanagement. 
 
Taxes are too high in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and families 
need a break. As we are coming upon the holiday season, I have 
spoken to families that inform me that they will be unable to 
afford a decent Christmas for their families. 
 
There’s something very wrong with that, Mr. Speaker. How 
many times has Canada been voted as the best country to live in 
by the United Nations? Unfortunately, I do not see this as being 
the case in Saskatchewan at the present time. 
 
(1130) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I read the suggestions that this government’s 
income tax review committee came up with, and essentially 
they are planning on reducing the personal income tax and 
raising the consumption tax. Mr. Speaker, that is just another 
way that this government proposes to give something with one 
hand and take it away with the other. 
 
The province of Saskatchewan has the longest hospital waiting 
list in Canada. And, Mr. Speaker, this government has not given 
any indication that they intend to address this problem. The 
constituents of Thunder Creek come to me with the fear that 
there is not going to be a health care system there for them, if 
and when they need it. In addition to this, those who are 
unfortunate enough to have to use our health care system do not 
necessarily get the treatment they need. 
 
It is somewhat encouraging, Mr. Speaker, that this government 
has at least acknowledged that there is a problem in health care. 
There is a shortage of doctors and nurses and it is the patients 
that are suffering, Mr. Speaker. Those patients that have paid 
taxes all of their lives and deserve the best possible care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s another serious problem that our province 
is facing and that is that we are losing our best and brightest to 
not only other provinces, but also other countries. Mr. Speaker, 
the youth of our province are very quickly waking up to the fact 
that there are not a lot of employment opportunities for them 
when they complete their education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if we want to survive as a province, it is our duty 
as legislators in Saskatchewan to stop the exodus of youth and 
create an environment where they can stay in their home 
province and contribute to society. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to conclude by saying that the 
constituents of Thunder Creek elected me to represent their 
views in this Assembly in the most fair and reasonable way 
possible. I have every intention of doing my job to the best of 
my abilities; and I look forward to lively debate that I will be 
participating in, with the members opposite. 
 
Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I support the amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, it’s an honour for me to stand in the Assembly this 
morning to address the comments in the Throne Speech. And 
before I begin my formal comments, Mr. Speaker, I want to 
congratulate you on your election as Speaker and I wish you a 
very successful term in the House. I know you will serve the 
House well, sir. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — I also want to express appreciation to my 
family who have been a great source of support to me 
throughout the electoral process. I want to express appreciation 
to wife, Louise; to my mother, Trudy, and to my sons Mark, 
James, and Michael for all the support they’ve given me over 
the last year and the support that has helped to make it possible 
for me to enter this House on behalf of my constituents. 
 
And I also want to thank the constituents of Saskatoon 
Greystone who have done me the great honour of electing me as 
their representative. It’s an honour to return to this House, and I 
treasure this Assembly, and I promise to work hard to represent 
them to the very best of my ability. 
 
I also this morning, Mr. Speaker, want to extend my 
congratulations to all members of the Assembly on their 
election and to extend my congratulations to Lynda Haverstock 
with the announcement that she’s going to be our new 
Lieutenant Governor. I know Lynda Haverstock well. We’ve 
differed on some political issues but I have great respect for her 
and I know she’ll do well in her new role. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to now turn to the 
Throne Speech which I think is an exciting document. It 
provides us with a very positive blueprint for the future. And I 
want to speak first to the commitment that’s made in the Throne 
Speech to make post-secondary education more accessible to 
the students of our province. And to set in process a 
consultation mechanism seeking advice from the people of 
Saskatchewan and from students and from our post-secondary 
institutions on what the best method is for making 
post-secondary education more accessible. 
 
I have many students in my constituency, Mr. Speaker. Several 
thousand students attend the University of Saskatchewan and I 
represent those students. And I know that some of their major 
concerns are an easing of student debt loads, which are 
currently very high, making it easier to get into first year and 
providing some support to those who are in their final year of 
their studies and who are graduating and are proving themselves 
and need that extra bit of help to complete their studies. And I 
hope that the commission, the Minister of Post-Secondary 
Education and the Minister of Education in their course of their 
consultations, will look at all those issues — I am sure they will 
— and will bring back a report to this House which addresses 
all those concerns. 
 
I also want to say as a member who is representing a university 
riding that we must not overlook in this Assembly the 
importance of adequately funding both of our universities. The 
University of Saskatchewan is a great jewel of our province and 
in this last two years we have taken steps to improve funding to 



120 Saskatchewan Hansard December 10, 1999 

the University of Saskatchewan — a 5 per cent increase now in 
the last two fiscal years. We need to keep on that track record, 
Mr. Speaker, to improve the quality of education on our 
campus, on both our campuses. 
 
It’s not just a matter of accessibility, it’s also a matter of 
providing high quality post-secondary education, and I know 
that all members in this Assembly will share with me in 
wanting to pursue that objective. 
 
I am going to work very hard, Mr. Speaker, to make sure that 
the operating and capital budgets of our universities reflect that 
objective. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — I want to turn to the issue of taxation, Mr. 
Speaker, and say that I welcome the commitment in the Throne 
Speech to reduce personal income tax in the next budget. I 
know this is a concern for many of my constituents. And I also 
welcome the commitment to remove thousands of low income 
families from the tax rolls altogether. That is indeed a 
progressive and exciting idea, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I also welcome the commitment to take a balanced 
approach to investing in lower taxes, better services, and lower 
debt. We have to look at income tax reduction in the context of 
a balanced approach because we want to protect our public 
services and keep paying down our debt and not just talk about 
reducing taxes. 
 
Now recently our government received the final report of the 
Saskatchewan personal income tax review committee. I 
welcome the recommendations of the committee. I want to 
thank the members of the committee for their hard work. And I 
want to particularly say that I welcome the recommendations 
with respect to moving to a tax-on-income system and to 
introducing higher non-refundable income tax credits. I think 
these are positive recommendations that I personally support. 
 
There are some recommendations in the tax review committee 
report that I do not support. I want to particularly make 
reference to one of those today, Mr. Speaker, and that is the 
proposal from the committee to broaden the sales tax base to 
include essential items such as residential electricity, residential 
natural gas, used goods, repair services, and children’s clothing 
and footwear. 
 
While there may be some items on which the sale tax base can 
be broadened, purchases essential to the well-being of every 
family in this province should, in my view, continue to be 
exempted from the provincial sales tax. 
 
That is my view, Mr. Speaker, and I will be urging the 
government to look seriously at that issue. I hope that 
recommendation in the report will not be adopted. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I also think that we need to be 
careful about the depth of the tax cut that we adopt. To move to 
the committee’s recommendation that we follow the path of 
Alberta with respect to income tax policy has to be approached 
with caution. 
 

We need to reduce personal income taxes — make no mistake 
about that — just as the NDP pledged to do in the last 
provincial election. But we also need to be careful to have on 
hand the moneys we need for good health care, good education, 
good post-secondary education, environmental protection, a 
strong social services safety net, and, Mr. Speaker — and this is 
a very important addition — we need to have the resources on 
hand to continue to pay down the debt. Because it’s getting that 
debt down that is our mechanism for long-term sustainable tax 
cuts in this province right across the board. We continue to face 
a situation, Mr. Speaker, where we have to pay out more than 
$700 million a year in interest payments on the provincial debt. 
 
I heard the member from Thunder Creek opposite, Mr. Speaker, 
say to this Assembly that he wants to see us take the Alberta 
approach. And I say that’s not feasible if we’re going to keep 
paying down the debt. 
 
And it’s not feasible, Mr. Speaker, if we’re going to have strong 
public services in this province. Do we want to cut kindergarten 
services like Alberta’s done? Do we want to cut health care 
services like Alberta did throughout the mid 1990s? 
 
Do we want, Mr. Speaker, to follow the Ontario model where 
we see 118 per cent increase in child poverty in Ontario as a 
result of the policies of the PC (Progressive Conservative) 
government there? That’s what massive tax cuts translate into, 
Mr. Speaker — tax cuts that are not sustainable. 
 
I favour tax cuts but sustainable tax cuts and tax cuts that are 
not delivered on the backs of axing our public services in this 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to turn to health care 
and say that I welcome the expressed intention in the Throne 
Speech to expand home care services and to train, recruit, and 
hire more health care providers. Those are exciting 
commitments, Mr. Speaker, and I know commitments that will 
be well received by my constituents. 
 
And I’m also pleased to see the announcement of a policy to 
standardize ambulance services because there are great 
discrepancies now in what people pay for ambulance service 
depending on where they live in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
And it’s nice to see that we’re going to move towards a more 
standardized fee structure — one that will be fairer for 
everyone. 
 
So I’m excited about these commitments around health care and 
our overall commitment to continue to strengthen our medicare 
system that we started in this province — our gift to the rest of 
the country, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I also want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I’m going to be working 
within our government to urge a more preventative approach to 
the delivery of health-care services. I think, Mr. Speaker, that 
this is the next important step in improving health care outside 
of the commitments that have already been made in the Throne 
Speech, is to take a more preventative approach to the delivery 
of health care. 
 



December 10, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 121 

That, Mr. Speaker, will translate into not only better quality of 
health for the residents of this province but also into making for 
a more economically sustainable health care system. If we’re 
going to contain health care costs and protect the health of our 
residents, we’ve got to pay more attention to prevention. 
 
Some of the measures that I’ll be working to advance include, 
first of all, a major initiative around prevention of cancer, which 
I consider to be a major priority in this province. We’re losing a 
lot of our friends and neighbours to the disease of cancer, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And we know in looking around the world that it is possible to 
achieve lower cancer rates than we’re currently experiencing in 
this province. I just say look at the Japanese. And let’s ask 
ourselves in this Assembly, in an industrialized society like 
Japan, why is it that women in Japan have a breast cancer rate 
that is only one-eighth of women in Canada and women on the 
Prairies? 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, is an example to me of the fact that breast 
cancer can be prevented. Most forms of cancer can be 
prevented, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I say that we need to do more through the Department of 
Health, through this Assembly, to advance that promotion, Mr. 
Speaker. We need to look and advise our residents and support 
our residents in improving their diets, in reducing their 
exposure to cancer-causing substances. And we need to make 
sure, Mr. Speaker, that that commitment is extended to our 
workplaces, and, Mr. Speaker, that that advice is provided 
through mechanisms such as our cancer clinic. 
 
(1145) 
 
We need to declare war on cancer in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
We need to bring our cancer rates down in this province and 
across the country. And we need to look at the role that diet, 
lifestyle, exposure to carcinogenic substances — including 
tobacco products and pesticides — play in that process, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I’m committed to working for that goal. I just don’t think we 
can afford the cancer rates that we currently experience. I’m 
tired of losing friends and neighbours to this terrible disease, 
and I think we, in this Assembly, have to pledge ourselves to do 
everything we can to prevent it and to take a broader approach 
than we’re currently doing through our health care delivery 
system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, similarly we need to do the same around diabetes, 
and the Canadian Diabetes Association and its Saskatchewan 
branch has some exciting ideas around this. We face the 
prospect of an epidemic in diabetes unless we take major steps 
to confront that health care problem, Mr. Speaker, and I’m 
committed to seeing us work on a prevention approach to 
diabetes. 
 
Similarly I want to see us expand the team approach to the 
delivery of health care. I look at our community clinics — our 
five community clinics — in this province, Mr. Speaker, and I 
see an excellent model for the delivery of health care services. 
 

I see, Mr. Speaker, a model that results in reduced 
hospitalization for people who are members of those clinics, 
when you compare them with the rest of the population in our 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I see a model that provides an excellent team approach among 
health care professionals to the delivery of health care services. 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, that we need to promote and expand 
that model and use it as a model for delivering preventive health 
care services to the residents of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Similarly, Mr. Speaker, we need to look at 
issues around accident prevention among children and youth, 
and make that a major priority in terms of preventive health 
care in our province. 
 
And we need to make a systematic effort to reduce child abuse 
in the home and in our community. And there are many exciting 
models around the world, Mr. Speaker, that we can look to as 
mechanisms for doing that. 
 
One of the ones that I’m excited about is what the Government 
of Hawaii has done in terms of reducing child abuse, domestic 
child abuse in portions of their state by over 70 per cent. And 
very simply what they do, Mr. Speaker, is they screen at birth to 
identify children who may be at risk of suffering abuse or 
neglect in their home by virtue of their unfortunate 
circumstances. And they offer to each of the families that has 
been identified as being at risk, a home visitation service that is 
carried out by a paraprofessional who’s acting in a 
quasi-volunteer role but receives some remuneration. 
 
And that volunteer, Mr. Speaker, visits each home that’s been 
identified on a regular basis — on a weekly or bi-weekly basis 
— for a period of four or five years. And, Mr. Speaker, do you 
know that in the cases of all homes that have received such 
visits, the rate of domestic abuse in the home has dropped by 70 
per cent or more? 
 
Now that’s a very significant achievement, Mr. Speaker. And I 
want to say that I consider the problem of child abuse to be a 
serious problem in our province. I think we need to look to a 
program like the one that’s been adopted by the Government of 
Hawaii as a major initiative to reduce domestic abuse in this 
province, Mr. Speaker, and I’ll be working to urge our 
government to look seriously at that program. I think it’s an 
exciting one. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I also would like our 
government to look at an aggressive initiative aimed at reducing 
the use of tobacco among young people in our province. The 
latter should include an aggressive advertising campaign aimed 
at children and youth. 
 
I welcome the appointment of an all-party committee on 
tobacco control announced by the Associate Minister of Health 
yesterday, Mr. Speaker. I know that committee will serve us 
well. I like the approach of an all-party committee on that issue. 
And I hope, Mr. Speaker, that we’ll see from that committee 
strong recommendations aimed at reducing the use of tobacco 
among our young people. 



122 Saskatchewan Hansard December 10, 1999 

I also want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I would like our 
government to look at a policy of saying to pharmacies — as 
the providers of health care products — that they should no 
longer be selling tobacco as part of their retail business. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say a word now about the commitment 
in the Throne Speech to families, and we see some very positive 
commitments in the Throne Speech to families. And our 
government has taken some very positive steps over the past 
couple of years with respect to expanding support to families — 
particularly low-income families — low-income working 
families in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I welcome the announcement that we’re going to 
move forward on amendments to legislation that will enshrine 
the right to family leave on items of family necessity as a piece 
of legislation in the upcoming session, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think the idea of guaranteeing every family in this province 
the right to family leave from their workplace if they have to 
attend a funeral, if they have a sick child, if they have a pressing 
family need, Mr. Speaker, is something that we ought to be able 
to guarantee every family in this province. And I’m excited that 
we’re committed to doing it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I’m also excited that we’re going to consult around 
amendments to The Labour Standards Act that would make it 
possible for people to have the opportunity, if they’ve done 
overtime work, to looking at time off as a compensation for that 
rather than simply additional pay, because people value having 
time at home, Mr. Speaker. Many people are having a difficult 
time balancing work and family commitments, and as a 
government we need to make it possible for them to . . . we 
need to make it easier for them to balance work and family. 
 
We had an exciting initiative in this last year, Mr. Speaker, 
around setting up a task force to look at just this subject. And 
we need to keep working on this issue, Mr. Speaker, and I’m 
pleased to see a commitment to doing that in the Throne 
Speech. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to say a word about the initiatives that 
the Minister of Social Services has taken to help lower income 
families. We've taken some very positive steps with respect to 
supporting lower income working families in this province. And 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I am pleased now to see that we 
have 9,500 families with children who are receiving the 
Saskatchewan employment supplement. And we have 23,000 
working families who are now receiving family health benefits, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Those are families that weren’t getting that income support 
before. They weren’t getting those family benefits before. These 
were previously reserved for families who were on social 
assistance. They have now been extended to low-income 
working families, Mr. Speaker. Families that are doing their 
level best to make ends meet, who are working hard in the 
workplace, and who needed that extra money to top up their 
income so that they wouldn’t be living in poverty, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we’ve made important strides in this regard and I want to 
congratulate the Minister of Social Services in our government 
for those steps, Mr. Speaker. And I want to say that I point with 

pride to the fact that Saskatchewan, under our NDP government 
and now under our NDP-Liberal coalition government, is the 
only province in this country to have reduced the rate of child 
poverty from 1989 to 1999, Mr. Speaker — the only province in 
Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — And where do we see some of the worst records 
in the country, Mr. Speaker? We see them from governments 
who’ve pursued hard-line, conservative right-wing policies, like 
Ontario, where the poverty rate among children has increased by 
118 per cent, Mr. Speaker—118 per cent. Ours has gone down by 
8 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That’s why I sit on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker; that’s why 
I’m committed to the work that’s happening on the government 
side of the House; that’s, Mr. Speaker, why we must reject the 
policies that come from the hon. members of the opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I believe there’s a great deal 
more that we can do in this whole area of addressing poverty, and 
I will be encouraging our government to expand our social 
housing initiatives. I’ll be encouraging our government to increase 
the minimum wage, and I’m going to be encouraging our 
government to look at sharply increasing benefits to those with 
disabilities, Mr. Speaker. I think these are important areas. 
 
People, Mr. Speaker, ought to be able to work full-time at 
minimum wage and have a livelihood above the poverty line in 
this province, Mr. Speaker. And I’d like to see our minimum 
wage move in that direction. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, I want to, I want to make sure that every 
person who has a disability in this province has an adequate 
income to live on. And I know that that’s an objective that’s 
shared by all members on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that I personally favour an 
increase in the basic allowance for those on social assistance as 
it applies to food, clothing, Mr. Speaker — food, clothing, and 
personal items. I think we need to increase this, Mr. Speaker. 
This I know, Mr. Speaker, is not something that other members 
of the House advocate. I advocate it, Mr. Speaker. I want to see 
lineups at food banks go down, not up. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think . . . I know that many of those who 
use our food banks are those on social assistance. And I think 
that the only way of getting those lineups down, Mr. Speaker, is 
to make sure that we combine a commitment to promote 
independence and work, with compassion in our social 
assistance system, Mr. Speaker. So I stand for an increase in the 
basic allowance on food, clothing, and personal items, Mr. 
Speaker, and I also stand for a commitment to promote 
independence and reduce the number of people who are 
employable on our social assistance rolls. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — And, Mr. Speaker, that means providing even 
more incentives for those on assistance to move into the 



December 10, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 123 

workplace and keep more of their money when they do. It 
means, Mr. Speaker, ensuring a decent minimum wage in this 
province. It means providing new work opportunities, like the 
support we’ve given to the Quint Neighbourhood Development 
Corporation in Saskatoon, to people living in low-income 
neighbourhoods, and it means a decent income security safety 
net, Mr. Speaker. And those all have to be there in combination. 
If they’re not, Mr. Speaker, we won’t crack this problem. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to say a word about our 
environmental policies in closing my throne . . . my role in the 
Throne Speech debate. And I want to say that I welcome the 
announcement that our government has made on a forest 
renewal program to plant at least a hundred million new trees 
over the next four years. 
 
That’s an exciting commitment, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
commitment that’s going to provide jobs in the North, Mr. 
Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s going to also result, Mr. 
Speaker, in an important initiative in terms of forest renewal in 
our province. 
 
And I also, Mr. Speaker, want to say how pleased I am to see 
the commitment that’s being made by our government to 
increase assistance to municipalities fighting Dutch elm disease. 
This, Mr. Speaker, is something we really need to keep . . . we 
need to keep our eye on the ball with respect to Dutch elm 
disease. It is steadily spreading throughout our province. 
 
And the best measure, Mr. Speaker, is to take preventive action, 
and that means good pruning programs in all the municipalities 
in our province. That’s the best way to guard against Dutch elm 
disease, Mr. Speaker. And I’m pleased to see a commitment 
from our government to increase assistance to municipalities in 
this regard. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to say with respect to the environment 
that I pledge my commitment, Mr. Speaker, in this Assembly, 
to work for policies that will enhance our environment. I think 
that all governments in this country need to pay more attention 
to a sustainable environmental policy, and there are many, 
many exciting things that we can do in this regard. And I want 
to make reference to a few of them this morning, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that first of all I think that there 
is a great deal more that we can be doing in this Assembly to 
promote an environmentally sustainable energy policy. And this 
is something that I hope will ultimately be endorsed by all 
members of this House. This, Mr. Speaker, should not be a 
political issue. This is a matter of simply an environmentally 
responsible approach to human behaviour on our planet. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I believe that if you look around at what 
other jurisdictions in Europe and North America are doing, you 
can see a lot of evidence of the success of initiatives around 
energy conservation and renewable energy development. I see, 
Mr. Speaker, that two are east. The governments in the United 
States have pursued successfully major conservation initiatives, 
especially in the New England states. Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1200) 
 
I look immediately to our south and I see that many of the 

southern states have now got wind generation projects going. In 
fact our neighbouring province of Alberta has a very successful 
wind generating initiative, Mr. Speaker. 
 
My dream, Mr. Speaker, is that our government, with support 
from all members of this House, will launch a major initiative 
around energy conservation and renewable energy development 
with a major focus on wind power, a major focus on solar 
energy, and a massive focus on job creation effort around 
energy conservation. 
 
And I want say, Mr. Speaker, that I see the beginnings of that in 
the very positive announcements by the Minister responsible for 
the Crown Investments Corporation, of the agreement between 
SaskPower and Honeywell and SaskEnergy and Honeywell on 
the conducting of energy audits for both commercial customers 
and residential customers. That’s a very positive announcement, 
Mr. Speaker, and it will lay the foundation for the kind of a 
program that I’m envisioning. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to say that we need to take a more 
aggressive approach around all our policies with respect to 
climate change. There is now growing evidence that even the 
commitments that were made at Kyoto will not be enough to 
grapple with the climate change problem. What scientists, 
renowned scientists around the world are saying is, we’ve got to 
reduce our greenhouse gas emissions by 30 to 40 per cent of 
what they were in 1990 — not just 6 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That’s going to require a determined effort by all members of 
this Assembly. We need to look at our transportation system. 
We need to look at all aspects of our energy system and we 
need to come forward with an aggressive climate change, 
greenhouse gas reduction program, Mr. Speaker. That’s what 
I’ll be standing for and supporting in this Assembly on behalf of 
my constituents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also would like to see our government focus 
more attention on the development of neighbourhood based 
recycling centres in all our urban municipalities. Any urban 
municipality that’s interested, Mr. Speaker, in advancing their 
recycling program, I’d like to see the province working with 
that municipality and providing with assistance. I don’t think 
we can afford door-to-door recycling services in our province 
but I think we can afford to set up effective neighbourhood 
recycling centres, Mr. Speaker, in all our communities, and 
that’s what I’d like to see us achieve. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to see us take action with respect to 
reducing public exposure to pesticide contamination. And I 
think one of the ways we could begin to do that, Mr. Speaker, 
and show respect for each other, is to encourage municipal 
governments and look at possibly legislation at the provincial 
level which would require in urban settings individuals to post 
their lawns before they spray with pesticides, Mr. Speaker. I 
think that that would be a progressive measure, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I hear other members of the Assembly have 
been saying to me, have been asking me about my views on 
uranium, Mr. Speaker. And I just want to assure you that my 
views on uranium mining have not changed. 
 
I also, Mr. Speaker, know that a decision on uranium mining 



124 Saskatchewan Hansard December 10, 1999 

has been made. I continue to hold the view that we shouldn’t 
expand the uranium industry in this province, Mr. Speaker. My 
mind has not changed on that because of the relationship 
between uranium mining and nuclear weapons proliferation, 
Mr. Speaker, and because of our inability to yet find a safe way 
of disposing of nuclear waste. 
 
But I respect the decision that my party has made on this issue. 
I respect the decision that my government has made on this 
issue even though I don’t agree with it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There are many, many other exciting environmental issues to 
work on. I’m going to work, Mr. Speaker, to do my best to 
make sure that Saskatchewan uranium doesn’t go into nuclear 
weapons. I’m going to do my best, Mr. Speaker, to make sure 
that we have a safe method of disposing of our uranium tailings 
in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I want to say that I both respect the decision of my 
colleagues and continue to hold my views, Mr. Speaker, and 
appreciate the fact that my colleagues respect my views even 
though they don’t share them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — So, Mr. Speaker, I’m honoured to be on this 
side of the House with the kind of support that I have from my 
colleagues and respecting my ability to take a position on this 
issue. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen a great many positive initiatives 
put forward in the Speech from the Throne. I’m proud of this 
agenda, Mr. Speaker. I think it’s one of the most progressive 
agendas that the New Democratic Party has run on. And I see 
many, many commitments that we made in the election 
reflected in this Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker. I think our 
government will in many ways be enhanced now through the 
coalition arrangement that we have because we’ll have some of 
the best ideas from the Liberal Party platform to consider as 
well in this coalition. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, I think will be very positive. Because the 
people of this province sent us a clear message — and the 
message that I’m committed to — and that is to work more 
together among the parties to advance the well-being of the 
people in this province. And I give my commitment, Mr. 
Speaker, to work with all hon. members on issues to see if we 
can find common ground as much as possible to advance the 
well-being of people in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the opportunity 
that I’ve had to participate in this Throne Speech debate and I 
want to say in closing that I will not be supporting the 
amendment. I will be supporting the government motion. 
 
And I want to, again, express my deep appreciation to the 
residents of Saskatoon Greystone for the trust that they have 
placed in me and promise them that I will do my very best to 
serve them well in the months and years ahead. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Speaker, it is with a great deal of pride that 
I rise this afternoon — I see now after the noon hour — on 
behalf of the citizens of Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan Rivers is one of those unique little 
ridings or constituencies we have in this province. It surrounds 
the city of Prince Albert; we’re a doughnut. We’re trying to put 
the squeeze on it, so to speak. And, Mr. Speaker, what gives me 
great pride today, is in . . . for the first time in almost a decade 
that the constituents of Saskatchewan Rivers will have someone 
who will represent all the electors in this legislature and not just 
some of them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Speaker, the breadth and depth of 
Saskatchewan Rivers flows from the towns of Birch Hills and 
Weldon, the native community of James Smith Indian 
reservation, north to the Prince Albert National Park. It goes on 
the west side from the communities of Mayview and Cookson 
and west — or east, pardon me — to a small village where 
everyone is in Love. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve heard many comments through the election 
and in this House about the highway system, and I want to say a 
few words about the highway system in my riding. I’m actually 
quite proud of it and, on a rare occasion, I want to thank 
actually the cabinet of the NDP government for the highways 
that I have. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — The No. 55 highway from Prince Albert north 
to Meath Park; the No. 3 Highway that comes through the 
riding, going past the towns of Weldon, Birch Hills, and then 
north certainly on the No. 2 Highway to the national park. Of 
course, I am afraid that the reason that those highways are so 
well-maintained is to allow the MLA from the opposite side the 
opportunities to get to their cabins in the summertime. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Speaker, I want at this time to just take a 
few moments to thank all the constituents of Saskatchewan 
Rivers who have graciously awarded me the opportunity to 
spend some time in this House. We are looking forward to 
many, many years of representation here. 
 
And I personally want to thank all those people who worked so 
diligently to ensure that I would be the representative for 
Saskatchewan Rivers. Mr. Speaker, many of my friends have 
taken great pride in the fact that finally in Saskatchewan Rivers 
one of their own, so to speak, is going to be here. 
 
But I also want to take a little time, a personal note, to my 
family. My son and my daughter and my wife have made a 
great commitment and a great sacrifice so that someone such as 
myself, and all the members of the House, Mr. Speaker, can 
give of their personal time at many occasions to be able to 
participate in the exciting debates that take place in this House; 
and I am looking forward to taking part in many of those 



December 10, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 125 

debates in the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the history of myself in politics has been long and, 
although for many years, certainly small time. For my family it 
has also been a large commitment for us to be involved in our 
community development. One of the great pleasures that we 
hold dear to our hearts is that when this province was formed in 
1905, there was a small school district formed, east of 
Weyburn, a community of Griffin, and one of the founding 
members of that school board was my grandfather. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Speaker, one of the large parts of the riding 
is the farming community. We are very blessed this year. 
We’ve heard speeches. We have had the debate here on 
Tuesday that took us well into the evening — very interesting I 
must say, Mr. Speaker — and I am very proud of this House to 
have allowed that to happen. We’re going to go down into 
history, a little footnote so to speak, but still we will go down in 
history for having that happen. 
 
Fortunately, unfortunately for us though in the North is that 
even though prices are depressed and families are having a hard 
time making ends meet, this year we were blessed with a 
bumper crop and families will be able to get by for one more 
year. 
 
But farming of course is not the only things that are happening 
in my constituency. Some of the communities are being very 
progressive, try to develop a new future for themselves so that 
they not become solely reliant on the farming community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the communities, Birch Hills, is actually 
working quite hard to develop their own processing plant where 
they will produce strawboard for a very large market. 
Strawboard, Mr. Speaker, is a very economically produced 
product, very strong in strength, but it’s taking quite a bit of 
work on the part of the community to pull all of this together. 
They’re having a great deal of trouble getting future capital that 
they so desperately need, but they are determined to go ahead 
and make it happen, and we should salute them; and I am going 
to work with them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am truly blessed in that I have inside my riding 
the national park of Prince Albert. And, Mr. Speaker, one thing 
we really like to brag about in our part of the world is the 
pristine beauty of the park, the welcoming nature of the 
community of Waskesiu as they welcome visitors every year. 
And of course one of the most outstanding features of the park, 
Mr. Speaker, is that it has a world-class golf course. 
 
(1215) 
 
But of course we’re also blessed in my constituency is 
immediately outside the golf course — as the cabinet opposite 
is well aware — is we have a second world-class golf course. 
And in fact, Mr. Speaker, in my constituency alone, there are 12 
golf courses so we are truly a constituency that promotes, 
encourages, and welcomes tourism. 
 
The north part of the riding, taking in the resort communities of 
Candle Lake, Anglin Lake, Christopher Lake, Emma Lake, and 

certainly the national park — both one of the active and 
progressive resorts in the province, Mr. Speaker — these 
communities of course are not that well populated in the 
wintertime, often shrinking to several hundred people. But in 
the summertime when people are able to take their holidays, 
enjoy time with their family and friends, these communities 
swell into the tens of thousands bringing much-needed dollars 
into these communities. Many of these visitors are certainly 
from outside the province. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, it’s important at this time not only to speak 
about where I’m from and a little bit about who I am, I think it’s 
very important that we spend some time talking about the 
Throne Speech that the Governor General brought to us on 
Monday. We were certainly, on this side of the House, very 
anticipatory, looking forward to some exciting change from the 
coalition government. 
 
It certainly, in my mind, was a brand new day. Unfortunately, 
that day was sad. It is rare — very rare, Mr. Speaker — that a 
government admits that having been in power for eight years, 
they’re not able to talk about the accomplishments that they’ve 
had being as, Mr. Speaker, there was none. 
 
They spoke about poverty, our children leaving the province. 
They talk about a government having to speak up for farmers. 
They spoke about the health care system. They spoke about 
developing new partnerships with our Aboriginal communities. 
And they spoke to some small degree about education in this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is Canada, this is Saskatchewan. I think it is 
with a great deal of regret that we need to talk about poverty in 
this hallowed hall. With the wealth that is in this province and 
with proper management, poverty should not exist to any extent 
at all. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Speaker, in a previous life, having worked 
with children, it was always distressing to me that we had to 
have programs in place so that children who came to school in 
the morning could have breakfast. Mr. Speaker, in 
Saskatchewan this should not be an existing program. 
 
The Throne Speech talks about reducing this problem. Mr. 
Speaker, this is Saskatchewan. With the wealth of this province 
this should not even be existing. We should be talking about 
eliminating it, period. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard figures in this House 
that poverty has been reduced to a small degree. Unfortunately, 
what I feel very strongly about is that those families finally 
gave up on this government, gave up on this province. And 
instead of the government taking credit for reducing the 
poverty, we’re probably having to give credit to our neighbours 
in Alberta for taking those families in and providing them with 
quality jobs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



126 Saskatchewan Hansard December 10, 1999 

Mr. Wiberg: — We talked about the kids leaving this province 
to escape the poverty that we have here. Is there a plan to keep 
those kids here? No. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is a proven fact that the only way to develop this 
province, keep our kids here for the future so that we will have 
future taxpayers in this province, is to reduce taxes. And we 
need to reduce taxes, not in graduated steps, not a little bit at a 
time, but by large amounts and in the very near, near future as 
promoted by the tax review committee established by the 
government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — It is only through tax deductions, tax 
reductions, Mr. Speaker, that jobs can and will be created. It is 
much easier for a family to work in an environment that 
promotes good wealth and good health, that a family will stay. 
We are not promoting that today, Mr. Speaker, and we should 
be ashamed of ourselves. 
 
And we need to work very hard to ensure that the kids that we 
are training in our universities and in our post-secondary 
institutions remain here to become an integral part of the future 
of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we woke up on September 17 with the realization 
that politics in Saskatchewan have changed forever. That, Mr. 
Speaker, was the brand new day. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, what we found out 
on September 17 was that there is a divisiveness in this 
province that hurts me to the very core. We found out on that 
day that the people of the cities of Saskatchewan have been left 
out of the problems that the farming community is suffering. 
They felt as though they were isolated from it. The government 
promised them that they would be isolated from it. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, this fall the province has finally 
admitted that the reality is the cities are starting to feel the brunt 
of the downturn in the farm economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is important that this House stand up for that 
most basic element of Saskatchewan’s economic backbone and 
that is the farm community. There are many good things 
happening in this province, and many more good economic 
possibilities could be developed. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, farming is the backbone that built this 
province, and farming is the backbone that will carry it into the 
new millennium. And it is time for all of us to stand up, Mr. 
Speaker, and protect that very element of our society that got us 
to where we are today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there were some notes in the Throne Speech — 
and I refer to them as notes — about changes in the health care 
system. Now I am quite concerned about changes to the health 
care system. We were promised change before; health care will 
be better. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, health care became better for the 

administrators. There was jobs created in the health care sector, 
Mr. Speaker, for the administrators. Hospitals were closed, 
nurses let go, replaced with administrators. In fact, Mr. Speaker, 
we’ve even heard that we may not even need doctors that much; 
we can replace them with administrators. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Speaker, what we need are health care 
providers. We have lots of administrators in the health care 
system already. If we are going to reduce the amount of health 
care centres we have in this province, Mr. Speaker, we do not 
need to maintain the amount of administrators that we have had 
in the past. The fewer health care centres, the fewer 
administrators. We should in fact, Mr. Speaker, have more 
dollars in that case to put into front-line health care. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, that has not been the vision of this 
government. The vision of this government, Mr. Speaker, seems 
to have been to actually attack the very fabric that has protected 
our long cherished health care system created in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m afraid that there are people who have long 
since left us who must be turning over in their graves thinking 
about the health care system and the legacy that has been 
created in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, living in a constituency that has six native 
communities, I’m certainly lucky to have an opportunity to 
know a lot of the issues surrounding Aboriginals, the First 
Nation communities — their desires, their wants for the future, 
what they are expecting from us and from themselves for now 
and in the future, and certainly for their children. But 
unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, a lot of their dreams do not 
coincide with the dreams of the government of the day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the communities that I’m actually very 
blessed, I must say, to have in my constituency is the 
community of Muskoday. Muskoday, as you may know, Mr. 
Speaker, has been recognized as developing one of the first 
self-governing communities for Aboriginals in the country. It is 
progressive; it is dynamic; and they are determined not to 
follow the status quo of this province. And they are going to, 
Mr. Speaker, create jobs in their community, for their children, 
for the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — They are not going to have a run-amok social 
assistance system in their community that simply throws out 
dollars so that reduces the dignity of their community. They 
want to reverse that trend, Mr. Speaker, so that dignity is 
restored to their community, restored to their people, and we 
should applaud them for their progressive and aggressive 
attitude. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Speaker, it’s getting to that time of the day 
that I’m starting to get dry in the throat and you’re probably 
getting tired of listening of me, but I want to take a minute just to 
offer my Season’s Greetings to you, to the rest of the House, and 
may you all have a joyous Christmas season. 



December 10, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 127 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to say to you that I am in favour of the 
amendment as brought forth by the Leader of the Saskatchewan 
Party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We are 
into the debates following the Speech from the Throne, and 
we’ve heard some excellent debates, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And there is a lot to talk about in this document because it’s a 
great document. I want to be able to do so at a bit more length 
than just a minute or two, and I know that there are members in 
this House now that feel this is about the appropriate time to 
close the House down and to go home to our families and our 
friends for the weekend, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So with that I would move that the debate now adjourn. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move the House do 
now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — The government Deputy House Leader has 
moved that the House do now adjourn. Before I call for the 
question may I beg again your indulgence to commend each 
and every one of the new members here on their presentations 
and their sincere efforts on behalf of the people that have 
allowed them to serve on their behalf here in this Assembly. 
 
And also wish each and every one of you a safe journey home 
and some quality time with the loved ones that I’m sure will be 
happy to see you spend some time with them this weekend. 
Have an enjoyable weekend. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:28 p.m. 
 





 

 


