





























































Hansard: March 24, 1999


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 211 
 March 24, 1999 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I have a petition to present on behalf of residents 
concerned about the deteriorating highway conditions and the 
need to increase spending on highways. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
finally show a serious commitment to roads and highways 
in Saskatchewan by urging it to increase its highway and 
road construction and maintenance budget by $300 million 
over the next five years as called for in the Saskatchewan 
Party’s election platform. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures to this petition come from the city 
of Regina and the community of White City. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present today on behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to have the Workers’ 
Compensation Board Act amended whereby benefits and 
pensions are reinstated to disenfranchised widows and 
whereby all revoked pensions are reimbursed to them 
retroactively with interest to April 17, 1985. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions come from the Regina area, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present today. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
demand that the federal government work with 
Saskatchewan to put in place a farm aid package that 
provides real relief to those who need it and the provincial 
government develop a long-term farm safety net program 
as it promised to do when it cancelled GRIP against the 
wishes of farmers. 
 

The signators are from the communities of Langenburg and 
Churchbridge, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 

petition from concerned citizens about parental rights. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide a review process with respect to family 
intervention to ensure the rights of responsible families are 
not being violated. 
 

Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
communities of Melfort, St. Brieux, and Regina. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition as well 
to present to the Assembly this afternoon. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reduce the royalty taxes on new drilling in Saskatchewan; 
to stop job loss, and create new employment in this sector. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition comes from the Carnduff area of the province, the 
southeast part of Saskatchewan. 
 
I’m pleased to present on their behalf. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too have 
a petition from concerned citizens of the province of 
Saskatchewan, and their concern is about the rights of 
responsible parents. And the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide a review process with respect to family 
intervention to ensure the rights of responsible families are 
not being violated. 

 
The signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from St. 
Brieux and Regina. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My petition prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call upon provincial and 
federal governments to immediately take steps to end 
unfair world subsidies, and provide farmers with prompt 
relief from declining incomes, and act as watchdogs 
against rising input costs which are harming the rural 
economy. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The good people from Cupar, Dysart, Fort Qu’Appelle, Regina, 
Indian Head, and Qu’Appelle have signed these petitions. 
Thank you. 



212 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 1999 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present petitions 
this morning on the issue of highways. And the prayer of relief 
reads as follows: 
 

Your petitioners are pleased to call on the federal and 
provincial governments to dedicate a significantly greater 
portion of fuel tax revenues towards road maintenance and 
construction so Saskatchewan residents may have a safe 
highway system that meets their needs. 

 
Your petitioners come from North Battleford, Denzil, 
Spiritwood, and, as the member for Athabasca used to say when 
he was presenting petitions, all across the land. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I join with my 
colleagues in bringing forward petitions. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call on federal and provincial 
governments to dedicate a significantly greater portion of 
fuel tax revenues toward road maintenance and 
construction so Saskatchewan residents may have a safe 
highway system that meets their needs. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed these petitions are 
from Saskatoon, a number from Indian Head, and several from 
the Kindersley area. And we appreciate those in Kindersley 
raising these issues with us so we can stand up for them in the 
legislature. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — Now I know the hon. member will recognize 
that in presenting petitions, hon. members are not to engage in 
debate and I’m sure that he’ll want to avoid doing that in the 
future. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 
petitions on behalf of citizens that are very concerned about the 
severe financial crisis that our farm families are facing in this 
province. 
 
The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call upon provincial and 
federal governments to immediately take steps to end 
unfair world subsidies and provide farmers with prompt 
relief from declining incomes and act as watchdogs against 
rising input costs which are harming the rural economy. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The petitioners that I present here this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, 
come from communities of Lipton, Lebret, Qu’Appelle, Fort 
Qu’Appelle, Edgeley, and Weyburn. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy today to 
rise again on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan to present a 

petition. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call on federal and provincial 
governments to dedicate a significantly greater portion of 
fuel tax revenues toward road maintenance and 
construction so that Saskatchewan residents may have a 
safe highway system that meets their needs. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition has been signed by concerned people 
living in the community of Grenfell. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
my pleasure once again to rise on behalf of citizens who are 
concerned with some of the most vulnerable in the province of 
Saskatchewan, and to read their petition: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide essential funding and ensure the delivery of 
scientifically proven diagnostic assessment and 
programming for children with learning disabilities in 
order that they have access to an education that meets their 
needs and allows them to reach their full potential. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

All of the signatures today are from Pelican Narrows, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have from the 
rural municipality of Auvergne No. 76, the following petition. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that you Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately start work on the rebuilding of our secondary 
highway system to provide for safe driving on what are 
becoming known as pothole roads, to enter into 
negotiations with SARM and SUMA for a longer-term 
plan of rural road restitution reflecting the future needs, 
and to provide safety for all drivers as the new trucking 
regulations change safety factors on these roads. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, these folks of course form the community of 
Ponteix as well as from Aneroid, and I’m happy to present it on 
their behalf. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the petitions presented at the last 
sitting have been reviewed and found to be in order. Pursuant to 
rule 12(7) these petitions are hereby received. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice 
that I shall on day 13 ask the government the following 
question: 
 



March 24, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 213 

To the Minister of Justice: have the reports recommended 
by the jury in the Laurie Jean Mathiason coroner’s inquest 
been completed, and if so, will you release them publicly; 
and if not, when will they be completed and released? 
 

I so present. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day 13 ask the government the following question. 
 

To the Minister of Finance: how much money is lost in 
revenue for each 1 per cent removed from the PST, from 7 
per cent, for example, to 6 per cent; how much money 
would be lost to RMs and towns if property taxes for 
education were reduced 10 per cent and capped; if all the 
education tax on farmland were eliminated, how much 
would be involved; has there been any recent research into 
replacing this tax or returning to the 60/40 formula of the 
past where governments put up 60 per cent of education 
tax and property tax produced the 40 per cent; have 
SUMA and SARM offered suggestions of alternatives to 
replace these taxes; if so, what are they? 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a great 
pleasure this afternoon to introduce to you and through you to 
all members of the Assembly 29 men and women of the public 
service. These men and women, Mr. Speaker, offer us technical 
advice, provide support and assist with consultations on a 
public basis, and they respond to questions that members 
opposite might have. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they are from the departments of Justice, 
Environment and Resource Management, the ecosystems 
branch, Women’s Secretariat, Finance, the Lieutenant 
Governor’s Office, Intergovernmental and Aboriginal Affairs 
and Protocol, Executive Council, Post-Secondary Education, 
and Liquor and Gaming Authority. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they will be attending the question period time 
frame and then going on a tour of the building, but also the 
Legislative Library and what is offered there, and briefed by the 
Legislative Assembly and other interesting items on their 
itinerary this afternoon. 
 
I would ask all members to join me in giving a warm welcome 
to the men and women of the public service. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I would like to introduce a number of acquaintances 
sitting in your gallery, from three of the educational partners 
here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Representing the Saskatchewan School Trustees Association, 
the SSTA, I see president Debbie Ward, Craig Melvin, and 
Ardith Stephanson. From the STF, Saskatchewan Teachers’ 
Federation, Doug Willard and Derwyn Crozier-Smith and Jens 
Nielson. And also from LEADS, the League of Educational 
Administrators, Directors and Superintendents, I see Jim 
Hopson, president. 

I want to indicate, Mr. Speaker, that I think right at the very 
beginning of his teaching career the president of the STF, Doug 
Willard, was on the staff of the same school division that I was. 
So acquaintances from just a few years ago. 
 
And I also note that the current president of LEADS was also 
the superintendent of Sturgis school division, then becoming 
Timberline, and now of course part of Crystal Lake, also in my 
current constituency. 
 
I’d ask all members to join me in welcoming these people to the 
legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I too want to advise the 
Assembly of my special guests who are sitting in your gallery 
this afternoon. Mr. Speaker, they’re here for two purposes. One 
is to observe the performance of the members in the House 
today and to evaluate their behaviour, Mr. Speaker. And 
secondly, they’ll be here as well to participate in the public 
dialogue on the role of the school which we’ll be announcing 
later today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like for the individual members if they 
might just rise when I introduce them so that we could on one 
more occasion recognize their presence here today. 
 
Ms. Deb Ward who is the president of the Saskatchewan School 
Trustees Association; Mr. Craig Melvin who’s the SSTA 
executive director; and Ardith Stephanson who’s the SSTA 
information and communications officer; and of course, Mr. 
Doug Willard who’s the president of the STF; also Mr. Derwyn 
Crozier-Smith who’s the general secretary; and Mr. Jens 
Nielson who’s the editor with the Bulletin; and from the League 
of Educational Administrators, Directors and Superintendents, 
Mr. Jim Hopson. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members of the 
Assembly on one more occasion to welcome them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to the Assembly I’d like to introduce two special 
guests that we have in the gallery, in your gallery today. Mr. 
Milt Wakefield, if he would stand please. Milt was a grain 
commissioner with the Canadian Grain Commission and is now 
the Saskatchewan Party candidate for Lloydminster and soon to 
be the MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly). 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, in your gallery we have Don McMorris. 
Don farms in the Lewvan area and is a Saskatchewan Party 
candidate for the Indian Head-Milestone, and will soon be the 
MLA in that area. And I’d like everyone to welcome them to 
this Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too on behalf of 
the Liberal caucus would like to welcome our friends here that 
are involved in the educating field looking after many of our 
young people across the province — which of course are the 



214 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 1999 

next folks that will be sitting in here so I hope that their visit to 
the legislature today is an enlightening one — and are meeting 
with the minister. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet I too would like to 
welcome the people here that work for the Public Service 
Commission. Hope that they enjoy the proceedings here today 
and look forward to meeting with some of them over the next 
few years. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce three guests sitting in your gallery. I also would like 
to welcome the very hard-working and dedicated SERM 
(Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management) 
employees in your Speaker’s gallery as well. 
 
We have with us today, and I’ll ask them to stand, Amanda 
Kerluke from Wadena; Jolene Chisholm from Fox Valley; and 
Lindsay Adam from Eastend. These three young ladies are 
attending Luther College here in Regina and wanted to come 
down to see how things are run in the legislature, Mr. Speaker. 
And I’d ask all members to welcome them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Murray: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I just 
couldn’t let this opportunity go by on behalf of my seat mate 
and I to say a special welcome to Mr. Jim Hopson, seated in the 
Speaker’s gallery. Jim is currently director of education at 
Buffalo Plains and we taught together for many, many years. 
And it’s a real pleasure to see him here. Welcome, Jim. Thanks. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce a couple of young men who are future leaders in this 
province of ours and I’m pleased that they’ve taken the interest 
to come and watch the proceedings here in the Assembly. 
They’re seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, Shaun McEachern 
and Chris Shauf. Ladies and gentlemen, please welcome them 
here, our future leaders. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Meeting Regarding Hafford Health Care Centre 
 

Mr. Jess: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Like the member from 
Carrot River Valley, I want to thank the Tories for hosting a 
meeting last night in my home town of Hafford so that I could 
discuss the new, improved Hafford primary health care centre 
with the 70 people who attended. 
 
My Tory opponent in Redberry Lake came over from 
Rosetown-Biggar constituency to chair the meeting. The drive 
was so long that he forgot to bring the coffee and doughnuts. 
 
Mr. Hermanson was there trying to explain why he would 
freeze the health budget and halt improvements in services and 
facilities as we now have in Hafford. I am sorry he received no 

applause for his comments, but I guess people were mad about 
the doughnuts. He did say that he doesn’t understand primary 
health care. It was explained to him. 
 
I was there, and said once again, that we are committed to 
improving health services in all of Saskatchewan, urban and 
rural, and that we have backed the commitment with $1.7 
billion, and then added an additional 69.4 million to hire 200 
nurses and improve our other services. 
 
No Liberals were there, Mr. Speaker. Pity. 
 
At the end of the meeting the Tories proposed a motion 
criticizing the government’s management of health care — 10 
of 70 voted for that motion. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Impaired Driving Awareness Week 
 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is my 
pleasure to rise on behalf of the official opposition in 
recognition of Impaired Driving Awareness Week. 
Organizations such as Mothers Against Drinking Drivers, 
MADD, and Students Against Drinking and Driving, SADD, 
are committed to the ongoing fight and the battle against drunk 
driving and raising awareness of the dire implications involved 
when someone under the influence of alcohol gets behind the 
wheel of a car. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the years many people have died due to 
drinking and driving. And in most cases, Mr. Speaker, it is not 
the drunk driver that is harmed, it is the innocent bystander that 
is hurt. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is crucial that we as elected officials get the 
message out there to our youth that you do not need to drink to 
have a good time, but if you do, there are designated driver 
programs in place to keep all of us safe from senseless harm. 
 
I thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Tourism Saskatchewan’s Awards of Excellence 
 
Mr. Johnson: — Mr. Speaker, in the province of Saskatchewan 
tourism is big business and expanding every year. Tourism is 
the fastest growing economic sector in the province. Tourism 
employs thousands of people throughout the province. 
 
Last Friday, Tourism Saskatchewan hosted its annual awards of 
excellence banquet and ceremonies at Queensbury Centre in 
Regina. Nineteen awards were presented; time prevents me 
from mentioning them individually. 
 
But the important fact is that this evening, Mr. Speaker, is that 
there were 125 nominees and 54 finalists for the judges to 
choose from — a daunting task. This many worthy contestants 
is living proof of the vitality of an importance of tourism to the 
province of Saskatchewan. As word gets around and as the 
world’s older tourist destinations become more and more stale, 
tourism in Saskatchewan can only grow. 



March 24, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 215 

My congratulations and appreciation to each contestant and 
each award winner. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Deputy Premier 
 

Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Deputy Premier can’t seem to get no satisfaction these days. As 
time goes by, more and more details emerge about not only his 
travel but his cultural tastes as well. 
 
We see where the Deputy Premier got six tickets to the Rolling 
Stones’ “Bridges to Babylon” tour from Labatts. Now tell me, 
did he skip the “Steel Wheels” tour because of our state of our 
highways in the province? 
 
Well I wonder, Mr. Speaker, if wild horses couldn’t drag him 
away from such an event, but I’m sure he had mixed emotions 
about missing the world’s greatest rock and roll band. After all, 
at his age, time is not on his side, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In this Chamber the Deputy Premier, Mr. Speaker, has a 
reputation for being a street-fighting man for his ability to paint 
it black — such items as flying his family to Alaska for a 
western governors’ conference when it would have been 
cheaper to fly commercially. 
 
However, when the whip comes down, there’s remarkably little 
difference between the Deputy Premier and his predecessors in 
the Tories. Meet the new boss, same as the old boss. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

1999 Cadet Honour Band 
 
Mr. Flavel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this is 
two statements for the price of one. 
 
The member from Yorkton and I both have constituents who 
have been selected as part of the 100 candidates chosen from 
the 210 sea, army, and air cadets across the Prairies. And they 
were chosen to be members of the 1999 Cadet Honour Band of 
the prairie region. I have the honour of announcing both of 
them. 
 
Brett Wlock from Yorkton plays the trombone and is a member 
of 17 Royal Canadian Air Cadet Squadron in Yorkton. His 
proud parents are Marg and Bernie Wlock. 
 
In my constituency, Salina Perry from Wishart has also been 
chosen. Salina, who plays flute, is a member of 542 Foam Lake 
Royal Canadian Air Cadet Squadron. Her parents are Marie and 
Lorne Perry. 
 
This Cadet Honour Band of prairie region will give concerts 
this summer in Calgary, Saskatoon, Edmonton, Winnipeg, and 
Thunder Bay, enabling the cadets from Saskatchewan to 
experience more of this great country. 
 
The member from Yorkton and I congratulate Brett and Salina 

and all band members, and wish them a successful and musical 
summer. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Canada Winter Games Gold Medal Winner 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again the 
town of Biggar has bragging rights to claim yet another 
champion. You’ve heard me speak about Sandra Schmirler, the 
Hanson Buck, and the 1999 Provincial Girls Curling 
Champions. 
 
Today I’d like to tell you about the most recent addition to this 
long line of champions. Mr. Speaker, Barry MacDonald is a 
young man who travelled to this year’s Canada Winter Games 
in Cornerbrook to compete amongst Canada’s best pistol 
shooters. At 17 years of age, he’s returned home with a gold 
medal. 
 
He and teammate Philip Mooney of Regina Coronation Park 
competed in the team pistol event. Together the pair ignored the 
pressure of a national spotlight and strove toward winning gold 
in their event. This is especially remarkable as this was Barry’s 
first national competition after only two years of experience to 
guide him. 
 
With this impressive showing, Barry might just become 
Biggar’s next Olympic champion, and what a fine addition to 
this ever-increasing list of greats. 
 
I want to congratulate Barry MacDonald on his gold medal in 
the team pistol event of the 1999 Canada Winter Games. This is 
certainly an exciting start to what will certainly become a long, 
successful career of one of our young champions. Once again, 
congratulations. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

The Battlefords Health District 
 

Ms. Murrell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Health care, Mr. 
Speaker, is a concern to all of us at some point in our lives. And 
lately rural areas are often incited to fear by opposition rhetoric. 
But in the Battlefords, the health district quietly goes about 
dealing with the needs of area residents. 
 
The Battlefords Health District is home to a number of general 
practitioners, specialists, and psychiatrists who provide 
full-time service in the district. In addition, 11 visiting 
specialists from Saskatoon attend The Battlefords Health 
District on a regular basis. These 11 specialists help round out 
the scope of services the district provides. 
 
Health care services are an ongoing priority of The Battlefords 
Health District, and the district will continue to ensure area 
residents have access to the services and the specialists that they 
most need. 
 
Thank you. 
 



216 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 1999 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Charity Foundations 
 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, my questions today are for the Premier. 
 
Mr. Premier, a number of your past and present NDP (New 
Democratic Party) MLAs paid their MLA allowances into 
charity foundations set up to benefit the NDP. They then 
overcharged taxpayers, they filed unaudited financial 
statements, and then they disappeared with money in the bank 
and no record of where that money went. 
 
Mr. Premier, did any of this money ever go to the NDP? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say that I 
find it a little surprising, after what’s been happening the last 
five years with these members and the Tory caucus, that they 
would raise this issue. 
 
But I just want to say, and compare the record if I could, in 
three main ways. 
 
First of all, in the report he refers to in today’s Leader-Post, 
Mark Wyatt says: “There is no suggestion of any politician 
involved benefited from their allowances.” 
 
So I want to make that very clear. 
 
Secondly, as far as we can see from the record, every invoice 
that members issued and received for office . . . were for real 
office equipment, for real offices, and real utilities. And, I 
would add, at fair market price. And I want to say to you, sir, 
compare that with your former colleagues in the Tory caucus as 
to what they did and their invoices, because they’re publicly 
documented. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the third main point I want to make is that after 
almost 20 years this company had accumulated $500 a year. 
And what did they do with the money? They gave every penny 
of it to a scholarship fund. 
 
I say compare that with the thousand dollar bills — the 
thousand dollar bills that your caucus . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order. Next question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, my question again is for the 
Premier. For the last four or five years I along with a number of 
people in Saskatchewan — I’m sure a majority of the people in 
Saskatchewan — have watched the various trials that have 
come forward. We’ve watched the Tory MLAs and we’ve 
watched the NDP MLA, for I believe Quill Lakes, found guilty 
of inappropriate action. And I, as a member of Saskatchewan 
. . . as a politician in this province, am appalled at the behaviour 
entrusted in those MLAs. 
 
The question I asked of the minister is, Mr. Speaker: did the 

MLA receive . . . did the NDP receive any monies from the 
trust foundations? 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Before permitting the 
Deputy Premier to respond to the question, I want to remind all 
hon. members that question period requires that questions are 
put to ministers for responsibilities charged to them in their 
ministerial capacity. And I will allow the Deputy Premier to 
respond, but I want to caution that the rules for question period 
must be followed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate actually 
the opportunity to answer this question. Because what amazes 
me is that member was so upset with the Tories, that in the dead 
of night he crawled across the floor and joined them, and joined 
them. Amazing disparity in truth. A very ethical move by you, 
sir, very ethical, that in the dark of night you crawled across the 
floor and joined the Tories and sit in the front benches and 
defend them. 
 
If you have any allegations of wrongdoing, any allegations, let 
me challenge you to this. You know the process better than 
anyone else, being part of the Tory caucus. You have lots of 
experience. You know the process. I just tell you, you know the 
process. Turn around and ask the former leader of the Tories, 
he’s sitting right behind you, what the process is if you have 
any allegations of wrongdoing. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, the affairs of this province are 
in the hands of the Premier, and my questions are directed to the 
Premier. In the ruling against Eric Berntson, Justice Gerein 
made the following statement about MLA allowances. I quote: 
 

The allowances were three in number and each had a 
specific purpose. Again, no money was to be spent in the 
furtherance of a partisan political purpose. 
 

Let me repeat that last statement: 
 

. . . no money was to be spent in the furtherance of a 
partisan political purpose. 

 
These two foundations were run by the NDP. The membership 
was open to members of the NDP, and upon dissolution, any 
surplus was to be turned over to the NDP. That sounds like 
partisan political purpose to me. 
 
Mr. Premier, do you feel these payments were appropriate? Did 
any money from NDP MLA allowances ever go to the NDP? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I say again to the member, and I 
want to be clear, that as far as we can see from the records, 
members were properly invoiced for real offices, for real 
equipment, and for real utilities, and nothing else. And I say 
again, over a 20-year period, about 20 years, $500 a year was 
accumulated on average for a total surplus of about $10,000 
after 20 years. 
 
Now I know you don’t understand surplus, being a Tory. You 
would have expected a deficit. But I can say that all of that 
surplus was given to a scholarship fund, was given to a 
scholarship fund to be used by young people. 
 



March 24, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 217 

Compare that with your record, the thousands of dollars, 
thousand dollar bills being shuffled around at some deck in 
some backroom . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . You weren’t 
there. I understand that. What amazes me though is that you, sir, 
crawling on the floor at night across the floor, yes, in the dark 
of night, slithering to join the Tories. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Now I’ll want to remind the Deputy 
Premier that language used in the House should be appropriate 
to parliamentary debate and I think his last reference goes 
beyond those bounds and I’ll ask him to withdraw that remark. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I withdraw the 
remarks that were offensive to the member. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, the 
problem is we have a number of different stories. The member 
for Churchill Downs says there was no surplus. The foundation 
treasurer who works for the NDP says, there was a surplus but 
she doesn’t know how much it was. The articles of 
incorporation say the surplus was supposed to go to the NDP 
and the Clerk of the Assembly says there wasn’t supposed to be 
a surplus in the first place. So did Justice Gerein. 
 
But there’s a very simple solution, Mr. Premier. Open the 
books. Your member for Churchill Downs is sitting right there. 
The foundation treasurer works in the NDP office. Will you ask 
them to open the books of this NDP charity foundation so 
taxpayers can see if any illegal payments went to the NDP? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I say again to the member opposite, 
if you have any suggestion or allegation that there’s any 
impropriety here, none of which has been shown in the report in 
today’s Leader-Post; in fact quite the opposite — I quote again 
Mr. Mark Wyatt saying: “There’s no suggestion any of the 
politicians involved benefited from their allowances.” 

 
I say to the member opposite, every year the statements were 
filed by the company and on dissolution, the final disposition of 
the money is there for the public to see. The $10,000 and some 
change went, every penny of it, to a scholarship fund to help 
young people. 
 
I say, compare that to the record — and I understand why you 
want to throw mud around, it’s election time — but what 
surprises me is that you’re the individual who chooses to defend 
Berntson and company today here in the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, we 
have some conflicting stories out of other NDP charity 
foundations. Mr. Tchorzewski says there were no illegal 
surpluses; but the foundation’s own financial statements say 
that there were. Mr. Tchorzewski also says the foundation made 
donations on his behalf; but he can’t remember who received 
those donations. 
 
Who got those donations, Mr. Premier? Was it the NDP? Mr. 
Premier, the NDP member for Coronation Park was part of that 
until he bailed out and took $1,400 of the illegal surplus with 

him. Will you ask him to open the books so taxpayers can see if 
any of the money went to the NDP? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, there’s not a shred of 
evidence, not a shred of evidence that the member is putting out 
here that’s there’s any wrongdoing by any member at this time. 
There is no evidence. What surprises me a little bit — maybe 
shouldn’t — is that these people, in doing what they’re doing 
today, dealing with and defending the accounts of the former 
Tories are admitting that they’re not doing well as we approach 
the next election. 
 
This is the hockey team that’s five points behind with two 
minutes left to play. The gloves come off, they can’t win. Let’s 
get on the ice and see if we can make them sore and bitter when 
they go home. We can’t win the game but let’s see how much 
damage we can do to them before we lose the game. Well 
you’re going to lose the game. 
 
And I advise you that talking of accounts of former Tories, if 
that’s your strategy for the next election, go ahead and talk 
about it. But I tell you one thing that, if you have allegations, 
you have members in your caucus who have lots of experience 
of what to do with that information. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Saskatchewan Party has obtained a copy of the North Broad 
Community Foundation’s financial returns. The statements 
show that from 1985 to 1988 the corporation filed unaudited 
financial statements. This NDP charity foundation collected 
more than $100,000 in taxpayers’ money from NDP MLA 
expense accounts. And they didn’t think it was necessary to do 
an audit. 
 
Mr. Premier, is that appropriate? Will you clear the air by 
asking your members to open the books and table all the 
financial records? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I must say on behalf of my 
members and my friends who have been in the caucus, I have 
no trouble saying to you very clearly that they will defend their 
record. The documents are clear on the way their money was 
appropriated. 
 
What I don’t understand is how you who have to defend former 
Tories are going to be able to carry out that task. I think I’d 
choose mine far quicker than yours because there isn’t a shred 
of evidence — isn’t a shred of evidence — of wrongdoing that I 
have or anyone in this caucus has. And if you have any 
evidence, you obviously have the experience to know what to 
do. 
 
I have here a clipping from the Leader-Post of August 12, ’97 
— “Sask Party names interim leader” — and there’s a smiling 
face of the individual who’s asking the questions. In it he says: 
“meanwhile Krawetz said he welcomes the endorsement of 
people like former premier Grant Devine and former cabinet 
minister, Grant Schmidt”, and you might as well have gone on 
to say former deputy premier, Berntson, and the rest of the Tory 



218 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 1999 

crew. 
 
I can tell you, sir, that the people who have been involved in 
these companies that rented office and office equipment are . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Next question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, the records also show some of 
that hundred thousand dollars was spent on some very 
questionable expenses. Over $15,000 went to sundry; nearly 
$10,000 went to miscellaneous; another $8,000 went to travel; 
that . . . on top of $2,300 that went to donations. 
 
Mr. Premier, sundry, miscellaneous, travel, and donations were 
not allowable expenses under the MLA office allowance. And 
over $35,000 went into these categories. 
 
Mr. Premier, where exactly did this money go? Did any of it go 
to the NDP? Will you clear the air and release all the financial 
records of these NDP charity foundations? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Let me say to the member opposite, 
again, that all of the processes that were followed were accurate 
and followed the rules of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
At that time everyone admits, and we all admit that when the 
McDowell committee and commission was set up to improve 
the reporting, that changes were made in order to make the 
issues more accountable and make the accounting more 
principled and we’re all involved in that. 
 
But I say to the member opposite, again, there isn’t any 
evidence that any wrongdoing or any allegations of wrongdoing 
at this time or any other time. Even the Leader-Post, even the 
Black newspaper, admits and says very clearly that there are no 
allegations of wrongdoing. 
 
To the member opposite I want to say to you very clearly, 
seems a little strange when you’re defending the record of Mr. 
Berntson and other people who you need to defend, that you 
would cast aspersions here in the Assembly and not outside the 
Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Staffing in Health Care Sector 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This year the Health 
minister declared herself surprised when the nursing shortage 
forced the closure of 64 hospital beds in Regina. However this 
government could have avoided this situation by opening up 36 
spots for practical nursing students at SIAST (Saskatchewan 
Institute of Applied Science and Technology) Wascana Campus 
for people on waiting lists, and 12 spots for nursing education 
programs of Saskatchewan for people on waiting lists for that 
program. 
 
This government, Mr. Speaker, has shown since 1991 that there 
would be a nursing shortage and has done everything to 

encourage it, including shutting off access to nursing programs 
and laying off nurses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister immediately open up access to 
those programs for those students waiting to take those courses, 
and help to alleviate the nursing shortage which is of the 
government’s own doing? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. What’s 
happening now is that we are preparing a long-term strategy to 
address the issues of recruitment and retention in the health 
sector that includes nurses, licensed practical nurses, therapists, 
and all the other health providers that we are going to look at in 
our health strategy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Well, Mr. Speaker, this associate minister was 
the Vice-Chair of the province’s Health Human Resource 
Committee, and she was talking about the impending nurse 
shortage. 
 
This very person, Mr. Speaker, knew about it and now she’s 
talking about a long-term strategy, and that was seven years 
ago. Why then, when the associate minister knew about this, 
why does the government continue to allow nursing students to 
while away on yet another NDP waiting list, when you can 
open up these spots and let those people get the education to fill 
the jobs that we so desperately need in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I’ve said 
before, what we’re doing is looking at a long-term strategy that 
we can address all the needs in the health sector which 
definitely were identified with the Health Human Resources 
Provider Committee that I was Vice-Chair of. 
 
And this is something that takes long-term planning. You can’t 
throw money at it. You have to actually have sustainable 
programs and strategies to address these large issues. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we need the nurses now. 
You talk about a long-term strategy, Mr. Speaker, let’s hear 
about it. Will the Minister commit today that she’s going to 
open up those positions to fill the vacancies that we need in the 
nursing shortage in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. What has 
happened last year in the nursing program is there were spots 
added to address the people that were interested in the program. 
So we have added spots. 
 
We will continue to look at what we need in this province to 
address all our health needs in all the provider groups. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



March 24, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 219 

Expenditures by Department of Agriculture 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, my question’s for the Minister 
of Agriculture. Apparently the minister likes to do a lot of 
flying by the seat of his pants when it comes to dealing with the 
best interests of Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
I’m wondering why the minister rang up a total out of province 
flying bill of over $68,000 in ’97-98; and in the latest year, he’s 
already rung up an air travel bill of over $45,000. 
 
In his travels to places such as Brazil, Mr. Speaker, Chile, 
Mexico, Indianapolis, China, and points in between, there’s 
usually a group of hacks and flacks to carry his bags through 
those busy airports, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the Minister of Agriculture worried about 
falling behind the Deputy Premier in cabinet’s frequent flyer 
race instead of trying to do his best to save the money to 
provide for the priorities of Saskatchewan people? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think in 
response to that, we know that we’ve got extremely productive 
producers and farmers in this province; that we have a Minister 
of Agriculture that is certainly going to do his job whether it be 
in Ottawa, but in other places also. We’ve got export markets 
that are extremely important to the producers of this province 
and that is what our Minister of Agriculture is doing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, the flavour of the month in 
Saskatchewan Agriculture and Food seems to be pork. But 
we’re not talking about the four-legged variety. It appears the 
operating costs of the communications branch of the 
Department of Agriculture for the last two years has gone up 
from 1.2 million in ’96-97 to 1.3 million in ’97-98 — those are 
the last two available years for which we have the figures. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how can this minister reconcile his government’s 
promise to slash government advertising and communications 
eight years ago while doing his very best to increase them? 
Aren’t there any farmers out there that you could help with that 
almost $100,000 increase in propaganda? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I first want to 
say that a number of the trips that the Minister of Agriculture 
has taken has been at the invitation of the federal government in 
order to promote agriculture in our province. 
 
But also, it seems interesting to me that when we get the 
opposition saying if we’re putting dollars into agriculture — 
that’s what we are doing. We spend five times as much per 
capita as any other province or the federal government on 
agriculture programs. Certainly the producers need to know 
about those programs in which we feel we have to communicate 
those to the farmers of this province. We have over 60,000 
farmers; it certainly is a priority for our government. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskEnergy Policy Regarding Termination of Service 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
questions this afternoon are for the minister responsible for 
SaskEnergy. 
 
Mr. Minister, a few days ago, 39-year-old Mr. Richard Wayne 
Bird died in a house fire in Regina. SaskEnergy had cut off the 
natural gas to Mr. Bird’s house because he hadn’t paid his bill. 
To stay warm, Mr. Bird apparently turned on the stove and the 
oven and went to bed. Firefighters believe the heat from the 
stove started the fire that killed Mr. Bird. 
 
Mr. Minister, what is the policy of SaskEnergy when it comes 
to cutting off natural gas supplies to customers for nonpayment 
in the middle of the winter? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
member opposite that the difficult situation that he refers to, and 
I want to extend sympathy to any members of Mr. Bird’s 
family. But obviously it’s a serious issue when the utility 
companies deal with billing and the issue of collection. 
 
I want to say as well that the tragic loss here, I think the 
member does not want to make the step of assuming that this is 
the responsibility or cause of a utility bill not being paid 
because obviously there are many, many grey areas when it 
comes to the issue of billing and companies, and only as a last 
resort do SaskEnergy cut off members of the public and only 
after many, many other approaches are taken to collect. 
 
Now I’m not sure if the member is saying that in this case there 
should have been a different approach but what I would ask him 
is that we allow the process to go forward in this case. There is 
a review going on at the present time and I want to be very, 
very clear to members opposite that the utilities in this province 
are second to none by comparison with lenience as it would 
relate to cutting off . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Next question. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, in 
Saskatchewan we have from time to time some very harsh 
winters. And everyone recognizes that shelter is extremely 
important and heat supplies, electricity, natural gas are 
important in Saskatchewan, perhaps more important than 
anywhere in western Canada, or as important certainly. 
 
What we are asking for is from SaskEnergy and from you as 
minister responsible, is what the policy is with regard to this. Is 
it for non-payment the utility is just simply cut off or is there an 
extended period or is it the policy to not turn off supplies unless 
payment is rendered within a certain period of time? 
 
We’re simply asking what the policy is so that the people of 
Saskatchewan are well aware of the extent that they can expect 
services from the utilities of this province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to get 
into the details of the situation as the member will obviously 
understand, because I think it’s important to know that there is 



220 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 1999 

an issue of privacy. But the concerns that he raises here are 
obviously legitimate ones. 
 
But the fact of the matter is that the corporations that we own in 
this province, when compared against any other corporations, 
have policy as it would relate to disconnect, that are very, very 
lenient. And it’s only as a last resort, and after all other avenues 
are explored, that the energy source would be shut off. 
 
In the case of SaskPower of course, the energy source to run 
furnaces at no time during the winter period will be shut off. 
There’s in effect a policy that would allow enough power to run 
the furnace and other appliances in the house. 
 
But I want to say to the member opposite that I think it’s 
important to know that the corporations that we manage and 
operate and own in this province are particularly lenient as it 
would relate to cutting off services. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Role of Schools in Saskatchewan 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 
very pleased to rise in the House this afternoon in my capacity 
as the Minister of Education. 
 
Together with our partners in education who I introduced a few 
moments ago, we’re announcing a public dialogue on our 
society’s changing expectations about the role of the school. 
 
For more than a century now our schools in Saskatchewan have 
served us very well and continue to serve us very well, but the 
role of the school has in fact changed. Teachers and boards of 
education are increasingly being challenged to meet society’s 
growing expectations for our schools. This afternoon, Mr. 
Speaker, one-fifth of the province’s population is at school. 
That is where they are, that is where they should be, and that is 
where their education needs to be best met. 
 
But many students are in school hungry, neglected, or abused in 
some way and that makes learning very difficult. Our schools 
must now deal with many special challenges. Children that are 
living in poverty, teenage pregnancy, and young offenders in 
our school to name a few. 
 
We’re also challenged to respond to the unique cultural needs 
of a rapidly increasing number of Indian and Metis students in 
our schools. All of these youngsters have the right to a 
high-quality education and the future of our province depends 
on us fulfilling their potential in becoming contributing citizens. 
 
Mr. Speaker, very much good work has already been initiated 
like Saskatchewan’s action plan for children, like our 
community schools program in intercity neighbourhoods and 
northern community schools, and like our integrated services 
project such as the one I’ve been able to visit at the Nutana 
Collegiate in Saskatoon. 
 
But more needs to be done. First, we need to engage the public 
and other stakeholders in a meaningful dialogue about society’s 

changing expectations of our schools. 
 
Second, we must develop shared understanding about how best 
to meet the needs of Saskatchewan children in a coordinated 
way. 
 
And third, we need to seek a broad consensus of what we can 
reasonably expect from our schools and what they can expect 
from our communities and our families and other human service 
sectors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the future I will be appointing a committee of 
five to nine members to undertake this task. The committee will 
be asked to prepare an interim report by June of the year 2000. 
It will then engage in further public discussion on the basis of 
an interim report in order to submit its final report by December 
31 of the year 2000. 
 
In conclusion, let me make one point very clear. While it is true 
that we have increasing, complex social problems presenting 
themselves in our classrooms across the province, the school 
alone cannot solve these problems. Just as it take a whole 
village to educate a child, so too does it take a whole 
community to support a school. The education system by itself 
cannot resolve these issues nor can the government alone 
dictate shared responsibility or legislative consensus. 
 
What we can do, however, is provide the necessary leadership 
and support so that we can address and resolve these issues 
together. I ask, Mr. Speaker, all members of the House to 
support this initiative to help improve a world-class education 
to be the best not only in Saskatchewan but to allow our 
students to participate in global opportunities in the future. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would 
like to commend the partners in education for this initiative. I 
know that the problems that teachers and trustees and school 
boards face is not one that has just surfaced. It is one that has 
been around for a while, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, I want 
to read to you one quotation, and it says this. It says: 
 

Schools and other agencies that serve youth must find new 
ways to work together. Some of these new ways might 
occur within existing organizational structures, others 
might require shifting or elimination of organizational 
boundaries. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that quotation is from a document called the 
Integrated School-Based Services back from 1992. And another 
comment in the . . . a document from that very same period of 
time says: 
 

Schools aren’t structured to deal with all the diverse needs 
of children. 

 
And if there’s one thing I’ve heard from teachers across this 
province, Mr. Speaker, is that schools are expected to do more. 
So many more students come into the school and have very, 
very diverse needs and it is the school that must handle those 



March 24, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 221 

problems. 
 
And I wish that the project that has been put forward today by 
the minister, I wish this project tremendous success. But you 
know, Mr. Speaker, I look at the time line that the minister has 
put in place, and I note that the final report is not going to occur 
until December 31, 2000. That’s almost two years away. 
 
Schools need help now. And they don’t just need verbal 
commitment, the commitments that we saw from government 
agencies back in 1991-92, and then we saw a non-financial 
support of school divisions. We need to ensure that school 
divisions receive the financial support to put in place, to put in 
place, all of those kinds of recommendations that will be for the 
betterment of students. 
 
I want to congratulate the minister on this initiative. I think it’s 
an initiative that all people — parents, students, teachers, 
trustees — look forward to and I hope that this project can be 
moved forward rather than into the new millennium. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would too 
congratulate the Department of Education and the minister and 
the educational partners here today and those other ones that 
will be involved in the process. We certainly know that any 
initiative that will turn the course of events that have happened 
across the province in education to better reflect the needs of 
the students are a welcome one. 
 
I will caution the minister, and I guess I will challenge him that 
given his government’s background, his government’s history 
in making commitments to hear what people have to say and 
then in the final result totally ignoring them, certainly I hope 
that this is not the case here. 
 
(1430) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d ask that the minister ensure, and I know the 
educational partners will certainly see that the process is 
adhered to, and a meaningful one, but in the end it will be upon 
the government’s shoulders to implement the recommendations 
of the people of the province that are involved in education. 
And I challenge the minister, and we will be watching to see 
that that does happen, and hopefully for the sake of our kids that 
are in school today and tomorrow and next year, that this 
process will have some meaningful results in the end. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, in the tradition established by 
this government to return written questions in a timely and 
accurate fashion, I’m pleased to submit question no. 1, and with 
leave of the Assembly to also submit simultaneously the 
answers to written questions 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, all 

the way to 13, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
The Speaker: — The responses to all of the questions 1 
through 13 are provided. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Jess, seconded by Ms. Murrell. 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
my pleasure to resume my participation in this Throne Speech 
debate. As members will recall yesterday at the end of the day, I 
was talking a little bit about the makeup and composition of my 
constituency, Regina Sherwood, and the areas that are in my 
constituency those being the Dieppe Community Association, 
Rosemont-Mount Royal, Prairieview, Normanview West, 
Normanview, Sherwood Estates, McCarthy Park and Walsh 
Acres. 
 
And I talked a little bit yesterday, Mr. Speaker, as well about 
the strong community spirit and volunteer ethic we have in my 
area. And this is very much exemplified by the strong 
participation in our local community associations. 
 
I talked a little bit as well about the volunteer wall of fame in 
the Normanview Shopping Centre in my area and the annual 
activities and nominations that take place surrounding that. 
 
I did neglect, and I’d like to take just a second to congratulate 
two young members of my constituency. They are Tracey 
Mucha and Amanda Snell. Mr. Speaker, these young women 
were on the bronze medal winning team of the Saskatchewan 
Ringette team at the recent Canada Games and certainly all of 
us are very proud that the team did so well. 
 
Ringette, in the northwest part of the city, has been an active 
sports association for a number of years and there is no doubt 
why a team with representatives on it from my area of the city 
could have done well because this association has a long history 
in our area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to turn next to a little bit broader view in 
my remarks and talk somewhat now about the city of Regina. 
Members will recall that yesterday I gave a member’s statement 
on a breakfast meeting that took place on Monday morning of 
this week, sponsored by the Regina regional economic 
development authority. 
 
And this breakfast meeting had representatives of the Canada 
Conference Board, who provided a very interesting and 
informative presentation on the economic outlook, not only of 
the city of Regina but also of the province and of global trends. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to maybe get back to some of those 
remarks and expand upon the remarks that I started in my 
member’s statement on this. Mr. Speaker, I’d first of all maybe 



222 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 1999 

like to quote and read from a press release issued by the Regina 
Regional Economic Development Authority yesterday about 
this breakfast meeting on Monday. 
 
And it says . . . it goes under the title, Mr. Speaker, “Regina’s 
economy hot”, March 22, 1999 and I quote: 
 

“1998 was a stellar year for Regina with the city recording 
its best economic growth in over a decade,” said Marty 
Klyne, president and chief operating officer of the Regina 
Regional Economic Development Authority. 

 
According to Louis Theriault, senior research associate and 
author of The Conference Board of Canada’s, Metropolitan 
Outlook, and I quote again: 
 

The strong activity in construction, commercial services, 
and wholesale and retail sales pushed Regina into second 
place in the nation in terms of best overall gross domestic 
product, that is GDP, just behind Calgary and just ahead of 
Toronto, Ottawa, Montreal, Winnipeg, and Edmonton. 

 
And quoting more from the press release, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Regina and Calgary shared top spot for employment and 
growth in the country in 1998. Nearly 6,000 new jobs were 
created in Regina, an increase of 5.6 per cent from 1997. 
The strong job growth was led by new jobs in 
management, administrative and other support, health care, 
social assistance and the professional, scientific, and 
technical service sectors. 

 
Housing starts, Mr. Speaker, increased by nearly 5 per cent with 
the largest increase coming from single detached homes which 
recorded growth of 26 per cent, second only to Calgary. 
 
Retail sales continued their upward swing with a 6 per cent 
increase in 1998 over 1997. Regina’s retail sales growth was 
second highest in western Canada and fourth highest in the 
country. 
 
Latest figures, Mr. Speaker, from The Conference Board of 
Canada point to another good year in 1999 for the Regina 
region with continued growth in GDP, employment, and retail 
sales. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wanted to go into detail in the press release and 
this breakfast from the other day . . . presentation by The 
Conference Board of Canada, to counteract some statements 
that have been coming from members opposite talking about the 
dismal behaviour of our economy and the mistaken impression 
many of our citizens that might get their . . . out there might get 
about the statistics that members opposite are bringing up. I 
trust much more the judgement and expertise of the 
professionals of the Canada Conference Board more than I do 
about members opposite when it comes to interpreting 
economic statistics. 
 
Mr. Speaker, talking a little bit more about this breakfast I was 
at — and I would like to point out that there were a number of 
us from the government side who were at this breakfast 
luncheon: my colleagues, the hon. member representing 
Coronation Park, also Regina South, the minister responsible 

for Sask Liquor and Gaming and the Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation, and the Minister of Labour were all 
in attendance at this very informative luncheon, as well as many 
civic leaders from Regina and surrounding municipalities and 
communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to maybe at this point talk a little bit about 
the Regina economic development authority. As a sub-share of 
our government caucus we have a group . . . we have a Regina 
caucus that meets on a regular basis, and for the last year and a 
half or so it’s been my honour and privilege to be the Chair of 
the Regina caucus. And it’s also my privilege to point out to our 
listeners out there, our viewers, that here in Regina, of the 11 
constituencies, we are all represented on the government side of 
the House here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — And we have very close and regular contact 
with a variety of organizations at the municipal level, one being 
the Regina Regional Economic Development Authority. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a group that just a year ago was still known 
as REDA, that is Regina economic development authority. 
About a year ago the RM (rural municipality) of Sherwood 
joined together into the organization and they expanded the 
name to what we call RREDA or Regina Regional Economic 
Development Authority. And Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to say 
that since that took place a few months back, that the RMs of 
Lumsden, Edenwold, and McKillop, and also the towns and 
villages of Grand Coulee, Lumsden, Pilot Butte, Regina Beach, 
Southey, Strasbourg, on to White City, have all joined together 
and are part of the Regina Regional Economic Development 
Authority. 
 
And I’d like to first of all on behalf of all my colleagues, 
commend the work and effort of RREDA as we call it, and what 
they do here in the city for economic — city and area — for 
economic development, and certainly for the breakfasts and 
other activities they sponsor, the most recent being this one we 
attended with the Canada Conference Board on Monday 
morning of this week. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d also maybe like to go into some of the details 
that were brought to our attention by The Conference Board of 
Canada at this breakfast. The presentations which took place 
revolved around three major areas. The presentations talked 
about global and national trends and their effect on 
Saskatchewan; the presentation talked about the provincial 
economy and basic provincial trends; and then there was a 
specific section on the city of Regina or the metropolitan 
outlook for the city of Regina. 
 
And this point I’d maybe like to talk about some of the 
provincial trends that were talked about in this presentation. 
And, Mr. Speaker, it was very interesting and I pointed out I 
talked a little bit earlier about what this seminar pointed out for 
The Conference Board of Canada as opposed to some of the 
statistics that have been coming to us on economic activity here 
in the province from members opposite. And one of the first 
things that came out of this was a chart and graph, Mr. Speaker, 
on real disposable income growth in Saskatchewan. 
 



March 24, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 223 

Mr. Speaker, in 1996 real disposable income growth in 
Saskatchewan grew by 11 per cent, a huge increase by any 
standards considering that it was 2 or 3 per cent the year before. 
That was the year in 1996. In any economic terms, this would 
be considered a spike up, Mr. Speaker. That was 1996. 
 
In 1997, there was a decrease of 11 per cent in real disposable 
income growth in Saskatchewan. Again, in economic terms, 
that would be considered a very large spike and this time a 
spike down. Mr. Speaker, this is totally due to the payments 
under the western grain transportation transition payment which 
came into the economy in Saskatchewan’s year in 1996 but 
were out of the economy in 1997. This resulted in a 
year-to-year difference of a change of 22 per cent. 
 
All the statistics that have been raised by members opposite in 
talking about the economic trends in the performance of 
Saskatchewan take this spike, that is the difference where we 
have a 11 per cent increase in one year with a 11 per cent 
decrease the next. When that filtered through to the next year, 
1997, they have taken an isolated, their statistics, to point out 
what they claim to be the dismal economic performance of this 
province. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s just not true. There has still been real 
growth year after year here in Saskatchewan. The fact that you 
can take this spike caused totally by this western grain 
transportation transition payment which is no longer in the 
system, we are now back to a situation where we are on a trend 
of moderate growth. In fact, Mr. Speaker, it’s pointed out that 
for the year 1999 and 2000 real disposable income in 
Saskatchewan should grow modestly, albeit, at 1.5 and 2 per 
cent. 
 
But this cause of this spike that I talked about with the removal 
of the Crow rate and the payments that were taken out, this did 
cause some wild gyrations in our economic performance. 
 
And I’d like to talk next about employment growth in the 
province. Mr. Speaker. Employment growth in Saskatchewan 
was up 2 per cent in 1995, it was up 1 per cent in 1996, up two 
and a half per cent in 1997, but only up 1 per cent in 1998. 
Again this is a direct cause of this change in real disposable 
income that I talked about earlier. 
 
But employment growth is projected to be by the Conference 
Board to continue to grow at one to one and a half per cent in 
each of the next two years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s still important to realize that this is always, 
and continues to be, growth upon growth. There has never been 
a negative growth in employment in Saskatchewan since the 
year 1992. And we can’t forget that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
An Hon. Member: — Who was in office before then? 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Yes, good question. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this also shows up in retail sales and real GDP 
growth here in Saskatchewan. Retail sales in Saskatchewan in 
1995 were up 5 per cent; in 1996, they were up 8 per cent; 

1997, up 8 per cent; in 1998 in the province, they were up 1 per 
cent. Again, this was attributable by the payment of the Crow 
coming in and then going out. 
 
Next year the retail sales are projected by the Conference Board 
to reach two and a half per cent in 1999 and an increase of 
almost 4 per cent in 2000. That is back to a situation of even, 
good growth — but still growth, Mr. Speaker. And again, there 
has been no decrease from one year to the next in retail sales in 
Saskatchewan . . . or drop in retail sales since the year 1991 in 
this case. 
 
An Hon. Member: — And who was in office in ’91 and 
before? 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Good question. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to talk one last area in this, and that is real 
GDP growth. Real GDP grew almost 4 per cent in 
Saskatchewan in 1996, 6 per cent in 1997, but only 1.9 per cent 
in 1998. Again, and I go back again, this is all attributable to 
that Crow rate benefit payment coming in and then not being in, 
in the year 1997. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I wanted to take a couple of minutes to explain 
to the members opposite and certainly clarify to our viewers 
and to my constituents and to the people of Saskatchewan that 
the statistics being used by the members — Statistics Canada — 
are very isolated. They take a worst case scenario in a very 
isolated window and use these to judge our performance by. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to point out that even many other 
institutions in this province do support this view, not only the 
Conference Board. I think many of us have heard of the Fraser 
Institute. This is not exactly an institute that is known to be a 
bastion of central or left-of-centre economics. But even the 
Fraser Institute today, as I understand, ranks us third in the 
province behind . . . or third in the country behind Alberta and 
behind Ontario in terms of economic performance and the way 
we handle our fiscal affairs. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I wanted to take a couple of minutes and 
explain to my constituents and to the people of the province a 
little bit about what . . . to rate this as a province to what I’m 
now going to focus in onto, that is, the performance here in the 
city of Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said before, I chair the Regina caucus; it’s a 
group that I’m very happy to . . . that we work to keep . . . 
maintain closer working relationships with municipal officials, 
and one of those organizations for sure being the Regina 
regional economic development authority. And out of this 
breakfast on Monday morning of this week, I have a number of 
highlights that were part of the report on the outlook for 
metropolitan Regina. And, Mr. Speaker, the activity going on 
here in the city of Regina will take me quite a long time to go 
through and I will ask members to bear with me a little bit 
because it is a great economic story, what’s been taking place 
here. 
 
The report divides the economic highlights into a general 
section first — highlights. I’ll then go into new developments in 
the city of Regina, expansions, major events, future 



224 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 1999 

developments, and infrastructure improvements. So, Mr. 
Speaker, with your kind forbearance and those of my colleagues 
here . . . It’s a long list, and I hope you’ll bear with me. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the city of Regina removed 20 per cent of its 
business tax in 1998, another 40 per cent will be eliminated in 
1999, and the remainder will be eliminated in the year 2000. 
 
Regina recorded the best employment growth in over a decade 
in 1998. Total employment was up 5.6 per cent over 1997, or 
5,700 new jobs. Regina and Calgary, as I said, shared the top 
spot for employment growth in the country in 1998. Regina’s 
robust employment and growth was led by new jobs in business 
services; the category of other services, which includes 
amusement and recreation and tourism; and personal and 
household services; public administration; and health and social 
services. 
 
Retail sales increased by 6 per cent in Regina in 1998 over the 
previous year — the second-highest growth in major prairie 
cities, second only to Calgary. 
 
The value, Mr. Speaker, of building permits reached $140 
million in 1998, down from the near record levels achieved in 
1997 at $154 million but significantly higher than 1996. These 
levels have not been seen since the record levels of the 
mid-1980s. The city of Regina forecasts that the value of 
building permits in 1999 could set an all-time record, that is, 
exceeding $200 million. 
 
The value of building permits . . . Oh, sorry. Total housing 
starts in Regina were up nearly 5 per cent in 1998 over the 
previous year, with the largest increase coming from single 
detached homes which recorded a growth of 26 per cent. 
 
It is important to note, Mr. Speaker, that with the sale of each 
home there is on average approximately 13,000 in ancillary 
consumer expenditures such as moving costs, legal fees, 
improvements, etc. 
 
The average residential selling price in Regina in 1998 
increased to $85,400 from 82,600 in 1997; an increase, Mr. 
Speaker, of 3.4 per cent. Real domestic product, that is GDP in 
Regina grew by 5.7 per cent in 1998 over 1997. 
 
Regina experienced the second largest growth rate in 1998 of 
major prairie cities, slightly behind Calgary’s 5.9 per cent. 
 
Regina led the country in real GDP growth on a per capita basis 
in 1998 at 5.5 per cent over the previous year. Mr. Speaker, 
they led the country in that category. 
 
Regina’s labour force grew by 4.4 per cent in 1998, the second 
highest of the major prairie cities, and only slightly below that 
of Calgary at 4.8 per cent. Regina recorded the lowest 
unemployment rate of all major prairie cities, at 5.2 per cent in 
1998, down from 6.2 per cent in 1997. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Why is this happening? 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Somebody asks why this is happening. It’s 
a very good question. We’ll get at this a little later. 
 

In July 1998, the Canadian Bond Rating Service reaffirmed 
Regina’s AA-plus rating and ranked it among the seven most 
financially stable cities in Canada. 
 
Regina had the second highest real personal disposable income 
per capita in 1998 of the major prairie cities, at $18,468, 
compared to 19,400 in Calgary. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the categories of new developments here in the 
city of Regina, first there’s Capital City Square. In April 1998, 
Home Depot officially opened its 130,000 square foot $10 
million location at the Capital City Square on Victoria Avenue 
East. Home Depot employs 200 full-time and part-time 
employees in Regina. 
 
In October 1998, the Bank of Montreal opened up a 4,000 
square foot new branch at Capital City Square. This branch, one 
of seven in Regina, will provide a full range of up-to-date 
banking services including a drive-through service and two 
automated teller machines. The Bank of Montreal employs 
approximately 100 employees here in the city of Regina, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Also in the Capital City Square mall development, there is a 
Kelsey’s, Grainfields, and A&W restaurants all open in that 
area in 1998. 
 
Close to the Capital City Square there is the West Landing 
Mall, Mr. Speaker. Completed in 1998, this 40,000 square foot 
West Landing Mall in east Regina became home to retailers 
such as Rogers Video, The Wine Mine, 7-Eleven, Shoe 
Warehouse, Little Caesars Pizza, and the Sherwood Credit 
Union’s newest location. 
 
Plans for a new IGA store in the West Landing Mall were 
announced in January of 1998, and the proposed 3.5 million, 
40,000 square foot building is scheduled to open February 25, 
1999. The outlet will employ approximately 222 people. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Where the MLA is. 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Well represented by the MLA of Regina 
Victoria. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Mr. Speaker, at the Southland Mall in 
November of 1998, Jersey City opened a 4,300 square foot 
facility. Other developments at the Southland Mall included a 
Kelseys, Montana Steak House, Chapters, and Starbucks. And 
you know the old saying: you’re not a city if you don’t have a 
Starbucks — somebody told us that at a meeting the other day. 
 
Anyway, Mr. Speaker, other developments in this area . . . also 
other significant developments were $45 million being spent by 
the Saskatchewan film industry in 1998 compared to 23.9 
million spent in 1997. 
 
Under the area of expansions here in the city of Regina, Mr. 
Speaker, we have in March 1998, the CIBC (Canadian Imperial 
Bank of Commerce) announcing it had expanded the Regina 
telephone banking centre by 175 jobs since November 1997. It 
will add . . . CIBC plans to add 100 more positions . . . it added 



March 24, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 225 

100 more in the fall of 1998 to the extent that there are currently 
400 full- and part-time employees at the CIBC Telephone 
Banking Centre here in the city. 
 
In May of last year the Canadian Tire store in south Regina 
officially opened after completing a $3.4 million renovation, 
expanding the store to 73,500 square feet. As a result of this 
expansion the Canadian Tire south added 40 employees 
bringing the total employment to about 135. 
 
In September of last year, Mr. Speaker, Con-Force Structures 
Ltd. opened their new $1 million dry-cast operation in their 
Regina plant. Con-Force has offices and manufacturing plants 
in Regina, Vancouver, Calgary, and Winnipeg. The Regina 
region’s reputation for innovation and its central location to 
markets tip the scale in face of . . . having this expansion take 
place in the city of Regina. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, in October 1998, the Northgate Mall 
officially reopened following a $13.6 million expansion project. 
The project which had begun in April of 1997 made room for a 
new major hallway in the mall, also for a food court, 11 retail 
stores ranging in size from 400 to 5,000 square feet. In late 
1997, the Safeway store also opened its $12.049 million . . . 
square foot operation in the mall. This expansion alone, Mr. 
Speaker, created 43 new jobs. 
 
In May of 1998, Winners opened a retail outlet in Regina’s 
Victoria Square Mall. Winners is Canada’s largest off-price 
retailer employing 75 full-time and part-time employees in its 
new 24,000 square foot Regina location. 
 
An Hon. Member: — And the MLA there is . . . 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — And the MLA is the member for Regina 
Victoria. 
 
In December in 1998, Sport Chek opened its first location in 
Regina in the Victoria Square Mall. The 18,000 square foot 
location offers athletic apparel for men, women, and children. 
 
Earl’s Restaurant also relocated to a larger premises and the old 
Earl’s was taken over by a new restaurant. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all these new and expanded opportunities have 
contributed very greatly to the hot economy that I’ve talked 
about earlier here in the city of Regina. 
 
In the area of major events or signature events as we could call 
them, nearly 12,000 people attended the opening ceremonies of 
the 1998 CanAm Police-Fire Games held here in Regina in 
June. Over 3,000 athletes and their families attended these 
games. 
 
Also in June of 1998 more than 20,000 people attended the four 
sold-out shows of the RCMP Tattoo which was held at the 
Regina Exhibition Grounds. 
 
In November of 1998, approximately 150,000 spectators 
attended Canadian Western Agribition, an annual event here. 
The International Business Centre set a record with 440 guests 
from 46 countries that were registered during last year’s 
Canadian Western Agribition. 

Mr. Speaker, the Royal Red Arabian Horse Show has signed a 
new agreement with Regina Exhibition Park and Regina will 
continue to host this significant event for another three years at 
least. 
 
And finally, who can talk about major events without talking a 
little bit about the Saskatchewan Roughriders. The Riders, Mr. 
Speaker, contribute 35 million both directly and indirectly to 
our local economy on an annual basis. 
 
In the area of future developments, we have the following 
planned activities. In February of 1998, Holiday Inn Hotels 
announced plans to build a new 109 room, $8 million hotel in 
east Regina. The project will create about 8,000 person-hours of 
employment in the construction phase and an annual payroll, 
Mr. Speaker, in excess of 300,000 after opening. 
 
In February 1998, as well, IMC Global announced long-term 
capacity expansions of the IMC Kalium Belle Plaine solution 
mine and the Colonsay shaft mine over the next three to five 
years. 
 
The Belle Plaine operation, the world’s lowest cost potash 
mine, produces a high purity white potash primarily for 
industrial markets and will be expanded from its current annual 
capacity of 2.4 million short tons to 3.2 million short tons. 
 
The expansions will generate approximately 80 permanent jobs 
in the Belle Plaine and Colonsay areas, and about 1,940 
person-years of employment during the construction phase. In 
addition, Mr. Speaker, it is estimated that about 2,160 jobs will 
be created in secondary industries. IMC Kalium employs 
approximately 350 people right now at its Belle Plaine mine. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, in April 1998, Regina-based Minds Eye 
Pictures announced that it will film a $42-million screen version 
of the novel, The Englishman’s Boy. Minds Eye competed with 
45 other companies before winning the film rights to the book 
by Saskatchewan author Guy Vanderhaeghe. 
 
(1500) 
 
In May of last year, Regina-based Crown Life Insurance 
announced plans to sell its insurance business to Canada Life. 
Crown Life, however, will continue to exist as a Regina-based 
investment management company with $1.5 billion in assets, 
mainly real estate, mortgages, and US (United States) insurance 
policies. Canada Life, on the other hand, Mr. Speaker, is 
Canada’s eighth-largest insurance company and will make 
Regina its western Canadian headquarters and maintain 700 
Crown Life employees. 
 
In May of 1998, Central Park Lodges Ltd. of Toronto 
announced plans to construct a four-storey, 135-unit seniors’ 
facility in Regina. This 6.9 million facility will have 
restaurant-style dining, a beauty salon, exercise room, and 
health office. The building will also offer independent living 
suites to residents, and nursing care for seniors who will require 
it. The project will generate 50 jobs . . . pardon me, 80 jobs 
during the one-year construction phase. Once complete, it 
would create 24 full-time and 52 part-time jobs. 
 
In May 1998, Mr. Speaker, SaskTel, our Crown corporation, 



226 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 1999 

announced that it would be spending 100 million on system 
improvements throughout Saskatchewan. Improvements will be 
made to the core network system, including replacing obsolete 
technology, increasing capacity, and improving service 
coverage. 
 
In August of last year, Mr. Speaker, IPSCO announced that it 
will produce 400,000 tonne order of large diameter natural gas 
transmission pipe for the Alliance Pipeline project. Shaw Pipe 
protection will coat the pipe. 
 
According to Regina-based IPSCO, the company’s large 
diameter pipe facilities are fully booked until the year February, 
2000. And this is, Mr. Speaker, great news as IPSCO is on the 
northern fringe of the city, and in my riding, I have quite a few 
. . . quite a number of employees and members of the United 
Steelworkers who are employed at IPSCO. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, in August, 1998 the Federation of 
Saskatchewan Indian Nations signed a multi-million dollar deal 
with Regina-based IPSCO and the Alliance project, pipeline 
project, to transport steel pipe for Alliance’s transcontinental 
pipeline. Various First Nations will haul more than 700 
kilometres of 90-centimetre pipe beginning in the fall of 1998. 
Of the 1,200 workers on the project, Calgary-based Alliance has 
agreed to hire a minimum of 150 Aboriginal workers. The $4 
million pipeline will run through Saskatchewan from Fort St. 
John, BC (British Columbia) to Chicago, Illinois. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, in November, 1998, Days Inn of Canada 
announced signing an agreement with Dimension 3 Hospitality 
to build 96 . . . to build 96-room hotels in Regina and in 
Yorkton. The Regina hotel will also be built on Victoria 
Avenue East across from Eastgate Drive. 
 
In December of last year, the National Energy Board approved 
plans for two pipelines across Saskatchewan. The 
Saskatchewan portion of Alliance Energy is a 3.7 billion 3,000 
kilometre natural gas pipeline; and also to Saskatchewan’s 
benefit, Mr. Speaker, there will . . . approval was given on 
TransCanada pipelines work that is ongoing and continuing 
here in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot more here to go. I hope you’ll bear 
with me. I would like to turn now also to some of the 
infrastructure improvements that has been taking place here in 
the city of Regina. 
 
In February of 1998, the Saskatchewan Opportunities 
Corporation announced plans to invest 15 million in a new 
$100,000 square foot information technology building in 
support of research and development here in the city. The 
project is expected to result in approximate 165 jobs during 
construction, and the building will be occupied by tenants who 
will employ an approximately 300 employees. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Where is it located? 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — University of Regina is the location of it . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . We won’t go into that . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . All the city of Regina. 
 
In April of 1998 the Canada Saskatchewan Agri-Food 

Innovation Fund, Mr. Speaker, announced 1.7 million in 
funding for the Canadian Western Agribition. The fund will be 
used to develop approximately 80,000 square feet of facilities 
through new construction and upgrading on the Regina 
Exhibition grounds. Also a new 34,000 foot link will be 
constructed between the commercial cattle barn and the stadium 
which will undergo extensive renovations in preparation for this 
year’s 1999 Canadian Western Agribition. 
 
In 1998 the Saskatchewan Indian Federated College announced 
a $10 million federal government contribution for the 
construction of a new SIFC (Saskatchewan Indian Federated 
College) building on the campus of the University of Regina. 
SIFC has already raised 3 million from private sources and will 
need to raise another 3 million for the project to proceed. 
 
In April 1998, SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 
Science and Technology), Mr. Speaker, announced that it would 
consolidate the Wascana campus’s eight centres into the former 
Plains hospital complex. This $28.8 million renovation began in 
the fall of 1998 and students will begin moving into the newly 
renovated area in the fall of 1999 with full occupancy scheduled 
for the fall of the year 2001. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, in the fall of 1998, the Regina Airport 
Authority and Transport Canada reached an agreement for the 
transfer of Regina Airport. The Regina Airport is one of 26 
airports across the country to be transferred under National 
Airports’ Policy by the year 2000. 
 
The Regina Airport employs approximately 31 staff. And in 
November 1998, the Regina Airport Authority board of 
directors announced that it had decided to take over the 
management of airport operations. 
 
The authority, Mr. Speaker, will take over operations of the 
Regina Airport in May 1 of this year. This will result in 
enhanced services for southern Saskatchewan’s air travellers, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Also in the fall of last year the new Petroleum Technology 
Research Centre for Regina’s research park was also 
announced. Construction of this $11 million, 55,000 square foot 
building will begin in 1999, and it’s scheduled to open early in 
the year 2000. The facility will be using C2000 energy 
efficiency standards for public buildings and will be one of just 
a dozen buildings in Canada that meets this new standard for 
energy efficiency. 
 
The latest figures also from this report indicate that nearly $740 
million worth of capital projects were just completed or are 
currently under way in the Regina region, covering the period 
1995 to the year 2003. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are significant developments and as you can 
see from the long list of projects that I’ve read from, this has 
contributed greatly to the growth in our economy here in the 
city of Regina. A growth that we continue to, although it will 
slow down somewhat, we continue . . . the Conference Board 
does project this growth to continue in the area of 2 to 4 per 
cent in the next two years to come. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was with great pleasure I had a chance to go into 



March 24, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 227 

some detail with, and share with members, certainly with 
members opposite, the economic activity taking place here in 
the city of Regina that we — myself and my colleagues — 
participate in. 
 
And I think during the Throne Speech debate I’ll get a chance 
to maybe go into some of the other aspects of what we’re going 
to try to do. I will conclude though, my remarks in this budget 
speech debate — sorry, Throne Speech debate — by saying that 
my constituents in Regina Sherwood I am confident support the 
initiatives that this Throne Speech has outlined in jobs and 
economy and fiscal management in health and in education. 
 
And I look forward to supporting and voting with this Throne 
Speech, the mover . . . moved so eloquently by my colleague, 
the member for Redberry Lake, and also seconded by my 
colleague, the member from Battleford-Cut Knife. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, with those remarks I’ll conclude my 
participation in this Throne Speech debate and look forward to 
getting back and talking during the budget speech in the days 
ahead. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d just like 
to take a moment before I enter into the reply to the Throne 
Speech to welcome you back to the legislature, and certainly to 
welcome the new pages, and once again to thank all of the 
Legislative Assembly staff for their support and services during 
this legislative session. 
 
I’d also take a moment, Mr. Speaker, to remember our families 
and our friends out there, our support staff in our constituency 
offices, and all the good people of the province that contribute 
to giving us an overview of their understanding and their 
concerns that they have in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is indeed an honour and a privilege always to 
reply to the Throne Speech on behalf of the people of the 
Humboldt constituency because they are such a creative and 
energetic and innovative community. These people strive 
always towards self-reliance. And they strive to foster their 
belief in free enterprise through their efforts in creating 
businesses and maintaining their agriculture base and their 
family farms. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they are a people, in Humboldt, who measure 
prosperity and success by the quality of people’s lives. And 
they are also, Mr. Speaker, a people who hold a very strong 
belief in free enterprise and they cherish also the freedom to 
identify their needs, to decide how to meet their needs, and the 
right to exercise those decisions. 
 
But unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, many of them in the Humboldt 
constituency, as well as people throughout the province, over 
the past eight years, have been telling me how very dismayed 
they are under the present governance of the NDP. They feel 
that in the last eight years the NDP government in this province 
have been cheating them of exercising those freedoms to a large 
degree. 
 
The socialist NDP government now decides what those 

communities need. The NDP government decides whether they 
need a hospital or a school, and what form these are to take. 
They say the NDP government with their heavy-handed 
government arm, controls and stifles people’s individual lives 
and the way communities will function. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, repressive and regressive taxation policies 
have taken their toll. Unnecessary and intrusive regulations 
have stifled growth and also box in people’s creative efforts to 
the point where people flee the province just so they can enjoy 
and use the abilities they have to work where they can reap 
some financial rewards for their efforts. 
 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, because they cherish their freedom as much 
and more than socialists cherish government control, many of 
them have done the only thing they can do that offers them 
hope. Thousands of young have left Saskatchewan to seek 
meaningful opportunities elsewhere. And now, Mr. Speaker, 
hundreds of seniors, frightened by the inability to access and 
receive the health services they need, are becoming part of the 
new exodus. 
 
They all know, all of the citizens of Saskatchewan know, and is 
saying what is so obvious — NDP Saskatchewan is in major 
crisis in every area and corner of this province. Every aspect of 
health care is in crisis; education is in crisis. 
 
As the second highest taxed province in Canada, businesses 
cannot make a decent profit. Retail sales are down; taxes and 
high utility rates are killing jobs. 
 
Highways are crumbling, and the farm economy, Mr. Speaker, 
is on the verge of collapse. 
 
RM councillors and school boards and health board members 
are at a loss as to how they can provide services needed for 
those that they are attempting to serve, due to unfair cutbacks 
under this NDP government. 
 
And why, Mr. Minister, why is this all happening? Because this 
government’s vision is one only of gaining power and control 
with the end result of robbing people of their rights and 
responsibilities to create their own destiny. 
 
We see this in the health board structure where there are 
government appointed people who ensure government’s agenda 
is followed; that agenda targeted at squeezing funding and 
manipulating the system so that only their NDP government’s 
idea of what health services are needed are in place. And the 
sad thing about this is there is no consideration for the unique 
needs of a particular health district. 
 
And to propel that NDP agenda the government sees that 
bureaucrats and government people from Regina are present at 
health board meetings just in case the appointed board members 
are not exerting enough control. Saskatchewan Health makes 
sure their hacks are present at meetings. 
 
(1515) 
 
Mr. Speaker, people are saying that state ownership of our lives 
and communities is taking place, and every person in this 
province is feeling the negative effects of it and they are now 



228 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 1999 

alerting their families and their friends about this. And they will 
speak clearly of this disdain towards such a system when they 
cast their ballots in the next provincial election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another area of NDP’s intrusion on people’s lives 
is in the area of education. I have had people calling me saying 
that they have chosen home schooling and they have had Social 
Services on their doorstep like state police giving them the fifth 
degree as to whether their own children are receiving the best 
form of education. That is an invasion on personal freedom and 
family rights. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people have experienced tactics of intimidation, 
coercion, manipulation, and threats, and these seem to be the 
order of the day under this NDP rule. They’ll get what they 
want in order to control so that they can remain in power. That 
is the sole reason for being here. That is the NDP vision. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what would benefit the people of 
Saskatchewan greatly is a government whose attitude and 
philosophy is one of belief that individual initiative should be 
substantially rewarded, a government whose members actually 
know what good governance is about. 
 
Good government is meant to serve people, to facilitate an 
environment that encourages and stimulates growth, and to 
devise policies that will lead to and enhance the well-being of 
people. Policies based on common sense principles such as 
individual freedom and equality of opportunity for all citizens. 
Principles that promote economic growth and job creation 
through the private sector not government as the engine of the 
economy — smaller, less intrusive, more efficient government. 
 
Policies that promote steady, gradual reduction in government 
spending and taxation while maintaining a firm commitment to 
balance budgets; a high quality health care system for all 
Saskatchewan people regardless of where they live within the 
province; a strong social safety net which protects those who 
truly need support while encouraging individuals to become 
self-sufficient; and democratic reform to make government 
more responsive to the people it serves. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am proud to be part of the Saskatchewan Party. I 
am proud that this party will bring about the prosperity I have 
just spoken of. 
 
Mr. Speaker, unlike the members opposite who are muzzled and 
unable to speak according to their constituents’ wishes, I am 
encouraged to speak out for my own beliefs and the beliefs of 
my constituents with the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
I think that we all saw, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the constraints put 
on the members opposite during the inquiry into the Channel 
Lake fiasco. The government members on the committee were 
presented with a report written by the Premier’s number one 
man and were told to accept it or walk away. That’s what passes 
for democracy in the NDP government of the day, Mr. Speaker 
— no thinking required or encouraged because their thinking is 
done for them. 
 
Where they believe in strict party discipline handed down from 
the hierarchy above, the Saskatchewan Party believes in the 
freedom of MLAs to speak their mind and to represent their 

constituents. And if the constituents don’t like how we’re 
representing them, we believe they should have the right to 
recall us. That, ladies and gentlemen, is respect for constituents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party opposition has spoken for 
the people who have been forgotten and abandoned by the 
members opposite. Every day of every week of the last four 
years our constituency office have received calls from NDP 
constituencies, members, and their constituents asking for 
assistance and help because the NDP offices would give them 
none. 
 
We have watched as this government has grown more and more 
politically driven with every decision it makes. Those people 
who do not appear to support the government, as is their right in 
a democracy, have learned that they cannot expect much from 
this government either. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite, with their cynical eye on 
the polls and their desperate attempt to maintain power at any 
cost, has left our province more divided than ever before. 
 
There are many examples of this government’s attempts to 
divide the people. The latest example was the spectacle of the 
Minister of Finance blaming the farmers of this province for the 
fact that the budget surplus had disappeared. This was the 
headline in the two major dailies and on the evening newscasts: 
“Finance Minister Blames Farmers.” I know members on this 
side of the House immediately began receiving many phone 
calls from those in the farming community outraged that they 
were being tarred as if they were second-class citizens and 
branded as villains in the eyes of those in the cities. 
 
The fact is, that not a single penny of the farm aid money had to 
come out of the current year’s budget, let alone the whole shot. 
The fact is, that the government had already overspent by 
hundreds of millions of dollars, far in excess of the amount in 
the farm aid package. 
 
But none of this mattered. What mattered to the NDP 
government was to further divide those in rural Saskatchewan 
from those in urban. 
 
And I think it’s sad, Mr. Speaker, when a government and any 
government in this province uses such a political tactic. Instead 
of showing leadership by telling all Saskatchewan residents 
how we are all affected by a severe downturn in the farm 
economy, the NDP sought not to bring people together but push 
them further apart. And I think this is so unfortunate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the Throne was probably the 
weakest I have heard since joining this legislature. It held 
absolutely no vision of where this government or this Premier 
wants to take the province. It’s got to be one of the first times in 
the history of the legislature, or perhaps parliamentary 
democracy, that a Throne Speech was used to respond to the 
election platform of the official opposition. 
 
This Throne Speech was not a blueprint of the government’s 
plans, but simply one political party which is desperately trying 
to maintain power, snipping at another party which dares to put 
forward an alternative for the people of Saskatchewan; an 
alternative vision which I’ll be very happy to outline for the 



March 24, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 229 

members opposite. 
 
We even see the government trotting out what appears to be an 
election slogan: The Saskatchewan Way, The Saskatchewan 
Way. Is that the Saskatchewan way as they see it or the rest of 
us in the province see it? Well let’s look at the so-called 
Saskatchewan way, Mr. Speaker, as proposed by the NDP over 
the course of the last eight years. 
 
According to the NDP, the Saskatchewan way is to increase 
taxes to the people of Saskatchewan by a cool $1 billion a year. 
Tax and spend, tax and spend to expand the bureaucracy, 
mismanagement of Crowns, and pay for their incompetence. 
They give themselves such accolades for being such sound, 
financial managers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well I can only figure out how the good books of farmers 
would look today if they could simply increase the price they 
get for their grain, whenever they wanted, in order to meet their 
bills. Because that’s essentially what’s happening here, Mr. 
Speaker, and what’s the net result? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, they like to talk a lot about the debt of this 
province — do they ever. But you know what, Mr. Speaker, 
something very interesting has happened since 1991, a time 
when the members opposite state they performed a financial 
miracle in Saskatchewan. In fact the total debt of this province 
has actually increased since 1991, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The members opposite can actually see it for themselves if they 
read various reports from the Provincial Auditor, or have these 
reports read to them. According to volume 1 of the Provincial 
Auditor’s 1998 Fall Report, the debt of this province in 1991 
was $17.5 billion. Way too high, Mr. Speaker, way too high; 
there’s absolutely no arguing that point. 
 
But the really interesting part is, Mr. Speaker, that after all the 
backslapping we’ve heard from that side of the House all these 
years for their supposed management skills, the total debt of 
Saskatchewan today stands at 18.9 billion. That’s an increase of 
$1.4 billion, Mr. Speaker. If you’d like, you can read it for 
yourselves on page 13. 
 
And these are figures the people of Saskatchewan can trust, Mr. 
Speaker. They include the total debt of this province including 
unfunded pension liabilities — that dirty little secret that the 
members opposite do not like to talk about. 
 
Since 1991 these unfunded pension liabilities have increased 
from $2.7 billion to nearly $3.7 billion. This is a bill that will 
surely come due, and we have not heard the government put 
forward a single word about how they plan to deal with it. We 
hear them talk about the numbers they want to talk about, but 
the truth of the matter is they have increased the debt over the 
last eight years. 
 
After $1 billion in tax increases, our province’s finances are 
worse off than when the NDP came to power. Now that’s not 
something I would want to boast about, Mr. Speaker. If I were a 
new resident of this province, after hearing this I would 
probably think, well at least the services people are provided 
with must have improved over the one . . . after getting this 
extra $1 billion. But sadly that’s not the case. 

Over the course of the last few days my colleagues have gone to 
great lengths to show that this isn’t the case. Not the case at all. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — In fact in eight key areas Saskatchewan now ranks 
at the bottom or near the bottom of any province in Canada. 
And I think that this is really worth repeating, Mr. Speaker, 
because the government members should have to hear as often 
as possible the result of their destructive and short-sighted 
policies. Job creation — the worst record in the country. In the 
period of 1991, 1992 — pardon me, not 1991 — `92, 1993, 
1994, `95, `96, there was zero job growth and over 4,000 
businesses filed for bankruptcy. Last year Saskatchewan was 
the only province to lose jobs — the only one, Mr. Speaker — 
4,900 of them, in fact. And with every job that disappears, 
another of our young disappears with it. 
 
And we hear the members opposite say that this is an anomaly 
because of the downturn in the agriculture and oil sectors. Well 
the last time I checked, the grain and oil prices were the same in 
Alberta as they are in Saskatchewan. So one would figure they 
should see a similar decline in jobs over there. But that’s not the 
case. In fact, it’s not nearly the case, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Last year while our government’s high tax policy was killing 
jobs, 38,600 were being created in Alberta. And as far as I 
know, Manitoba has been hit hard by the farm crisis as well. So 
what’s happened there — 11,300 new jobs created, 15,000 
more than in Saskatchewan. 
 
Let’s go far afield and look at Newfoundland, Mr. Speaker, a 
province which has been devastated by the closure of the 
fisheries — 6,100 new jobs created there, Mr. Speaker, 10,000 
more than in Saskatchewan. And they are Statistics Canada 
figures, Mr. Speaker, not the concocted numbers that we get 
from the NDP government. The government isn’t simply 
content to shade the truth any more; the numbers that they are 
using are outright fantasies. 
 
The Throne Speech, for instance, congratulates the government 
for creating 30,000 jobs. Well they must be counting 
Manitoba’s figures too because 30,000 jobs have most certainly 
not been created in Saskatchewan. Far, far from it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is a record that should make the NDP government 
members hide their heads in shame. It’s a shameful record that 
can be attributed directly to their high tax policy. And how high 
are the taxes? Let’s go into that. Like I’ve said, they’ve gone up 
one billion since 1991. That’s a billion dollars that is taken 
directly from consumers’ pockets, money that they’d otherwise 
use to take care of their families. 
 
We now have the second highest taxes in Canada. Only Quebec 
has higher taxes. And this doesn’t even include the huge 
increases imposed on people here by the monopoly utilities. 
Massive increases in power and energy and telephone rates. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Humboldt constituency residents and all residents 
of Saskatchewan have to work over half the year simply to meet 
their tax obligations. What a disincentive to set up shop in 
Saskatchewan. 
 



230 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 1999 

And even when the government doesn’t appear to be increasing 
taxes, it is. Government policy has caused a huge increase in 
property taxes in Saskatchewan. The government’s lack of 
commitment to municipal and education funding has meant 
property owners of this province have had to pick up the tab for 
their province’s failures. And the average property tax, Mr. 
Speaker, the average property tax bill for $100,000 of value is 
higher in Saskatchewan than anywhere else in the country — an 
average of $1,920 a year. 
 
(1530) 
 
In Alberta, the average residential property tax bill is 1,460. 
And in NDP BC, it’s only 1,130, where even Glen Clark with 
all the time he spent cooking the books, has managed to lessen 
the tax load for taxpayers. 
 
Once property taxes paid by business is worked into the whole 
equation, the average bill in Saskatchewan comes out to $4,650 
a year — nearly $1,000 a year higher than the second highest, 
Manitoba’s. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP’s taxation policies are proving ruinous to 
our province. These stifling policies have also led to population 
stagnancy in Saskatchewan — no growth. We have the second 
lowest growth in Canada. In this area, we actually squeak by 
Newfoundland but as we can see, if you want a job, 
Newfoundland holds more hope than Saskatchewan. So we 
might even fall into the last place in this category, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Businesses are not coming here, and existing businesses are 
closing down or relocating to the US or other provinces. And 
those highly skilled workers we lack in certain areas are 
choosing to locate elsewhere. 
 
Currently, the NDP is out there trying to recruit nurses after the 
former president of SUN (Saskatchewan Union of Nurses), now 
the Associate Minister of Health, discovered to her shock that 
there was a nursing shortage. Well how easy is it going to be, 
Mr. Speaker, to be able to recruit those nurses when they look 
at their tax bill here compared to other parts of Canada or even 
the States, and when they hear about the horrific stress nurses 
and health care providers are trying to deal with in NDP 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the shortage of nurses is only one of the things in 
bad repair in our health care system. 
 
NDP mismanagement and incompetence has meant that even 
though the provincial health budget is higher than ever before, 
the system itself has never been in worse shape. Vast quantities 
of money are being spent and no one seems to know on what. 
We have fewer hospitals, fewer nurses and doctors, fewer beds, 
and longer waiting lists. 
 
Home care is inadequate to meet the needs of our elderly sick. 
Mental health services are far from adequate. Crisis intervention 
is often lacking. Social workers are drained of energy trying to 
keep up with all of their caseloads. 
 
So where is this money going, Mr. Speaker? We have the 
longest waiting lists in Canada and we have the highest infant 
mortality rate in Canada. And according to the Associate 

Minister of Health we’re going to still have fewer hospitals in 
the unlikely event that the NDP is re-elected. And for all of this 
we simply spend more and more and more. 
 
So what are we getting in return? No one knows. And one thing 
is sure, people have lost confidence and trust in the existing 
NDP administration. And we have to get to the bottom of where 
this money is going, Mr. Speaker, because it’s obviously not 
going to front line services or services that people need to 
provide for their well-being. 
 
It’s the system that is rotten, Mr. Speaker, the NDP system they 
so proudly trumpeted in 1993. Simply put, the whole thing has 
been a disaster. There’s absolutely no denying that, Mr. 
Speaker. Everyone in this province knows it. 
 
The NDP is a party which portrays itself as the only defender of 
medicare in the country. They are not being up front with the 
people of this province. Why don’t they just say what they’re 
doing? Why don’t they just simply say they’re pushing for 
privatization? Let the people know. The sanctimony that comes 
out of their mouths is overwhelming, Mr. Speaker, but equally 
and dismaying . . . so dismaying is the NDP hypocrisy on this 
issue. 
 
Just as the NDP always does when it finds itself in political hot 
water, they start lashing out at their opponents, and when that 
doesn’t work they simply begin distorting the truth. Lately the 
government members have taken to spinning a tale that the 
Saskatchewan Party is opposed to the Canada Health Act. In 
fact the truth is the Saskatchewan Party passed a resolution at 
its founding convention in full support of the five principles of 
the Canada Health Act. 
 
But let’s look at the NDP’s support of this same Act. Mr. 
Speaker, one of these five principles is that of accessibility. 
Does anybody on that side of the House recall that word, 
because over the last seven years health care for many in this 
province has become less and less accessible. They have 
watched as their hospitals have closed and their services have 
disappeared. And people are being forced to pay for more and 
more health services. And they have heard the member from 
Saskatoon Eastview tell them that they will probably be losing 
some more of their services especially in the area of acute care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a situation in this province where some 
people have to drive several hundreds of miles out of province, 
some of them every week, to receive necessary treatment. Of 
course the money for these travel costs comes out of their own 
pockets, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is the NDP’s idea of accessibility. And I call it two-tiered 
medicine. You’re treated one way if you live in one part of this 
province and you’re treated another way if you happen to live 
away from one of our larger centres. 
 
So the NDP has no lessons to teach anybody about the defence 
of health care because their defence has been a sham from the 
start. 
 
And there are other areas too where the NDP has dragged us to 
the bottom of the barrel, Mr. Speaker: in highways, in retail 
sales, in crime, and in welfare numbers. We have more people 



March 24, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 231 

on welfare in this province than we have farms in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to say a word about crime, Mr. Speaker, in particular the 
crime against children on the streets. Mr. Speaker, since being 
elected to this legislature, I have taken a special interest into the 
well-being of the children of our province. In particular, I have 
raised the issue of the growing problem of child abuse through 
the child sex trade in this legislature countless times since 1996. 
And since 1996 I have been greeted with blank stares of 
disinterest and contempt and outrage for even mentioning this 
problem by the members opposite, especially from the Premier 
and Deputy Premier who ironically represent constituencies 
where the problem is so prevalent. 
 
For the past three years the NDP has taken virtually zero 
interest in this issue. Now suddenly two months before an 
election, they trod out a weak Bill in order to look like they are 
taking the problem seriously. And I hope they are, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But where have they been for the past three years? Where have 
they been as hundreds of our youth were suffering and being 
abused, sexually, physically, psychologically, and emotionally 
abused through the child prostitution trade? They’ve been 
nowhere, that’s where. 
 
And I bet a dollar that they decided to write this Bill when their 
own polls showed them that people were concerned. Just like 
they decided the problem of youth crime was an issue after all, 
after years of making excuses for inaction, years of saying that 
it’s overblown by the media. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll have much more to say on the NDP’s feeble 
attempt to address this problem that they have through changes 
to an existing Bill, and I’ll do that at the appropriate time, 
because I believe the issue of child sexual abuse deserves a lot 
of discussion in this legislature. And it deserves to be treated 
with more than a pathetic patch job like we see with the 
amendment to The Child and Family Services Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is simply so many issues facing the province 
and I have little or no confidence that the members opposite 
have any idea of how to handle them. They seem to be drifting 
aimlessly and they certainly have no vision for the future, 
offering no hope for the people of our province. 
 
The people of this province and the Humboldt constituency 
deserve much better, Mr. Speaker. They deserve a government 
that believes that Saskatchewan doesn’t have to be on the 
bottom rung of the ladder. They deserve a government that 
believes that more of the people’s hard-earned money is better 
left in their own pockets. And they deserve a government that 
hasn’t been consumed with its own arrogance, cynicism, and 
cronyism. They deserve a government that truly empowers 
people in our communities to decide and put into action what 
they know is best for them. 
 
Simply put, the people of this province deserve better than what 
they’re getting. And under the NDP administration we have 
seen no new ideas, no inspiration, and no leadership. We have 
had absolutely no indication from the Speech from the Throne 
that there is any hope of seeing, and ever again seeing anything 
from the crew opposite. 

Mr. Speaker, I believe it’s time to settle this. I believe it’s time 
that the members opposite put their record on the line and let 
the people decide. I believe it’s time that the Premier dissolves 
this legislature and calls an election so we can finally free 
ourselves to start revitalizing our lives and engage in the 
wonderful work of recreating Saskatchewan under a 
Saskatchewan Party government. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s nice 
to be able to get up today to represent my constituency of Arm 
River, the people that sent me here. It’s nice to see you back 
and I hope that each one of your ewes has twins this spring for 
you so that that helps subsidize your income here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to make welcome today the folks at 
Central Butte, if there’s anyone listening. They’ve come on 
stream this spring, onto this network. So hopefully if anybody’s 
listening out there, and I know there’ll be a few, welcome on 
board, and hope that they’re happy in hearing what we have to 
say in the legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech that we heard on March 15 
leaves a lot to be desired, Mr. Speaker, and it’s really a sad day 
in this province when a Throne Speech has such a lack of vision 
as this one does. The Premier likes to call this the Saskatchewan 
way and I can’t count the number of times that I had in this 
House and other places, Mr. Speaker, heard the Premier say but 
in Alberta they have more of this or more of that, we should do 
like they do in Alberta, or in Ontario. Did you know that we 
have three times as many something or others as they do in 
Ontario. But when it chooses him . . . when it pleases him, Mr. 
Speaker, then he talks about the Saskatchewan way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we look through this Throne Speech from the 
Premier and from this government it is interesting to note — 
and we’ll kind of go through it part by part I think, Mr. Speaker, 
and then we’ll talk about all the things that aren’t in this speech 
— but the first area that the Premier points to are jobs and 
growth. And the very most interesting part of this thing is the 
fact that he immediately goes to the agriculture community. 
From a government and a Premier and an Ag minister that 
doesn’t give two cents about rural Saskatchewan and 
agriculture, he wants to talk about all the things that he’s done 
for rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And he starts and he likes to toot his own horn quite a bit, and 
he talks about, earlier this year, my government acted to help 
farm producers affected by these events — referring to 
economic overseas wars, drought, and all those type of things. 
The Premier and the Ag minister went kicking and screaming. 
They were dragged to the table to talk about a program for 
farmers and for agriculture producers in this province — not 
like they wanted to go there. 
 
The next day when he makes . . . is my government brought in a 
bridge support program at a critical time to assist our hog 
producers. Now here’s a government that pushed hogs in this 
province. Told everybody that’s the end all and be all to 
agriculture in this province. It’s going to save rural 
Saskatchewan. It’s going to save agriculture, Mr. Speaker. And 
now the first thing they have to do within a year they have to 
come in with a bridge support program to try and prop up their 
own program that they started, Mr. Speaker. 



232 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 1999 

The one part that, Mr. Speaker, that the Premier doesn’t 
mention is the potato industry. The second part of the plan that 
the Ag minister and the Premier and the government brought in 
to save agriculture in rural Saskatchewan is the potatoes. And 
now we’re hearing and getting calls from potato producers 
across this province that the market has fallen out of potatoes. 
And so the guys that were in it, the individual producers, the 
private producers, Mr. Speaker, in this province are now finding 
it tough. And they end up going broke as a result of what the 
province tried to do. 
 
And certainly the minister that lives across the water from me 
who was the driving force behind that as well; Sask Water. 
 
The Premier goes on to say, Mr. Speaker, and my government 
also announced an $85 million top up for NISA (Net Income 
Stabilization Account) accounts. Now we all know in the 
province that the NISA account is a good program. Where else 
can you put your dollar in and have it matched? 
 
However at the SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities) convention, Mr. Speaker — and many of the 
members across the floor were at it — the Premier stood up that 
morning on his soapbox and said: and my Ag minister right 
now, the member from Watrous, is out announcing an $85 
million top up for the NISA program. 
 
Well funny, the headlines in the Star-Phoenix the next day was 
“Province puts in $10 million.” Ten million dollars is what the 
province puts in. And the Premier tried to lead the SARM 
people, the SARM delegates that they were putting in $10 
million. How can you do that? And here he goes and tries . . . 
and he’s trying, Mr. Speaker, to mislead the public again by 
saying they announced a $85 million top up to NISA. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other thing that isn’t mentioned in here is that 
the agricultural crisis is over. The Minister of Agriculture says: 
well, we think the crisis is over; hogs have gone up, price of 
grain is going up, everything is going up. The only thing that’s 
going up are the balloons, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But just so that the minister may be aware that the agricultural 
crisis is not over, I’d just like to quote a couple of things from 
some bills that some farmers have brought into my office, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Here’s a farmer here that wasn’t able to pay his input bill last 
fall at a multinational grain company elevator. He’s trying to 
pay it, but couldn’t. He went in and he made a down payment of 
$1,000 on a $10,000 bill. He said I’ll pay you the rest as I can 
— this farmer still had some grain. Now two days later, Mr. 
Speaker, he gets a notice and it’s a final notice. And it says that 
if this account isn’t taken care of within 20 days, then we’re 
going to turn your account over to a collection agency. 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Speaker, another farmer comes in with a bill that he has to a 
lending institution for a land payment. And the letter starts as: I 
thank you for your payment of $6,000 which we received in the 
mail recently. Well that’s all great, Mr. Speaker, he tried to 
make the bill. Here’s a lending institution that two days later 
comes along and says if this bill isn’t paid, total bill isn’t paid 

within 30 days, we will take action. 
 
Now if that’s the result of what the Ag minister has done in this 
province, in saying the crisis is over, why isn’t he going to these 
multinational grain companies and the banks and saying, hold 
on we need help. We got some help coming. 
 
An Hon. Member: — He promised he would. 
 
Mr. McLane: — He promised he would, and he hasn’t done it. 
Instead he says the crisis is over. So these people are thinking, 
well maybe it is. So why don’t we foreclose on these guys? Call 
in their loans. And who’s going to farm the land, Mr. Speaker? 
Not the Agriculture minister in this province, I can guarantee 
you that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the next part in the Throne Speech — the 
“Saskatchewan Way” — they talk about education. The 
Premier’s dedicated about a page and a half to education. 
 
I had occasion yesterday to talk to a couple of students in this 
province who wanted my opinion on the Throne Speech in 
terms of what was said in the education section. And so I 
pointed out that there was a lot of fluff, a lot of nice things said. 
And much the same as the announcement that the Minister of 
Education made in the House earlier today, that they’re going to 
look into it over the next couple of years and see what needs to 
be done. 
 
There’s problems out there now, Mr. Speaker, as you well 
know, in rural Saskatchewan in particular, with our schools and 
our students, with lack of opportunities to receive the education 
that they’re entitled to. And certainly with the closures we’re 
seeing kids having to ride buses much further than they should. 
 
So nothing in education but a bunch of fluff, Mr. Speaker. And 
if you want to single out post-secondary education, in the words 
of a university student yesterday that I talked to, there’s 
absolutely nothing in there to give him any sense of security 
that he’s going to be able to finish his education and come out 
of there with a job. 
 
Now the next section, Mr. Speaker, is health care. And I guess 
. . . I don’t think we’d have to say a word about health care, Mr. 
Speaker, because the people in this province know exactly 
what’s happened with health care in Saskatchewan — or the 
lack of it. There isn’t any. From massive waiting lists, Mr. 
Speaker, to closures to layoffs of nurses, now trying to get them 
back — there’s nothing there, there’s nothing left, Mr. Speaker. 
It’s almost to the point of no repair. 
 
But anyway I’d like to talk about a couple of the comments that 
the Premier makes, Mr. Speaker, in the health care section. He’s 
talking about reorganizing 400 local health administrations into 
just 32 regional administrations, just 32. He forgot — when he 
booted out the 400 small health boards without so much as a 
thank you, the former minister of Health — he forgot that most 
of them were volunteers, Mr. Speaker. Farmers, schoolteachers, 
nurses, RM administrators . . . (inaudible) . . . you name it — 
these are people on these volunteer boards that ran our health 
system for nothing and did a wonderful job of it. But he 
consolidated them into just 32 regional administrations. And I 
think that’s a good term — regional administrations — because 



March 24, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 233 

that’s what we’ve got, a bunch of administrators out there. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard the Premier, we’ve heard the 
Premier say, at SARM as a matter of fact, in one instance, that 
he’s going to make sure that the federal money, the new federal 
funding for health is going to go to front-line workers. 
 
Well, I think, Mr. Speaker, the Premier should maybe start 
doing something about it because if he watched the papers at all 
— and I’m sure most of you do — you see lots of 
advertisements like this one: Regina Health District advertising 
for a manager of special projects; we’re seeing the Living Sky 
Health District advertising for a community administrative 
coordinator; here again we see the Regina Health District, an 
access team manager, administration. We can go on. They’re 
advertising for five utilization coordinators, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That’s not what the province needs, that’s not what the health 
system needs. We need nurses, we need support staff to make 
sure that the people that need services are going to get them and 
when they do that there’s somebody there to look after them. 
 
The Premier goes on to say, Mr. Speaker: 
 

. . . and by investing in the latest miracles of modern 
technology, additional MRIs (magnetic resonance 
imaging), and state of the art nuclear medicine facilities in 
our major hospitals. 

 
Well, the second MRI that came to this province, Mr. Speaker, 
was bought by the people, not by the government. It was paid 
for by donations; it was paid for by the private industry, by 
private people that bought tickets in Regina. That’s how the 
second MRI came to this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It had nothing to do with this government, it had nothing to do 
with the Minister of Health — any one of the five or six that 
we’ve seen here in the last five years. It had everything to do 
with people wanting some services. And they’re the ones that 
had to provide it. So here again, the Premier is saying well yes, 
maybe we’re going to have all these MRIs, but somebody else 
is going to buy them and he’s trying to take credit for it. 
 
He talks about satellite renal dialysis in Tisdale and Yorkton, 
Mr. Speaker. I know a little bit about dialysis because I have a 
brother-in-law in Saskatoon at this point that’s on it. And he 
talks to people that are driving in from Tisdale, from Star City, 
the other side of Tisdale, Mr. Speaker — they’re driving from 
everywhere. And he’s bragging about having these renal 
dialysis units in those communities. 
 
Well they’re there, but there’s nobody to run them. They won’t 
give them the money to run them, Mr. Speaker. And these 
people got to drive for hours. They’re driving from North 
Battleford. I know a man from North Battleford, Mr. Speaker, 
not much . . . a little bit younger than me, Mr. Speaker, he 
drives from North Battleford after he works eight hours. Can 
you imagine driving to Saskatoon three times a week for that 
kind of treatment when you’re working? Amazing, Mr. 
Speaker. Absolutely amazing. 
 
One of the parts that really concerns me in this section, Mr. 
Speaker, is where the Premier talks about mistakes have been 

made. You bet mistakes have been made. You can’t count them 
on a hundred hands, Mr. Speaker, the mistakes that this 
government in health care have made. 
 
And he talks about well, they introduced “measures designed to 
tackle some (tackle some) of the key priorities still facing our 
health care system.” Some! Wouldn’t you think that the Premier 
would be thinking we got to tackle all the problems that are 
facing our health care system and the priorities. No. He says 
“some.” And I’d like to know which ones the “some” are going 
to be. 
 
Is he going to tackle the waiting lists or what’s he going to 
tackle? Or is he going to tackle the nursing shortage? I’m not 
sure what he means by some, but it sounds like a lack of 
commitment to me. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier goes on to say: 
 

. . . and my government is going to reduce that spending 
even more by working with health districts to further 
economize on health administration. 
 

Well I think I pointed out earlier, Mr. Speaker, how he’s a little 
bit late. They’re hiring administrators daily in this province and 
a lot of that money is going to be wasted long before the 
Premier and this NDP government get around to figuring out 
what’s happening. 
 

And for four years, provinces have tried to cope with deep 
federal cutbacks to health care and other social services. 
 

That’s a quote from the Premier in this document. Well again, 
at SARM, as the Premier and the bear-pit session was taking 
place, I sat at a table with a group of fellows and ladies. And 
one of the guys at the end — and I think actually it was maybe 
from the Minister of Agriculture’s own constituency, I’m not 
sure, I didn’t know the man personally — had a little card, Mr. 
Speaker. And on that card before the Premier started speaking 
he had written: pass the buck. 
 
And you know what, Mr. Speaker? When the Premier was done 
and the bear-pit session was over, that card that that gentleman 
had was full of ticks. Every time they passed the buck to the 
federal government, to the municipality did something wrong, 
to the former Tory government, he’d put a tick on it. And the 
sheet was completely filled when the bear-pit session was over. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, if you don’t think that that table didn’t have 
a good laugh about that, guess again. 
 
So we’ve seen what the NDP have done to health care in this 
province, and it’s not something that I’m very proud of or 
would ever want to have been part of. 
 
The next part, Mr. Speaker, in the Throne Speech document 
talks about justice, Mr. Speaker. And I guess all I can say about 
justice really is that . . . (inaudible) . . . from people that have 
had break-ins, that have had their cars stolen not once, not 
twice, not three times, and not by three different people, but by 
the same young offenders in many cases or other criminals 
because of lack of policing in our rural areas. 
 



234 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 1999 

Now the other interesting thing is the government talks about in 
the . . . I will make mention of it . . . is they support the 
initiatives that the federal government introduced in reforming 
the Young Offenders Act. 
 
Now it was very interesting that the day that that was 
announced the provincial Justice minister was scrambling 
around trying to find out what it was all about. And yet they’re 
trying to tell us that they were down in Ottawa trying to frame 
something into this Act that would help us in Saskatchewan. I 
think it’s a lot of hot wind again, Mr. Speaker, and the Premier 
is trying to let us believe that he actually was trying to do 
something there. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, by now, we’ve come to the back of the 
document, to the end of it. And you know what was missing,? 
One of the glaring mistakes that was missing, that the Premier 
missed, was that he forgot to talk about transportation. Can you 
imagine? In a province that lives and dies on transportation, 
everything we do we have to drive for it. 
 
We’ve got to drive. Our agriculture products are trucked and 
drugged by rail. Our kids are transported over these roads daily 
in school buses. We have to get in the car to go get the mail 
from the farm. So how could he forget about it and why would 
he leave it out? 
 
I can tell you why, Mr. Speaker. Because he doesn’t care 2 
cents about rural Saskatchewan or about the transportation in 
rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, — not 2 cents. 
 
I’ll tell you a little story, Mr. Speaker, that over the weekend I 
had occasion to go visit a grid road because there was people 
driving on it and said they were having to use their four-wheel 
drive to get down this grid road and all that. So I went and saw 
it. 
 
And I tell you, Mr. Speaker, it was despicable, absolutely 
despicable what had happened to that grid road. And you know 
the reason it was in that shape? The reason it’s in that shape is 
because nobody will drive on the provincial highways any 
more. 
 
Four miles from this road, there’s a highway, runs parallel to it, 
it’s called No. 15 Highway, Mr. Speaker. I drove on that 
highway as I went to Carrot River on Monday to attend a health 
meeting. As I turned onto that highway, there’s a big red sign, 
NDP sign. It says the next 31 kilometres, road holes, broken 
pavement — 31 kilometres, Mr. Speaker. Can you imagine a 
sign that said 31 kilometres? I can’t imagine that in this country 
in this day and age. 
 
But I can imagine it when I look across the floor here and see 
what they’ve got here for NDP members. I can understand that. 
So 31 kilometres of broken pavement, nobody’s using it. The 
trucks sure aren’t using it. I used it, but I came home a different 
way, I can guarantee you that. Nobody’s using it. So where are 
they going? They’re going four miles farther south to cross the 
grid road, and that’s why it’s chewed up. Ruts this deep. 
 
And you know what they told me this morning? And this is in 
the Minister of Agriculture’s constituency, the constituency of 
Watrous — it’s not even mine. People come to me this morning 

and says, we’re now having to leave our cars in Simpson 
because we can’t get to the farm with them. They’re either 
taking the truck or the tractor to get to town so they can go 
somewhere with the car if they have to go to the doctor or 
whatever. Can you imagine? That’s what this has come to. 
That’s what these guys, these people across the floor, have done 
to rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And this document has no vision as to how they’re going to 
solve it or fix it. In fact, they don’t even want to talk about it. 
Transportation isn’t even mentioned in this document, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Let’s go across country a ways, Mr. Speaker. And the member 
. . . a neighbouring member is in the House today across the 
floor that represents the constituency across the water from me, 
where the potato industry is. The Department of Highways has 
entered into agreement with the municipalities over there to use 
the grid road to haul the potatoes out. 
 
Now wouldn’t you have thought, Mr. Speaker, that when a 
government want to embark on a program of a product . . . of 
growing potatoes in this province, they’d have said, okay, well, 
number one, how are we going to grow them? Where are we 
going to grow them? And how are we going to get them to the 
market and where’s that market going to be? You’d have 
thought they’d have sat down and looked at it, and developed 
some type of infrastructure to meet all those needs. 
 
No, they went in and they bought up a bunch of acres of land 
and paid farmers to grow potatoes. And now they got no place 
to ship the potatoes, Mr. Speaker — absolutely no place for 
those potatoes to go. The highway is shot. No. 19 Highway is 
shot. Don’t care where you want to drive on it, from No. 1 
North it’s gone. It’s this wide; it’s as wide as a cow trail, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And so now they entered into agreement with these 
municipalities to haul potatoes on the road — on the gravel 
road, on the rural municipality road. Well the RMs entered into 
the agreement, much to the chagrin of many of the local 
taxpayers because it happens to go right by their farms. 
 
(1600) 
 
Now how would you like trucks — semi after semi after semi 
after semi — hundreds of thousands of tons of potatoes, every 
day, going by your farm? Well they don’t like it. But they said, 
we’ve got to get the potatoes out, and I agree. We’ve got to get 
the potatoes out. So they’ve come up with an agreement, and 
it’s probably going to . . . it’s probably going to work. The RM 
may make a little money off it. 
 
But what they should be doing, they should be building the 
highway. Why don’t they build the highway? Why wouldn’t 
they say, we’re going to build No. 19 Highway last year to haul 
these potatoes out, instead of worrying about it now? When the 
potatoes need to be hauled, they’ve got to use the municipal 
road. It makes absolutely no sense. That tells you how much 
planning went into government . . . that there isn’t any. No 
common sense at all, not an ounce of common sense. So any of 
their decisions that they try and solve a problem . . . not a 
minute. 



March 24, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 235 

Mr. Speaker, the last thing I’d like to talk about would be in 
transportation is the short-lines in this province. And I notice 
today — and I was remiss I didn’t bring it with me — there was 
a news release put out by the Minister of Transportation today 
announcing that a deal had been struck with the rail company 
and a short-line on the Red Coat Trail. And I’m happy that they 
did. 
 
But the interesting part, I had occasion last Friday by accident, I 
bumped into a couple of these fellows that were on this 
committee, and one of the things that they told me, yes, we’ve 
got a deal. We think we’re going to do it. One of the real 
problems that we’ve got is the grant money. The 16 per cent 
money that was to be put in by the province and the 16 per cent 
money that was to be put in by the federal government. 
 
An Hon. Member: — What happened to it? 
 
Mr. McLane: — And the first thing that happened to it was 
that the provincial government said, yes, it’s going to be a 
grant. We’re going to give you 16 per cent. You can use it as 
equity and that will help get you off the ground. Wonderful, 
wonderful. What’s happened now? Now the provincial 
government says no, we’re going to take that . . . we’re going to 
call that 16 per cent money back, 16 per cent of the net salary. 
We’re going to call that back from you. 
 
But we’re good fellows, but we’re real good fellows. We’re 
going to give you 15 years to pay it back — 15 years. Now 
that’s reasonable but it does nothing to help get the rail line off 
the ground and established — not a thing, Mr. Speaker. The 
bank looks at this as a debt and not as equity, and so when they 
go, when these short-line companies go to the bank and they 
say what about the 32 per cent, they say it’s debt, Mr. Speaker, 
that’s what the lending institutions say, it’s debt. And that’s 
what these gentlemen from the Red Coat Trail told me, Mr. 
Speaker. That was the real problem and keep fighting for it. 
 
And another reason I’m fighting for it because it’s the right 
thing to do, Mr. Speaker, but also we have a short-line company 
at home trying to buy a short piece of line without any help 
from the provincial government I can tell you that. 
 
Now the second part of this, Mr. Speaker, I’m not done yet with 
this 16 per cent. What’s happened now is the provincial 
government is saying not only we’re going to call the 16 per 
cent back, the provincial share, we’re going to call back the 16 
per cent federal grant as well, and they want to vote that way. 
They’re going to call the federal grant back. 
 
And Mr. Speaker, I just talked to the Minister of Transportation 
in Ottawa’s office today and they’re going to send a letter 
saying that’s wrong, that they want their 16 per cent to be a 
grant and I’m hoping what they’ll say here is that the province 
should come along and give their 16 per cent back as well. 
That’s what I want, Mr. Speaker, and that’s the problem. 
 
So don’t ever let the Minister of Transportation in this House 
say that this is a wonderful agreement with the Red Coat Trail 
and all the things the government has done, the provincial 
government has done, when they haven’t — they haven’t done 
nothing, Mr. Speaker, haven’t done nothing, Mr. Speaker. 
 

So all I can say, Mr. Speaker, with a vision like this 
government’s got and a lack of vision that’s in this document, I 
can tell you there’s no question in my mind why the province is 
in the shape it’s in. And I sure will not be supporting this 
document, Mr. Speaker, and I urge all the members opposite to 
join me in doing that. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it gives me . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of 
pleasure to enter into the Throne Speech debate and speak on 
behalf of the positive future of this province. It should not be a 
surprise to anyone, Mr. Speaker, why the members opposite are 
going to be a long time finding the way to government. They 
cannot see the benefits that are staring them in the face. These 
people with their amendment that talked about darkness and 
their speeches that talk about darkness forget that Saskatchewan 
has led Canada’s economic growth for the last five years. 
 
I think they want Saskatchewan to fail. I don’t think they 
believe in Saskatchewan. They talk about it as if they do and 
then they speak about how awful it is. I think they should 
express a little pride in this province because this province has a 
lot to be proud of. 
 
And that’s what I want to talk about today, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I want to talk about the strength of Saskatchewan 
which is built on the rural economy and the rural communities 
which believe in caring and community and compassion and 
hard work to find our way to a better future, a better future that 
began with the foundation of the province — in fact it began 
before that — and that will continue to build as long as people 
of vision are allowed to govern this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan does have a rich, rich history 
beginning with the Aboriginal people who occupied this land 
and cared for it for many thousands of years. And we have a 
rich time of transition when the explorers found their way to 
this land, already occupied, and in this spirit of caring and 
co-operation, the two groups, the immigrants — the explorers 
— and the native people of this land established an economy 
that was a very, very strong economy. People of Saskatchewan 
experiencing change co-operatively. 
 
So northern Saskatchewan became the centre of the 
Saskatchewan economy; and it became the centre of 
Saskatchewan economy because people traded in beaver pelts 
and they traded in food that came from the buffalo herds which 
were plentiful in the south. They created an economy where 
everybody was equal and everybody was strong. 
 
And that economy over time changed yet one more time when 
settlement came to Saskatchewan in larger numbers and we had 
to start working out some other challenges. Nine hundred 
thousand people moved to this province between the years 1900 
and 1930 and created an entirely new economy. 
 
Once again, change occurred co-operatively where the southern 
communities built and they created an economy built on 



236 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 1999 

working with your neighbours. And they worked out 
arrangements with the Aboriginal people of the day, some of 
which have created some historical conflicts which have not yet 
been resolved, but they created treaties which allowed the 
development of much of Saskatchewan’s rich agricultural land 
and created other lands for Aboriginal people. Again, a huge 
change, but the spirit of caring and co-operation and 
compassion predominated it. 
 
The reason I want to focus on that spirit is because listening to 
the members of the opposition, they want to focus on the 
differences between us and poke holes between the 
relationships of the Saskatchewan people. They want to destroy 
the spirit that built this province. They want to separate rural 
from urban. They want to separate Aboriginal from 
non-Aboriginal. They want to create differences between the 
north and the south. 
 
I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that is not the spirit of any 
Saskatchewan person — never was, not 10,000 years ago, not a 
hundred years ago, and not today. And we will never bend to 
the kind of division that the members of the opposition continue 
to want to place in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — We have built this province and when it’s 
become the best place on earth in which to live because people 
care about each other, because people believe in their 
neighbours, because people want . . . because people know that 
things change and that in order to create change, you have to 
work co-operatively. 
 
So those people who built this nation and those people who 
built this province in the 1900s have now built structures, the 
co-operatives of this province, the Crown corporations of this 
province, and the private institutions of this province that have 
made this the fastest growing economy in Canada for five years 
running. An economy based in rural Saskatchewan because we 
are the most rural of all. An economy based on the strengths of 
community and the strength of caring and the strength of 
compassion and the strength of hard work that no Saskatchewan 
person shirks from. And we have built a great province. We 
experienced the darkness of a few years ago, the darkness that 
the members opposite want to talk about in their speeches. I 
actually have some sympathy for people who listen and wonder 
how while they live in the best province in the world, some 
members can only see darkness. 
 
We came to a period of darkness in the last 10 years leading 
into the ’90s, that where we created a debt and a deficit and a 
division between the people of this province. And the people of 
Saskatchewan said no, there has to be a better way. And as the 
Throne Speech says, “There is no spring though all the world is 
greening, unless you see through eyes renewed with hope.” And 
with those words, if there are any words that define the 
challenge and the opportunity of today, they are those words. 
 
The words that we know we will continue to face challenges, 
there’s nobody in Saskatchewan knows better today the 
challenges that face them than the farmers of this province. But 
that with the hope and optimism that working together we will 
get through the tough times, they continue to put their shoulders 

to wheel and build this economy, and build it to be the best one 
in the world. 
 
I want to speak about the emergence from that dark period from 
which we just came and why we now have a new world in 
which to live, and a new hope and a new sense of 
determination. And I want to speak from it from two 
perspectives. First the work that I do in my department and 
secondly, the opportunity I have to represent my constituents 
and the example they are to Saskatchewan and to the world, 
about how the world should work. 
 
In my department I have the privilege of representing a number 
of major issues of importance to Saskatchewan and they include 
the economic relationships of this province with those outside 
our province and our country. They include the relationship 
between Aboriginal people and all of the people of this 
province within the province and within Canada. 
 
They include the relationship of this province to the country 
constitutionally and legislatively. And they include the 
relationship of the people of Saskatchewan to the 
compassionate institutions of the Saskatchewan Council for 
International Cooperation and the other matters that we carry on 
with respect to caring about other people in the world. 
 
So it’s a privilege to represent this part of the work of the 
government in the goings on and in the carrying out of the 
vision of this government and of the people in Saskatchewan 
expressed in this Throne Speech. 
 
I want to say that one of the most important things to 
Saskatchewan and to Canada is trade. And we have, 
Saskatchewan has, increased its trade virtually double in the last 
five years and we are beginning to see some of the tensions that 
grow from trade relationships growing across the border. 
Another time of change. 
 
Now there are two ways of approaching the kind of conflict that 
we see that results from our economy exporting more to the 
United States. Half of Saskatchewan’s trade goes north and 
south. There’s actually as much goes north and south as east 
and west right now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are a couple of ways of approaching that, 
and we’ve seen from the tensions in the American side that 
some of the people on the United States side of the border have 
chosen to approach this issue from a position of conflict. I know 
the tensions of American farmers because they are like the 
tensions of ours; they are like the tensions of the farmers in 
Herschel, Saskatchewan, and every other small town and every 
other community in Saskatchewan. 
 
But we want to take a different kind of approach. We want to 
take an approach of building relationships with those with 
whom we trade to create an understanding of the issues that we 
need to address to improve trade and to try and create a stronger 
regional economy that builds on the strength of Saskatchewan 
and shares it with the strengths of the States and the northern 
States that deal with us. 
 
And in the interest of that, I had the privilege last December to 
travel to the United States to speak to the congress of state 



March 24, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 237 

governments there to talk about the border relationships. And in 
speaking about those border relationships, when you sit down 
and talk you quickly realize that fighting is not the answer. And 
that finding the reasons why there are different rules on each 
side of the border and why there are barriers to trade; why those 
need to be addressed. 
 
And I want to say I was very, very encouraged by the spirit of 
co-operation that this gathering of all 52 states expressed when 
we spoke in the international panel about building that 
relationship. I had the chance, and I’m going to continue 
building this relationship, to meet the Lieutenant Governor of 
North Dakota and the Lieutenant Governor of Montana to talk 
about those issues on a cross border, neighbourly basis. 
 
And I want to say again that while they are aware of the 
tensions that are there with their agricultural community, 
whether it’s about wheat or durum or beef or hogs or any other 
issue, they realize that it’s in our common interest to address 
those issues that divide us and create a strong regional 
economy. Because we have an awful lot in common. We’re all 
people of the prairies. We’re all people based in agricultural. 
We’re all people quite a ways away from our national capitals. 
We have much in common to deal with. 
 
And I want to say that I was encouraged by the building of that 
relationship, not the division that the members opposite would 
talk about. Let’s fight. No. Let’s co-operate and build a stronger 
country, but build a stronger relationship with our trading 
partners as well. 
 
(1615) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Speaker, I also have the privilege of 
dealing with the Aboriginal Affairs in this province. And one of 
the great learning experiences for me, who’s lived most of his 
life on the farm at Herschel with my family and my community, 
is to have gotten to know Aboriginal people in my daily life 
through my work here and getting to know some of the 
strengths of their accomplishments which I did not know 
before, strengths of their accomplishments which they are quite 
aware of but we don’t see. 
 
Aboriginal people and non-Aboriginal people in Saskatchewan 
have had, in some ways, the disadvantage of not seeing each 
other in their daily lives. As I’ve often said in speeches, we’ve 
lived too long apart. We don’t understand the culture and the 
work that’s going on in the Aboriginal communities and they 
often do not understand all the elements of our economy and 
our construct and our social structures. 
 
One of the emphases that I’ve placed in the work of my 
department is to start to build those relationships, to start to 
work with the federal government to help build those 
relationships to create an economy which is fair and strong for 
everybody. 
 
And I want to say that there is much that has already been done 
that’s positive that started long before this government came to 
power. Back in the 1940s, a relationship was established with 
the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations to give them a 

structure from which they could work, a structure from which 
they can relate to the rest of the province, a structure through 
which their First Nations can speak in order to build their 
economy and their social structures and their future. 
 
I want to say that, without dwelling too long on it, that there are 
some tremendous positive signs of the work that has been done 
over the last 50 years now becoming apparent. It is very, very 
encouraging to see at the recent National Aboriginal 
Achievement Awards, five Saskatchewan Aboriginal people, 
Indian and Metis, — from a 17-year-old university student who 
won a national award to the artistry of Allen Sapp to the 
business excellence of others — winning national awards for 
their contribution to our culture and our economy, to the mix, 
the grand mix of life and culture that we have the privilege to 
experience here. 
 
But it’s also encouraging to see a Harry Cook from the La 
Ronge First Nation win a national business award. And it’s very 
encouraging to see the Meadow Lake Tribal Council running 
one of the best forestry operations in the world from a business 
standpoint and from an environmental standpoint. 
 
We have begun to see the results of strong leadership in the 
Aboriginal community building elements of a strong economy. 
Not enough, not enough, to end the poverty that exists in many 
communities, but certainly a strong start, an example of what 
can be done. And building on that, there is the opportunity 
which has built through education in their communities, where 
Aboriginal students now are roughly representative in their 
numbers in the technical schools and in the universities of this 
province, so that they can go on to build their careers, their 
families, and their communities from a stronger base of 
education and from a stronger base of success. 
 
There’s one other fact I want to reflect about this, and that is 
that Aboriginal youth today — who are one of our great 
strengths; we often hear about the large numbers of Aboriginal 
youth in our province — are establishing businesses at two and 
a half times the rate of the rest of us. What a wonderful, 
wonderful sign of hope that we are beginning to see a critical 
mass of success emerge. And what a wonderful indication to all 
of us that if we continue to work together, one of the challenges 
which faces Canada will be confronted first in Saskatchewan 
because here again we have worked to join and unite and to 
co-operate in order to achieve success with all of our citizens. 
And I’m proud that I have a small place to play in the 
development of that relationship. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had the privilege this year also to work briefly at 
the national scene on building the social union of Canada. One 
of the things that we know from the recent past is that this 
country cannot work when it does not work together, and the 
federal government removed $6 billion out of the coffers of this 
province . . . of this country for social services, and the Premier 
of this province started a battle to respond. 
 
The end of that battle was the signing of the Social Union 
Agreement when there was an agreement to replace some of 
that money and to build a future where there was co-operative 
federalism and not fighting. So again we’ve had a chance to 
create a country a little more caring, a little more 
compassionate, and a little more co-operative. And for that, I 



238 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 1999 

think we can thank the spirit of Saskatchewan for leading them. 
 
The other place that I would like to speak about that happens to 
fit into my responsibility is the compassion of our province. We 
know through things like the Telemiracle, and the 
Saskatchewan Council for International Cooperation, and the 
Ukrainian Advisory Committee that seeks to find co-operative 
relationships to help build the economy and social structures in 
the Ukraine, and from the Canada foodgrains bank which had a 
start here that people in Saskatchewan know the need of 
neighbourliness. 
 
They know that none of us live by our own strength. They know 
that we need each other. So including building the economy we 
believe that about ourselves, our neighbours in Saskatchewan, 
and our neighbours in the world, and that is a spirit that comes 
from this province more strongly than anywhere else in the 
world. And these are the reasons why this is the best province in 
the world in which to live. And these are the reasons why this 
province has created such an influence on Canada and made 
Canada a more caring and compassionate place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m proud that the department that I now have the 
privilege to lead has responsibility for these matters that I’ve 
had a chance to learn and work in this environment. 
 
But I want to before I close, Mr. Speaker, speak to the elements 
that are at work in my constituency that are a reflection of this 
same spirit and the same determination to succeed. 
 
In my constituency our farmers, like farmers across the 
province, have led the world in creating new crops, new 
opportunities, new products from which to establish farm-based 
businesses and processing. And in the years since we have 
changed the agricultural policy of this province, we have seen 
farmers respond as we’ve created an environment healthy for 
growth and for business success. We’ve seen farmers go from 
16 million acres of wheat in this province to nine million acres 
of wheat . . . mean seven million acres are in new crops which 
provide new opportunities for processing. 
 
And without telling all the stories — whether it’s in the pulse 
crops or small fruits or potatoes or pork or beef or any of the 
others, the spices and the speciality oils that are created in this 
province — we have created a base here in Saskatchewan, the 
farm community, for a successful economy. And there is every 
reason for optimism as we face the future in spite of the 
difficult days our farmers are facing now. 
 
And I want to say that the farmers of this province are up to the 
task, and if we continue to work co-operatively, we’ll find our 
way through these days for continued success in the near future. 
 
But I want to speak about co-operation from another standpoint, 
Mr. Speaker. Because the member opposite from Arm River 
was speaking negatively about one of the real signs of 
co-operation in this province. 
 
We know that the debt that the members opposite left the 
people of the province . . . Michael Walker from the Fraser 
Institute today was in the paper saying what a shame it was that 
Saskatchewan’s economy was burdened by the awful 
management of the members opposite. We know that’s a 

challenge we face, and we try to face, we try to find answers 
co-operatively. 
 
One of those arrangements is a co-operative relationship 
between municipalities and the Department of Highways to set 
up road maintenance agreements where municipalities happily 
make their grid roads available because they can be maintained 
and where the Department of Highways, where the Department 
of Highways pays these RMs to help that out. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these members know that a co-operative 
relationship of practical measures is how this province has 
always succeeded and will always succeed in the future. Now 
the members opposite, they holler from their seats because they 
do not . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Now all hon. members will recognize 
that the Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs is located not far 
from the Speaker’s chair and even the Chair is having difficulty 
being able to hear the minister and I’ll ask for the co-operation 
of all, of all the members on both sides of the House. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The members 
opposite hate hearing about co-operation and practical 
arrangements that try to save money, but I’m telling you that’s 
how this province was built in the pioneer days and that’s how 
the future will be built. And that’s why it’s such a privilege for 
me to represent people that work with that spirit who make the 
kind of arrangements the member opposite attacks. 
 
The West Central Road and Rail in my constituency has had the 
distinct honour of leading one of the most progressive ventures 
in trying to save the railroad the members opposite are 
abandoning, that the Tories and the Liberals abandon and that 
will continue to abandon. West Central Road and Rail has 
demonstrated the willingness to run a local business with local 
support, on business principles. 
 
The members opposite rant and rave about all the things wrong 
with the arrangement. You know what? West Central Road and 
Rail likes the arrangement that the province made with the 
federal government and with them in order to facilitate the 
development of the railroad. And you know what the member 
from Arm River needs to know is that banks also respect the 
relationship. Maybe the members opposite should learn to talk 
to banks and banking principles because they don’t understand 
them. 
 
Now I want to say as well, we’ve seen the model of the 
development of hog barns which the member opposite attacks. I 
want to use an example. The Quadra model at home is local 
farmers — 10 and 15 of them — gathering together to create a 
new technology, a new barn that contributes to our economy. 
We will see thousands of jobs in this province in packing and in 
food processing resulting from this growth in the industry. 
Why? Because community groups, farmers co-operate to build 
a new enterprise. 
 
This is the story of Saskatchewan. This is the story of how we 
have become the best place in the world to live. Not because we 
were born with golden spoons in our mouths but because we 
were born with determination and the will to work and the 
commitment to work and to work in the interests of our 



March 24, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 239 

communities. That’s what’s happening, that’s what this Throne 
Speech is about, and that’s what the future of Saskatchewan is 
about. 
 
And I want to speak just briefly about another element of 
compassion seeing that’s a theme of this Throne Speech. With 
respect to compassion, this constituency is a leader amongst all 
the compassionate people of Saskatchewan in achieving some 
things. Now one of the biggest elements of compassion in 
Canada is the health care system. Now the members opposite 
love to get up and hammer at the health care system. They think 
it’s good politics. 
 
Well interestingly the leader of this ragtag crowd of 
malcontents and disloyal elected members that’s across, he was 
at a meeting in Hafford last night. He said he did not understand 
primary care. Amazingly, the Leader the of Opposition party 
lives where primary health care was begun. Amazingly, later in 
the meeting, he says we get excellent health care in Beechy. 
 
Now give me a break. Maybe he hasn’t been home for a while. 
But that primary health care model that was set up in Beechy 
and is an example to Canada, is an example of using practical 
measures to deliver co-operatively good care in the community. 
And the member opposite while he crows about the system, 
acknowledges that it’s excellent. 
 
Meanwhile the member from Rosthern is at Hafford last night 
too. And he’s saying what an awful system, except when I 
needed appendix surgery I got excellent care in the system. 
Now here they go — awful system in which they get excellent 
care. You know it doesn’t add up. 
 
These guys don’t know what health care’s about. They don’t 
know what budget’s about. They don’t know what loyalty to a 
constituency is about. They do not understand the privilege of 
representing their people in this legislature. They do not 
understand the privilege that we have as elected members to 
speak for the most compassionate people in the world and try to 
build an economy based on co-operation and not division. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, in closing, that that is why I 
voted against the dark, critical, no-vision amendment of the 
members opposite yesterday and why I will be very, very proud 
in a number of seconds to stand here to support this Throne 
Speech. 
 
Because in this province the spirit of co-operation and 
compassion and hard work is what will drive it. And the 
deceptive traits of the members opposite and hiding from their 
own past will not get Saskatchewan anywhere. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1630) 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. It now being . . . Order, order. It 
now being 30 minutes before the time of adjournment and the 
sixth day of debate in the response to the Speech from the 
Throne, pursuant to rule 14(4) the question shall now be put. 
 

The division bells rang from 4:34 p.m. until 4:36 p.m. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 34 
 

Flavel Calvert Wiens 
MacKinnon Lingenfelter Shillington 
Upshall Atkinson Goulet 
Johnson Whitmore Serby 
Lautermilch Cline Kowalsky 
Crofford Van Mulligen Bradley 
Koenker Trew Renaud 
Scott Nilson Langford 
Murray Hamilton Junor 
Stanger Jess Kasperski 
Ward Belanger Murrell 
Thomson   
 

Nays — 8 
 

Krawetz Toth Bjornerud 
Gantefoer Julé Aldridge 
McLane McPherson  
 

MOTIONS 
 

Address be Engrossed and Presented to 
His Honour the Lieutenant Governor 

 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I move, seconded by the member from Prince Albert 
Carleton: 
 

That the said address be engrossed and presented to His 
Honour the Lieutenant Governor by such members of the 
Assembly as are of the Executive Council. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 

Ways and Means 
 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I move, seconded by the member from Prince Albert 
Carleton: 
 

That this Assembly, pursuant to rule 92, hereby appoints 
the Committee of Finance to consider the supply to be 
granted to Her Majesty, and to consider the ways and 
means of raising the supply. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:38 p.m. 
 



 

 


