





























































Hansard: April 16, 1999


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 607 
 April 16, 1999 
 
The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to present 
a petition in support of Saskatchewan disenfranchised widows. 
Reading the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to have the Workers’ 
Compensation Board Act amended whereby benefits and 
pensions are reinstated to disenfranchised widows and 
whereby all revoked pensions are reimbursed to them 
retroactively with interest to April 17, 1985. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the petition I have to present to the Assembly this 
morning is signed by individuals from the community of 
Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I arise on behalf of citizens 
asking for a review of parental rights. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide a review process with respect to family 
intervention to ensure the rights of responsible families are 
not being violated. 

 
The signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
communities of Melfort and Fairy Glen. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too have 
a similar petition that is asking for a review of parental rights. 
And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide a review process with respect to family 
intervention to ensure the rights of responsible families are 
not being violated. 

 
And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Melfort and Prince Albert. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I present a petition this morning, 
the prayer of relief of which reads as follows: 
 

We call on the federal and provincial governments to 
dedicate a significantly greater portion of fuel tax revenues 
towards road maintenance and construction in order that 
Saskatchewan residents may have a safe highway system. 

The petitioners come from Maymont, Denholm, North 
Battleford, Richard, Swan Hills, Battleford, Meota, and 
Paynton. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I bring forward 
petitions as well today. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call on provincial and federal 
governments to immediately take steps to end unfair world 
subsidies and provide farmers with prompt relief from 
declining incomes, and act as watchdogs against rising 
input costs which are harming the rural economy. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the people who have signed the petition are from 
Kincaid, Hazenmore, Ponteix, Kinistino, Melfort, Weldon, 
Leader, Maple Creek. I so present. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have this morning 
petitions from the rural municipality of Glen Bain No. 105 and 
the village of Glenbain. And I’ll read the prayer on their behalf: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately start work on the rebuilding of our secondary 
highway system to provide for safe driving on what are 
becoming known as pothole roads, to enter into 
negotiations with SARM and SUMA for a long-term plan 
of rural road restitution reflecting future needs, and to 
provide safety for all drivers as the new trucking 
regulations change safety factors on these roads. 
 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
These folks come from the community of Glenbain, but also 
from Vanguard I see. And I’m happy to present on behalf of 
those, from Gravelbourg as well, this petition today. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk:  According to order the petitions presented at 
the last sitting have been reviewed and found to be in order, and 
pursuant to rule 12(7) these petitions are hereby received. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is 
my distinct pleasure to introduce to the Assembly three persons 
in wheelchairs and their attendants. They are here from the 
Saskatchewan Abilities Council which is in my riding. They are 
participants of the Life Enrichment project with Saskatchewan 
Abilities Council. Their chaperons are Lynne Demeule and 
Barb Murray. 
 
It will be my distinct pleasure after the question period to meet 
with these people and get their reaction to the proceedings. So I 
invite all members to join me in welcoming these people to the 
Assembly. 



608 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 1999 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to introduce to you and through you to the Assembly a 
couple of constituents sitting in the west gallery at the very top, 
Lloyd and Audrey Bell. Lloyd and Audrey brought in some 
petitions this morning and presented them to the Premier. 
 
Along with them is their son Gerry and a colleague Bob who 
are nurses at the Pasqua Hospital. I would ask members to 
welcome them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Ward: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, to you and through you 
it is my pleasure to introduce in your west gallery a group of 
grade eight and nine students from the Torquay School in my 
constituency. With them also is their teachers, Ms. Antosh and 
Mrs. Durr. Their chaperons, Cam Holzer and Ms. Mann, I 
believe. It is going to be my pleasure to meet with them later 
after question period, have a drink with them, and yes I’ll even 
pay for it, Mr. Speaker. So I’m looking forward to them having 
a tour and meeting with them later. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Prairie Agricultural Machinery Institute 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Hon. members, I want to 
take a moment to highlight and celebrate a pillar of 
Saskatchewan’s research and development community which is 
located in the thriving rural town of Humboldt, and publicly 
acknowledged their role in ongoing contributions to our 
agriculture and industrial sectors. 
 
Over the years the Prairie Agriculture Machinery Institute, 
known as PAMI to farmers, has tested nearly 800 farm 
machines, building an extensive base of experience in 
agriculture technology and processes that is unmatched in 
western Canada. 
 
Over 5 million copies of evaluation reports are in the hands of 
farmers and others in the prairie provinces. Their record of 
recommendations for improvements to machinery manufactured 
in Saskatchewan have made a significant contribution to the 
quality and competitiveness of machinery manufactured in and 
exported from Saskatchewan. 
 
In their current programs, PAMI is performing aggressive 
research and development for its clients to promote and enhance 
sustainable agriculture. While being respected worldwide and 
having contracts with many multinational companies that sell 
their product here, PAMI primarily focus on stimulating 
economic enterprises in Saskatchewan through a vast array of 
programs. 
 
As an example they provide safety standards testings to 
companies like Doepker in Anaheim, Eastern Air Supply in 
Canora, and Power Pin of Regina to sell better, safer products. 
 
In their confidential development program, they help about 20 

manufacturers per year to develop new or improved existing . . . 
(inaudible) . . . products. And, Mr. Speaker, there is much more 
that I can say about the work at PAMI, and I will take the 
opportunity a little bit later today to expound on that. Thank 
you. 
 

April Land Sales 
 
Mr. Wall: — Good morning, Mr. Speaker. It’s your good news 
boy from Swift Current with more good news — this time from 
Swift Current and Estevan and Kindersley and Lloydminster. I 
know the member from Kindersley doesn’t like good news so 
I’ll just address the rest of the Assembly. 
 
Yesterday the April land sale of Crown petroleum and natural 
gas rights was announced. The sale, Mr. Speaker, realized 7.4 
million in revenue for the province. This compares more than 
favourably with February sales of 2.9 million and is 
considerably more than the 5.8 million of a year ago. 
 
The Weyburn-Estevan area received the most activity with sales 
totalling 2.9 million. Swift Current of course was right in there 
at 2.2 million. The other areas of play were Kindersley, 
Kerrobert, and Lloydminster. 
 
This is good news, Mr. Speaker. The price of crude oil is on the 
increase, an increase which obviously is stirring optimism in the 
oil patch which makes me feel pretty good too. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Federation of Labour Meets in Davidson 
 

Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today in the community of Davidson in the Arm River 
constituency, representatives of the Saskatchewan Federation of 
Labour will be meeting to discuss the Premier’s future — or 
should I say the lack thereof. 
 
The Premier can’t really be surprised by this, after all he’s 
destroying collective bargaining in this province. Mr. Speaker, 
those sorts of actions have gotten the Premier a walkout of 
8,400 nurses; a smear ad campaign that is encouraging caring 
nurses to leave the province or the occupation; and hundreds of 
thousands of lost health dollars to move patients, most of which 
didn’t need to be moved. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Arm River will be holding a 
meeting in Davidson today to meet with nurses from Moose 
Jaw-Thunder Creek, Regina, Living Sky, Saskatoon and 
Midwest Health Districts. These nurses, Mr. Speaker, want this 
government to treat them with respect and repeal Bill 23. 
 
As the member from Arm River regrettably has a death in his 
family, Jim Melenchuk will be attending in his place. 
 
In closing, I urge the Premier who is all too willing to insert 
himself in the negotiations to join Jim Melenchuk at this 
meeting and tell the nurses that he was wrong, he’s sorry, and 
he’ll now repeal Bill 23. 
 



April 16, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 609 

Lloydminster Credit Union News 
 

Ms. Stanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
congratulate the Lloydminster Credit Union on another 
successful year. Members gathered to hear about the credit 
union’s success at the 56th annual general meeting held on 
March 30. The highlight of the year was an increase in real net 
assets of $12 million. Total assets grew by 4.3 per cent to reach 
over 289 million which exceeds the 1998 budget by 1.6 million. 
 
In addition, surplus earnings for 1998 after expenses and taxes 
are $867,000 of which more than 730 was allocated to a 
contingency reserve. Another positive note for the Lloydminster 
Credit Union is that their membership has increased by 4.5 per 
cent, bringing their total to just over 19,000 members. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also like to mention that John Vinek, 
general manager of the Lloydminster Credit Union, is retiring 
this fall after 31 years of service. The Lloydminster Credit 
Union has flourished and progressed under John’s leadership. 
Over the years he has made a significant contribution to both 
the credit union and the community of Lloydminster. We would 
like to thank John for his contributions and efforts and wish him 
a fruitful retirement. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Birthday of Sergeant-at-Arms 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, this is of course the Year of the 
Older Person, a stage in life which is fast closing in on many of 
us including our Sergeant-at-Arms who observes his birthday 
this weekend. 
 
I ask all members to join with me in wishing him the very best, 
and the people who watch proceedings on television will not be 
aware that it is his unfailing good humour which never fails to 
brighten our day. And to all of us, I am sure, he is an ornament 
to this Chamber. All the best, Pat. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Rural Dinner Theatre 
 

Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, thank you very much. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s spring and in the Watrous constituency the arts 
have come to life in the form of theatre. There are many, many 
active communities who raise funds through theatre in the 
community and I’m just always amazed at the talent and energy 
that goes in, and the success of these. 
 
For example, Mr. Speaker, we have dinner theatres in Viscount, 
in Watrous, Nokomis, Allan, Guernsey, in Semans, Drake, 
Young, and also we’ll take in Imperial. They’re very close and 
they always wanted to be in Watrous constituency anyway, so 
we’ll add them to the list. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, also in the constituency these people work 
very hard in fundraising. Drake, for example, goes into a 
community fund that raises money for the rinks and the halls 
and everything that goes on that needs donated money. 
 
We also, Mr. Speaker, have professional dinner theatre in 

Meacham. This weekend, starting this weekend and for the next 
three weekends, the Dancing Sky Theatre will be putting on a 
performance called The Shipbuilder by Ken Mitchell. And they 
always have very good turnouts. And Angus and Louisa 
Ferguson have worked very hard to bring professional theatre to 
rural Saskatchewan, and that is now surrounded with great 
amateur theatre. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

New Democrat Party Nomination in North Battleford 
 

Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last night I 
drove up to North Battleford. And by the way, if you could see 
my eyes, you’d know that I drove back last night as well. 
 
Anyway it was an amazingly easy city to find on our new 
four-lane Yellowhead Highway between Saskatoon and North 
Battleford, the one fine example this province has of what a 
national highways program could produce, should the federal 
government decide to create one. 
 
However, I digress, Mr. Speaker. I was in North Battleford as 
one of 230 delegates and guests at a very interesting nominating 
meeting. This was to pick the next MLA (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly) for North Battleford. 
 
The hall was packed, Mr. Speaker. Extra chairs had to be 
brought in. There was wonderful enthusiasm and speeches in 
support of three great candidates, and they had wonderful and 
outstanding speeches. 
 
As guest speaker, the Premier was in equal fine form. It took 
two ballots to pick the candidate. She is none other than Kim 
Newsham, a young lawyer who will gladly make room for the 
current member to return to his practice back in North 
Battleford. 
 
The current and future MLAs from North Battleford should 
wave to each other when they meet each other on the road, one 
going home and one coming to do the people’s work here in 
Regina. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Canadian Tire Expansion in Estevan 
 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to inform 
the House about more jobs being created in Estevan. Thirty new 
retail jobs and work for 50 local residents have been created as 
a result of the upcoming construction of an innovative, new 
format Canadian Tire associate store. 
 
A new look store will be located beside the Estevan Shoppers’ 
Mall. With 22,000 square feet of retail space, the new store will 
triple the size of the current location. 
 
The new features of the store will include a 12,000 square foot 
outdoor garden centre, an eight-bay automotive service centre, 



610 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 1999 

and a parking lot that will accommodate five times the number 
of vehicles in the current location. Plans are to have the new 
Canadian Tire store open some time this fall, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Canadian Tire has been serving Estevan since 1973. The 
construction of the new store is part of a 1 billion national store 
expansion program launched by Canadian Tire in 1994. 
 
The national program is designed to provide customers with 
outstanding depth and breadth of merchandise selection, a more 
convenient shopping experience, and unbeatable services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is another example of the many job 
opportunities being created in our province today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Nurses’ Strike 
 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for the 
Premier. Mr. Premier, yesterday you and I both received a letter 
from Debbie Heathcote of Moosomin. The letter reads: 
 

Dear Mr. Premier: It is with great sadness and anger that I 
am writing . . . one of my best friend’s father died last 
night. He was one of the many that had been airlifted out 
of Saskatchewan under your Government’s direction. His 
cardiologist . . . was not happy with this decision and 
verbalized that to management. My friend shared with me 
the emotional experience of going to the airport at 3 a.m. 
. . . and watching the airplane go up into the sky bound for 
Minot. She was in tears . . . that was the last time she saw 
her father alive. Her family believes that his airlift to Minot 
contributed to his loss of will to live and quickened his 
death. 
 

She then goes on to say: 
 

There were nurses in the essential services pool who . . . 
(were willing to look) after him. 

 
Mr. Premier, end this strike now. What are you doing to bring 
this crisis to an end? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
would ask the House to give me permission to read a letter that 
I have just sent to Rosalie Longmoore, the president of the 
Saskatchewan Union of Nurses. And I would like to read it into 
the record. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you. This letter is sent this 
morning and it’s dated April 16, 1999. 
 

Dear Ms. Longmoore: Thank you for your letter of April 
15, 1999. 
 
I believe we share a strong common commitment to getting 
our health system working again, to building and 
improving upon it, and to moving forward to conclude a 

fair collective agreement. 
 
I want to assure you again that we have listened and heard 
registered nurses loudly and clearly. We have all gone 
through some extremely difficult days, and so have the 
people of our province. 
 
For my part, I want to reiterate the following commitments 
to you and to your members, as discussed during your 
meeting with Premier Romanow a week and a half ago, 
and as set out in the attached memorandum: 

 
(1) On workplace issues and conditions: Our government 
is committed to the negotiation of an agreement which will 
address and resolve key workplace issues facing registered 
nurses. We want to ensure that RNs/RPNs can provide 
better care for patients. Priority issues to be addressed in 
this collective agreement include a recruitment and 
retention fund; better seniority provisions; a binding 
independent process to resolve nursing practice issues; a 
commitment to convert casual and part-time work into 
full-time jobs; and other appropriate improvements to 
working conditions. 

 
(2) On pay equity and Dorsey normalization: Our 
government is committed to pay equity for all workers in 
the health sector. The draft MOU contains appropriate 
assurances for SUN members. In addition, we are 
committed to normalizing differences between terms of 
work and benefits caused by the implementation of the 
Dorsey commission. 

 
(3) On compensation: Our government is committed to 
the negotiation of fair compensation — fair to nurses, fair 
to other health care and public sector workers, and fair to 
the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 

 
(4) Regarding Bill 23: Bill 23 presents no obstacle to 
concluding an agreement. The Bill does not forbid 
discussion of any issues. In the event any future 
amendments are appropriate, consistent with the points 
above, they will be presented to the legislature. 
 
I accept your letter of yesterday as a good faith 
undertaking. I ask you to accept this letter and these 
commitments as good faith undertakings as well. 
 
In order for collective bargaining to resume between 
yourselves and SAHO, you, your union and your members 
must abide by all of the laws of Saskatchewan, and with 
the injunction issued by the Court of Queen’s Bench dated 
April 11, 1999. 
 
Please have your attorney contact SAHO’s representatives 
to discuss the next steps. 
 
I believe it’s time for us to resume working together to get 
our health care system working again, and to jointly arrive 
at a fair collective agreement for your members. 
 
Yours sincerely, Pat Atkinson, Minister of Health. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



April 16, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 611 

Response from Minister of Health to 
Saskatchewan Union of Nurses 

 
Mr. D’Autremont: — I listened with great interest to the 
minister’s letter to SUN (Saskatchewan Union of Nurses) and to 
Rosalee Longmoore. Unfortunately I don’t believe it actually 
did address the questions that the nurses were presenting to deal 
with the issue, which was to remove the impediments to the 
wage negotiations. And that, Madam Minister, I did not hear the 
minister say. 
 
She said, we can negotiate but those impediments are still there 
for the next three years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Madam Minister, you spent a lot of time running around the 
province yesterday right in the middle of the health care crisis 
doing NDP (New Democratic Party) business rather than 
carrying on with the necessity to settle this strike in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Madam Minister, will you set aside your NDP priorities and 
focus on ending the strike and meet with Rosalee Longmoore 
and the unions without any preconditions on the labour 
negotiations, on the salary negotiations. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, what I can assure the 
members of the legislature and all of the citizens of 
Saskatchewan, that yesterday we received a letter from Ms. 
Longmoore indicating that she wanted some information 
contained in a letter. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that this letter addresses very clearly the 
issues that Ms. Longmoore referred to. Mr. Speaker, I think the 
letter speaks for itself and we will wait to determine what the 
Saskatchewan Union of Nurses’ response will be to my letter. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam 
Minister, everyone in Saskatchewan wants the nurses’ strike to 
end but your government hasn’t listened to nurses. Instead it 
chose to try and bully them into a contract and the strong-arm 
tactics didn’t work, Madam Minister. 
 
Yesterday, the Saskatchewan Party proposed a compromise to 
break the standoff. We attempted to amend the NDP’s 
back-to-work legislation to remove the impediments to 
negotiations exactly as the nurses and SUN were asking. We 
believe that this action would lead to a resumption of 
negotiations and return to work by the nurses. But you, the 
NDP, flatly refuse to listen because it wasn’t your solution, and 
now the nurses are also saying they will return to work if you 
amend the back-to-work legislation. 
 
Madam Minister, your action now would be better than never. 
Will you do what the Saskatchewan Party proposed yesterday 
and what the nurses have asked for — remove the impediments 
in Bill 23 so that the nurses can go back to work? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I believe that the member 
did not understand or hear the contents of my letter. It’s quite 
clear in my letter, and I will repeat again, verbatim: 
 

Bill 23 presents no obstacle to concluding a (collective) 
agreement. The Bill does not forbid discussion of any 
issue. In the event any future amendments are appropriate, 
consistent with the points above, they will be presented to 
the Legislature. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam 
Minister, those impediments still remain in place, even though 
the nurses extended an olive branch yesterday. And fact is, you 
carried on your attack in today’s newspapers with the ads that 
you’ve been running, attacking nurses and providing them with 
misinformation. 
 
The nurses want to go back to work. The people of 
Saskatchewan want the nurses and the government to 
compromise and to get back to work. Madam Minister, it’s time 
to forget about the Premier’s ego and focus on the proper 
solutions, the solution that we presented yesterday to remove — 
to remove the impediments, the similar proposals that the 
nurses are asking for. 
 
Will you stop attacking the nurses and start listening to them? 
Will you agree to amend your back-to-work legislation, that 
SAHO (Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations) 
and SUN can sit down and negotiate a fair . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order, order. The hon. 
member for Cannington’s question is not on the record because 
the Chair is unable to hear his question being put, and I ask for 
co-operation from members on both sides of the House to 
enable the hon. member for Cannington’s question to be heard. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam 
Minister, will you amend your back-to-work legislation so that 
SAHO and SUN can go back to the negotiating table so that 
nurses can go back to work? Will you take out the offending 
parts of that legislation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — You know, Mr. Speaker, I don’t quite 
understand why the member would be so interested in 
continuing to escalate this situation. Mr. Speaker, the people of 
this province want our health care system to return to them. 
And this government wants that to happen as well, and so do 
the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses. 
 
To repeat again, because obviously the member cannot listen or 
hear, but I will say it again. In the letter, and I quote: 
 

Bill 23 presents no obstacle to concluding an agreement. 
The Bill does not forbid discussion of any issue. 
 

Now just listen: 
 
In the event any future amendments are appropriate, 
consistent with the points above, they will be presented to 
the Legislature, (Mr. Speaker). 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



612 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 1999 

Provincial Tax Rates 
 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 
the Minister of Finance. Mr. Minister, the Alberta treasury 
department recently undertook a study. They figured out how 
much taxes Alberta people would pay if they used 
Saskatchewan tax rates. Do you know how much it is, Mr. 
Minister? — $5 billion; 5 billion. In other words, if Alberta 
charged your tax rates on Alberta taxpayers, they would collect 
enough money to run the governments of Alberta and 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now I don’t think Ralph Klein is going to go for that, so why 
don’t we do something about Saskatchewan’s taxes? Mr. 
Minister, why was there no long-term plan for tax reduction in 
your budget? Why do you have no plan for cutting taxes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I thank the member for 
the question. I notice the member, in his description of Alberta 
taxes, doesn’t bother going into the fact that Alberta residents 
pay a medicare premium, Mr. Speaker. We don’t hear about 
that. 
 
But what I want to say to the member is this, Mr. Speaker. That 
the record of our government since we balanced the budget, has 
been that since 1995 in each budget, Mr. Speaker, we have had 
tax reductions. We have reduced . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. The Chair was 
having some difficulty being able to hear the question being 
put, and now it is being impossible for the Chair to hear the 
answer being provided. And I ask for the co-operation from 
members on both sides of the House. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I want to say this to the member, Mr. 
Speaker, that we have been reducing income taxes and sales 
taxes in this province in every budget since 1995. 
 
And I want to indicate this to the member as well, that when his 
party was last in office they expanded the PST (provincial sales 
tax) to cover restaurant meals, children’s clothing, reading 
materials, and used cars. And they harmonized the PST and 
GST (goods and services tax) and raised taxes for 
Saskatchewan people. That’s their record, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I want to also say, Mr. Speaker, that if we weren’t paying 
$750 million a year in interest on their debt we could eliminate 
the sales tax and cut income tax by 50 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
minister is confused. The Saskatchewan Party is soon to be in 
office. Unfortunately we’ve never had the opportunity to be 
there in the past. Mr. Speaker, the reason for that is because the 
Saskatchewan . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. Now hon. 
members seem to have a great deal of interest in the question of 
the member from Melfort-Tisdale and I advise all members to 
allow him to put it clearly. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

reason, the fact we’re soon to be in office is because we’re the 
only party in this province that’s talking about meaningful tax 
relief. The NDP government has their record to stand on, and 
it’s abysmal. The Liberals think that taxes are not high enough. 
And our party is the only party that’s talking about meaningful 
tax relief, and it’s backed up by WEFA Canada who says it’s 
doable in a sustained, balanced budget way. 
 
Mr. Minister, when will you catch on, this province cannot 
continue to pay the second highest taxes in Canada and have 
any economic growth in this province. Mr. Minister, where’s 
your plan for tax relief? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, we not only have a plan for 
tax relief, we have a record of tax relief. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — We’ve had a successful record of not only 
balancing the books, but starting to reduce the taxes in this 
province. But I want to say to the member, Mr. Speaker, who 
wants to stand here and say he’s not a Tory and he’s not 
associated with the Devine Tories, when he left the Liberal 
Party for the Tory Party he jumped out of the chicken deep 
fryer into the frying pan, Mr. Speaker. And now he’s 
uncomfortable. 
 
And I’d be uncomfortable if I was him too, because he refers to 
the WEFA study of their platform. Six weeks after their 
platform was released, Mr. Speaker, they came out and said that 
they had overstated Saskatchewan’s revenues by $392 million 
and overstated expenditures by $451 million. Well where have 
we heard this before? 
 
And what did the leader of the Tories, Mr. Hermanson, say 
about this, quoted in the Leader-Post? He said, but I think this 
strengthens the document, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well this is the same funny money we saw in the 1980s, and it 
didn’t work then and it won’t work now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Nurses’ Strike 
 

Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question 
today is to the Health minister. And I’ll have to say I’m very 
disappointed in the letter that she read here today. It shows that 
this is just another political game that they’re playing. 
 
And speaking of political games, yesterday my colleague for 
Thunder Creek and I met with nurses from communities 
throughout South Country Health District. We were shocked to 
hear that the CEO (chief executive officer) of the health district, 
Dale Schmeichel, was forcing LPNs (licensed practical nurse) 
from CUPE (Canadian Union of Public Employees) to 
immediately report to work and cross the nurses’ picket lines. 
 
And it doesn’t end there. He says that when CUPE fines their 
members he will have the health district pick up their tab and 
pay the fines. He then threatens if the LPNs don’t go to work 
he’ll discipline them. 
 



April 16, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 613 

Mr. Premier, this is no less than political blackmail. Mr. 
Premier, the nurses of South Country Health District know your 
close ties to Dale Schmeichel, and they want to know if he’s 
acting under your direction. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve learned a long time 
ago that you cannot always rely on the information that is 
shared in this legislature or shared with the public because 
oftentimes the information is not accurate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what I want to say to the member is that I 
understand why he wants to continue to escalate this situation. 
But I want to tell him that the people of this province, the 
government of this province, and the Saskatchewan Union of 
Nurses and their members want to get back to the bargaining 
table. 
 
And we will, Mr. Speaker. We will have a collective agreement 
that is fair to the nurses, fair to the people of this province, and 
fair to other public sector workers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Speaker, Dale Schmeichel, the CEO 
of South Country Health District, worked directly out of the 
Premier’s office to dole out NDP advertising. He was then sent 
to the South Country Health District to try and close down rural 
hospitals and demolish health care. 
 
One day an ad man for the Premier, the next day a strike buster, 
and prepared to go wherever the Premier needs him. At the 
same time Saskatchewan nurses were handing out an olive 
branch, your hacks were hacking it in two. 
 
Mr. Premier, call off your NDP MLA fearmongers, call off our 
strike busters. And for the sake of health care in this province 
will you now stand up and scrap Bill 23. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I would just repeat to the 
public that this member’s information cannot always be relied 
upon. What I can say to the people of this province is that we 
believe that we could possibly see a negotiated collective 
agreement. It will depend on the hours ahead, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know the member wants to continue to escalate 
this situation. But I would suggest to him that what we want to 
do is solve the problem, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier pretends to be a 
great statesman. He claims to be a great negotiator, a great 
conciliator. Well here’s your chance to prove you’re a 
statesman, Mr. Premier — this time here at home in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The nurses want you to repeal Bill 23, especially section 7, and 
not play the games that you’re playing here this morning. As 
the Liberals said at the beginning of the week, nurses need 
section 7 repealed so they can conduct bargaining in good faith. 
 
Mr. Premier, the nurses have extended a hand of peace to you. 
Will you take it and repeal Bill 23, section 7, for sure, or are 
you going to say never? 
 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Premier 
of this province last Wednesday met for over 11 hours to 
address those issues that the parties could not . . . were not able 
to address themselves. Attached to the letter I have sent this 
morning is the memorandum of understanding that the Premier 
thought would solve the issues, the impasse between the 
employer and the employee representative. 
 
This memorandum has a date on it, Mr. Speaker; it has the hour 
on it. Our Premier has spent the last week trying to solve this 
problem, Mr. Speaker. And we believe that with some goodwill 
and with some common understanding, that we can in fact 
ensure that the people of this province have access to the kinds 
of health services that are so necessary. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Premier alone has the power to end this chaos in our health care 
system. He alone can repeal this Bill and bring some sanity 
back to the process and stop the political games that you’re up 
to this morning, Madam Minister. 
 
Instead of being the statesman that he thinks he is, the Premier 
is acting like the spoiled child who pouts in the corner until he 
gets his way. And that’s what you’re doing. The whole country 
is watching, Mr. Speaker. They’re all wondering why this man 
refuses to do what’s right for health care. People in 
Saskatchewan are shaking their heads wondering why the 
Premier, this supposed great conciliator, won’t repeal Bill 23. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask the Premier, will he do the honourable thing? 
Will he do the premier-like thing: accept the offer of peace from 
the nurses, repeal Bill 23, and stop your foolish games, Madam 
Minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I see the member has a lot of support 
on his side of the . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Now, Mr. Speaker, there are people . . . 
there are people in this province, Mr. Speaker, that are 
interested in the public interest. That is our Premier. And then 
there are people in this province that are interested in their own 
personal interest. And that is that member. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Yes. Mr. Speaker, there’s a letter that 
has been sent this morning. The letter indicates clearly the 
position of the Government of Saskatchewan, and we will await 
the results, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Back-to-Work Legislation 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again to 
the Premier. Mr. Premier, as I indicated earlier, a family is 
sorrowing this morning as a result of your policy. The Minister 
of Health indicates that she has responded to the olive branch. 
As I’ve listened very carefully, Madam Minister, Mr. Premier, 



614 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 1999 

you could show real leadership by saying, including in that 
letter to SUN, you could show some goodwill and show some 
leadership by rather than saying we will make necessary 
changes to Bill No. 23 after negotiations, by saying we put all 
that aside, we will sit down and honestly and fairly negotiate 
with you. 
 
Mr. Premier, will you indeed open up fair and complete 
negotiations without holding a hammer over the nurses’ heads? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I want to reiterate again 
to the member that there is a section in the letter that I sent this 
morning that indicates that Bill 23 presents no obstacle to 
concluding our collective agreement. The Bill does not forbid 
discussion on any issue, Mr. Speaker. And in the event that 
future amendments are needed to the legislation, we believe that 
those amendments will be presented to this legislature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 26 — The Apprenticeship and Trade 
Certification Act, 1999 

 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 26, 
The Apprenticeship and Trade Certification Act, 1999 be now 
introduced and read a first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 240 — The Motor Vehicle Impoundment 
and Forfeiture Act 

 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I move 
that this Bill be introduced and now read a first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 27 — The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 1999 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 27, The 
Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 1999 be now introduced and 
read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 28 — The Administration of Estates Amendment 
Act, 1999/Loi de 1999 modifiant la Loi sur 

l’administration des successions 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 28, The 
Administration of Estates Amendment Act, 1999 be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I 
would ask leave to move first reading of a Bill, The Resumption 

of Services (Nurses-SUN) Amendment Act, 1999. 
 
Leave not granted. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 7 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Serby that Bill No. 7 — The Prairie 
Agricultural Machinery Institute Act, 1999 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 16 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Lautermilch that Bill No. 16 — The 
Mineral Taxation Amendment Act, 1999 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Bill No. 16, The 
Mineral Taxation Amendment Act, 1999. While this Bill 
contains some very minor changes it is nonetheless important in 
that it deals very specifically with our potash industry which 
has obviously blossomed since government control was 
eliminated and people were put in charge that knew what they 
were doing, to the extent that Saskatchewan citizens are now 
proud of that particular element of our industries. 
 
As the minister explained, IMC (International Minerals and 
Chemical Corporation (Canada) Ltd.) Kalium is expanding at 
its Belle Plaine mine which is good news coming to us from the 
private sector — and I again underline it comes from the private 
sector. Hopefully we’ll see a similar expansion at Colonsay 
down the road as well. 
 
The main changes in this Bill, Mr. Speaker, will allow potash 
producers to pay their taxes on a consolidated basis instead of 
separately on each individual mine. 
 
While none of us likes to pay taxes, it should at least be as 
convenient as possible. So this is probably a pretty good 
change. If the members opposite know anything, it’s how to tax 
people. So we bow to their significant expertise, Mr. Speaker. 
 
While the changes being proposed in this Bill are minor and 
won’t bring an end to the world as we know it, nonetheless they 
do give us some reason for concern because the government is 
simply continuing to follow a path we’re not that comfortable 
with. Many of the Bills we see moves much out of legislation 
and moves the things into regulations. 
 
This Bill goes a step even beyond that, Mr. Speaker. Here we 
see moving some details out of regulations and giving the 



April 16, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 615 

minister sole discretion to change things. In this case, it is 
simply a matter of the acceptable form that is to be used. 
Whereas currently regulations set out what the form looks like, 
now it’ll be solely up to the minister, outside of regulations. 
 
Once again we’re only talking about a form and it’s not the 
most important thing in the world. However I just want to point 
out that once again how much power is being taken away from 
this legislature, that we’ve moved away from legislation, 
leap-frogged right over regulations, into the minister’s office. 
Now the government is skipping right over those regulations. It 
is a concern we want to draw to the member’s attention, that we 
see more and more of this every session. 
 
While we do have some questions about this Bill, they can 
certainly be handled in Committee of the Whole. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 3 — The Intestate Succession Amendment Act, 
1999/Loi de 1999 modifiant la Loi de 1996 sur les 

successions non testamentaires 
 

Clause 1 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I’ll begin by inviting the minister to 
introduce his official. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Yes, Mr. Chair, I’m pleased to have with 
me Susan Amrud from the Department of Justice. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and good afternoon — or 
good morning I guess — Mr. Minister. And I would like to 
welcome your official, Susan Amrud. It seems to me that the 
name is very familiar and I may have a little chat with Susan a 
little bit later. I think you may have been from out in the Bruno 
area at one time or your family was. So it’s nice to see you here 
today, Susan. 
 
Mr. Minister, we have discussed a little bit about this 
amendment Act and it seems fairly clear what the Act is for. 
And as I’ve mentioned before we are very happy to see this 
kind of amendment. It clarifies some things and it clearly 
defines what happens to someone’s estate if they die without a 
will. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, I have a couple of questions and they’re very 
brief. One of them is, what sort of research was done as to how 
many families this amendment will actually affect? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — At this stage, it’s hard to tell. We know 
that there was one solicitor, then a few others that we talked to, 
who had run into this problem. But usually it arises in a 
situation actually where there’s some props, some mineral 
rights that are found and an oil company wishes to enter into a 
lease and then when they try to figure out who owns it, they 
realize that the registered owner on the title of the mineral rights 
is back two or three estates. And then they have to figure out 
how that asset can be moved forward. It’s in those situations 
then that you need to have a clarity in this law. And so 

practically we don’t know exactly how many. It’s very few, 
very few. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m having a little bit of 
difficulty following. I’m wondering if we’re on the same Bill. 
We are talking about The Intestate Succession Amendment Act, 
okay. I think you went right into mineral rights and so on and I 
guess that’s not quite where my mind was, so I will accept your 
answer certainly and re-read it in Hansard yesterday and try to 
make the connection to my question. 
 
Could I just ask you one other, two other questions here. There 
is an amount of $10,000 that is stated as the minimum for a 
preferential share, and I was wondering how was the $10,000 
figure arrived at? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The present law is $100,000. When the 
change was made in 1978, at that point they increased it from 
10,000 which was set in 1960. So up until 1960 there was no 
preferential share for the widow or the spouse of the deceased. 
In 1960 they took 10,000. I think the concept was roughly the 
value of an ordinary house at that time. By 1978 they increased 
that amount to 40,000, and then in 1990 that amount went up to 
100,000. So that’s roughly where the amount comes from is the 
value of the home. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Okay, so then, Mr. Minister, from what you’re 
saying there was already a preferential amount that was placed 
in the Bill by 1990 already, or, so this is 1999. Is this 
amendment simply to reiterate that 1990 figure? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — No, this amendment relates to the fact that 
in 1978, when this Bill was amended, they forgot to reference 
the fact that any estate prior to 1960, the amount was zero. The 
Act in 1978 said any matter before 1978 would be $10,000; 
after 1978 it would be $40,000. But when you have an estate 
that you’re trying to probate, say from 1952, the amount in that 
one is zero. Then if you had another estate that was in 1972, it 
would be 10,000; if it was in 1982, it would be 40,000; 1992, it 
would be 100,000. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, that’s a very fine 
explanation. 
 
My last question is simply: does the length of marriage affect 
this preferential share in any way? For example, if the couple 
was only married a few months, would this preferential share 
apply in that case? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The preferential share would apply if 
you’d been married for five minutes. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister, and I bid you 
a good day. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Committee members, your Chair has 
made his first error of this session. I forgot to invite the minister 
to report the Bill without amendment, and I now do so. 
 



616 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 1999 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’d like to thank 
my official, Susan Amrud, who was with me when we dealt 
with that Bill, and I would move that we report this Bill without 
amendment. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 4 — The Securities Amendment Act, 1999 
 

The Deputy Chair: — I’ll begin by inviting the minister to 
introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’m pleased to 
have with me Ms. Barb Shourounis from the Saskatchewan 
Securities Commission and Mr. Brent Prenevost from the 
Department of Justice. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Welcome to the 
officials, the minister. Minister, in your speech you referred to a 
committee, I believe it was the Zimmerman committee that 
made recommendations that the thrust of these amendments or 
this legislation comes from. Can you tell me how many 
recommendations there were and how many of them are being 
incorporated into this legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — We don’t have the exact answer, but there 
were approximately 12 to 15 recommendations, somewhere in 
that range, and about a third of them are part of this 
recommendation. 
 
I guess I should explain a little bit about the process. The 
Zimmerman committee was chaired by a person who was a 
CEO of, I think, Noranda, and he ended up working with the 
whole of the industry of Canada looking at securities and 
looking at a number of the issues around the bidding process in 
takeovers. And out of that there were some recommendations. 
 
These recommendations then went to all of the securities 
commissions in Canada who reviewed them as it related to their 
own particular jurisdictions and some draft proposals were 
prepared and shared through the Canadian securities 
commission organization and those went through quite a 
number of discussions, and finally there was a version that 
everybody agreed should be incorporated into provincial 
legislation across the country. 
 
And so what we have here is in our amendments is the version 
that is being passed in other legislatures across the country. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, minister. Were there any of the 
recommendations that had impact on the national government 
in this collegial effort where the recommendations that had 
impacted and need to be passed on the national legislation 
stage. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The answer to that is no, because there is 
no jurisdiction in the federal government as it relates to the 
securities commissions. And that’s why we have the discussions 
that we do about how we can work together as provinces and as 
securities commissions in the country to set up a system that has 
a national character but retains the regional and provincial tools 

to make sure that we can raise capital in Saskatchewan or 
Alberta or whatever. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Minister, is similar legislation being passed 
in all other provincial jurisdictions or are there some 
jurisdictions that are not choosing to pass this legislation? Or 
can you give us an update on the status of what’s happening 
across the country? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Yes, I can report on that exactly. British 
Columbia, Alberta, and Ontario have already passed this 
legislation but it hasn’t been proclaimed. Manitoba hasn’t put 
their changes forward yet but they’re on track to do that. 
Quebec has started with the process but it hasn’t been passed 
there. Nova Scotia hasn’t put forward their changes yet. New 
Brunswick, PEI — Prince Edward Island — Yukon Territories, 
and Northwest Territories do not have takeover bid legislation 
at all in their legislation. With Newfoundland, we’re not quite 
sure what they’re doing. 
 
But basically in those jurisdictions where this kind of legislation 
is in place, either it’s been passed and not yet proclaimed or it’s 
in the process — except for Newfoundland which we don’t 
know. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, minister, and is there the 
agreement that all of these legislatures and the legislation that 
they’re going to propose is going to be seamless in so far as that 
the timelines — the fact that you can change timelines, etc., by 
regulation instead of statute — those sorts of things, is that 
going to be implemented, you know, basically on the same 
basis right across all the provincial legislatures? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The answer to that is yes. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, minister, and I take 
it from your initial answer to the question in terms of the 
communication with the local companies that are affected, or 
potentially affected, have been part of this whole process and if 
that . . . I take that at face value that the discussions, the 
communications have been very positive and very ongoing. 
 
It’s certainly the information we’ve received and we’re very 
much supported and congratulate you on implementing this in a 
timely fashion. Thank you very much. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 8 inclusive agreed to 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Before I do that I 
would like to make a special point of thanking the staff at the 
Saskatchewan Securities Commission for all of the hard work 
that they’ve done in this national initiative to improve the 
securities legislation in Canada. 
 
And I’d also like to thank Mr. Brent Prenevost and others who 
work with him for their advice as we work through these 
changes which make it better for business in Saskatchewan, but 
also in Canada. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 



April 16, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 617 

Bill No. 18 — The Constitutional Questions 
Amendment Act, 1999 

 
The Deputy Chair: — I’ll begin by inviting the minister to 
introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I am pleased to 
have with me Darcy McGovern from the Department of Justice, 
and also Tom Irvine from the Department of Justice. Tom is 
part of the constitutional law branch and has had special advice 
around this Bill. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And welcome to you, Mr. 
Minister, and to your officials this morning. When we have a 
title or a Bill that uses the word “constitutional questions,” it 
right away sounds like it has a whole lot of importance behind 
it. 
 
So the first question I have, Mr. Minister, is how many 
constitutional-related cases have had the need for the 
intervention of the Attorney General? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — It’s difficult to know exactly how many, 
but I think if we use the term “dozens” would be accurate in 
each year. 
 
And basically it comes up in different ways. Sometimes people 
who are involved in a particular case will just phone in and find 
out if it actually is a constitutional issue, so there’d be contact 
based on this particular legislation. But ultimately it doesn’t 
involve the Attorney General being involved in the particular 
case so it’s hard to give an exact number. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. You mention that these things 
would arise in different ways and the information would come 
through to you in different ways. And I wasn’t quite sure of the 
comment you made. Does the Attorney General decide whether 
it is merited for him to intervene in a case? Like how is that 
decision made? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The normal procedure would be that the 
director of the constitutional law branch would receive the 
notice. And many of these are routine; they’re of a similar 
nature and they will be dealt with very quickly. 
 
Some of them though involve much greater research. They 
would then be dealt with within the constitutional law branch 
with some briefs and ultimately go to the deputy minister. If it 
was one that the deputy minister felt needed review by the 
minister, then it would come to the minister. 
 
As you can tell, there would be some cases each year that have 
a broader nature to them and those are the ones that have a 
higher profile and actually have an involvement of the lawyers 
for the Attorney General in them. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — This amendment, I believe, basically 
reinforces the practice that already exists with lawyers and they 
already adhere to that particular practice. How was it ensured in 
the past that they were in fact informing the Attorney General in 
constitutionally-related cases? 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — This particular legislation has been in 
effect since 1979 and in the normal course the lawyers will 
provide the information. One of the issues that does come up 
though is: is it just the law itself; is it the various other parts of 
it; whether it’s some of the regulations or whether it’s under 
other pieces of legislation; and I think also involving sometimes 
the municipalities. And so the issue sometimes isn’t always as 
clear. 
 
What we wanted to do with this legislation, which is quite 
simple, was just to make sure that all lawyers would know that 
it included all aspects of the law, whether it was the statute or 
whether it was the regulation or some other situation like that. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. You mentioned 
that this sort of had its beginnings — and I believe the date you 
mentioned was 1979 — and I guess the question I had . . . I 
believe in 1995, The Interpretation Act 1995 may have 
unintentionally narrowed the operation of the term “regulation.” 
Could you discuss briefly, as my last question, how that 
narrowing may have resulted in 1995? 
 
(1115) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Basically we would call this preventative 
measure. There’s a possible argument that nobody’s made yet 
and we don’t know of any case that’s involved, but we just want 
to make sure it’s absolutely clear that the term “regulation” in 
that interpretation Act wasn’t incorporated in the broader 
definition of law that’s in this Act. 
 
And so just for further clarity, we want to make sure it said all 
of the different words that are used to describe what we’re 
doing. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’d like to thank 
my officials and others within the department who have assisted 
them for their work in this area and I would move that we report 
this Bill without amendment. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 3—The Intestate Succession Amendment Act, 
1999/Loi de 1999 modifiant la Loi de 1996 sur les 

successions non testamentaires 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 4 — The Securities Amendment Act, 1999 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 



618 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 1999 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 18 — The Constitutional Questions 
Amendment Act, 1999 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Justice 
Vote 3 

 
Subvote (JU01) 
 
The Chair: — Before I invite questions, we’ll begin by inviting 
the minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’m pleased to 
have with me a number of the officials from the Department of 
Justice: John Whyte, who’s the deputy minister of Justice and 
deputy attorney general; Doug Moen, who’s the executive 
director of public law and community justice; Colleen 
Matthews, who is executive assistant to the Deputy Minister; 
Elizabeth Smith, who’s the director of the administrative 
services branch; Keith Laxdal — back there — who’s associate 
deputy minister of finance, administration division; Ron Hewitt, 
who’s the assistant deputy minister of registry services division; 
Darryl Bogdasavich, who’s the executive director of the civil 
law division; Richard Quinney, who’s the executive director of 
the public prosecutions division; Don Head, who is the 
executive director of corrections; Dave Gullickson, who’s a 
senior policy analyst; and Laura Bourassa, who is the Crown 
counsel from the policy planning and evaluation department. 
 
I look forward to your questions. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And good morning, Mr. Minister, 
and to your officials this morning. We have a number of 
questions that I think are of fair importance and interest to 
people throughout this province. 
 
Section 147(1) of The Non-profit Corporations Act states that 
all non-profit corporations must file an annual financial return 
with the corporations branch. In section 147(3) it states that a 
corporation that fails to file its annual returns “is guilty of an 
offence . . . liable on (a) summary conviction” of a fine of up to 
$5,000. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’m going to list a number of non-profit 
corporations that were struck from the corporate registry for 
filing to file financial returns. And the ones I’m going to list are 
as follows: The Regina Community Development Foundation, 
the North Broad Community Foundation, the west side 
community foundation, the Churchill Heights Assistance 
Association, Pine to Prairie Management Inc., cathedral area 
property management corp., Regina Wascana Plains 
Community Foundation, and the North East Community 

Foundation. 
 
Mr. Minister, was any legal action ever taken against any of 
these corporations for, under 147(3), failing to file financial 
returns? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The answer is no. Normal penalty is that 
they’re struck from the register. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — That’s fine. That’s a normal penalty. But my 
question was, was any legal action ever taken? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Not that I’m aware of. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Okay. So normally there should be 
something happen; 147(3) says that they are guilty of an 
offence liable for summary conviction of a fine of up to $5,000. 
So I guess my question then is if that that’s very plain and 
simple in 147(3), why wasn’t any legal action not taken? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — As far as I know from the officials there 
never has been a prosecution under this section. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — That’s amazing, Mr. Minister. We have this 
section which states very clearly — nothing obtuse about the 
language in there — that that’s the offence and that’s what 
should happen. And I guess my question is, it seems interesting 
that these corporations involved NDP MLAs. 
 
How much did that play . . . how much of a part did that play in 
the fact that nothing ever took place on those difficulties? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — It took no part at all. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Very interesting that we have a situation 
where according to 147(3) an offence took place. Basically 
these all involved NDP MLAs, and your department chose to 
take no action. 
 
Mr. Minister, what’s the point of having this provision in the 
law if you’re obviously not taking any action to enforce it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — If the member wishes, I think there are 
approximately 3,000 other corporations that are in a similar 
situation. As with many of our pieces of legislation they include 
sanctions and penalties that may be used in some situation, 
whether it’s a specific complaint. 
 
And in this type of legislation it’s . . . well obviously, there 
hasn’t been a complaint that required the use of this legislation. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — It’s interesting that you have this big, long 
list of corporations that apparently have done the same thing. I 
guess if you would have addressed any of those you would have 
been forced to address these. And that may explain why your 
department has been so lax in that area. 
 
Mr. Minister, when a non-profit corporation is struck from the 
corporate registry for failing to file financial returns, what is 
supposed to happen to the assets? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — You’re getting into a question where 
you’re asking something we don’t have all of the details here. 



April 16, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 619 

But my understanding is that normally when a corporation is 
struck or wound up or ended or whatever happens to it, assets 
are disposed of pursuant to the articles of incorporation and 
presumably that would be the normal course in all of these 
companies that are ultimately struck. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Well, Mr. Minister, it is my understanding 
that under The Escheats Act, when a corporation is struck for 
failing to file financial returns, all of its assets are supposed to 
be turned over to the Crown. Did the corporations branch ever 
take legal action to recover these corporation assets on behalf of 
the Crown? 
 
(1130) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I’m not sure that your initial premise is 
correct, and so it’s a matter where we would have to seek . . . or 
I would have to seek legal advice and try to respond to that. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Okay, let’s do that, Mr. Minister. You have a 
lot of legal advice around you. You’re supposed to be leading 
this province in what’s right and wrong and how our laws in 
this particular province are supposed to be enforced. And so I 
just repeat that particular question: why not? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well as I said before you’re asking for, 
sort of, a whole legal description of a process here. I would be 
happy to provide you with what the normal course of action in 
all of these cases is in a letter, and I would undertake to do that. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Well that’s interesting that we have a 
problem here that 11 of your advisers can’t seem to be able to 
answer. And you’ve been aware of this. It’s been in the media; 
I’m sure you read it in your local paper. And now you and 11 
other people who are supposed to be leading this province in 
Justice can’t seem to decide what is happening in this particular 
case. 
 
And I guess my question is, is that lack of involvement and the 
fact that you did nothing on that particular situation and get 
those assets back in the Crown, as the Act very specifically 
specifies, have anything to do because those organizations that 
are listed earlier on, involved NDP MLAs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The answer to that is no. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Okay, and so now that you’ve been made a 
bit more aware of it, is it your intention to take action against 
these corporations now for failing to comply with the Act as the 
Act very specifically says is supposed to occur? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — As I said before, I’ll provide you with a 
detailed description of the process and if there are specific 
concerns that are there, well then maybe they can be dealt with. 
But my understanding is we need to give you the information 
about the normal process. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — What actions have you taken to determine 
how these corporation assets were dispersed. Because according 
to the legislation that’s there, the assets remaining are supposed 
to go the Crown. So what digging have you done and what 
actions have you taken to determine how those assets were 
dispersed? Because they are supposed to go to the Crown. 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — As I said before, my advisers don’t know 
that that’s exactly what’s supposed to happen at this stage, but 
we’re going to get some information and we’ll set that out; or if 
we get the answer here before the morning’s out, then I will 
provide you with the information. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Some amazement over on this side of the 
House, Mr. Minister, that you have these corporations who 
failed to comply with the Act. It’s your job to make sure that 
the Act is upheld and yet nothing has been occurring. And, Mr. 
Minister, you, I believe, are clearly in a conflict of interest 
making these kinds of decisions because they involved your 
NDP colleagues. 
 
Would you be willing to refer this entire matter to the Justice 
department of another province, like Alberta or Manitoba, to 
conduct a complete investigation into the activities of these 
non-profit corporations and their non-compliance with the Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — As I said before, we’re going to take a 
look at the whole process and obviously if there’s some 
problem that involves a situation that there is a conflict, then we 
do send it to other provinces and those are the kinds of things 
that would happen. 
 
So that’s the normal procedure; we’ve used it in other 
situations. But at this stage, we’re just looking at the process. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Well thank you for that commitment because 
here you had these non-profit associations that were controlled 
by NDP MLAs, and you have just said that if you find that 
there’s a difficulty there with you as the person from that side 
of the House making a decision, it will be sent out of province. 
So we will be looking forward to that occurring. 
 
There are two kinds of non-profit organizations, or 
corporations, Mr. Minister. One is a membership corporation 
and one is what’s called a charitable corporation. Could you 
explain in some fair detail the difference between those two? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — In consultation with the officials, if you 
have some very detailed questions, because that’s what these 
are, please give them to me in writing or orally now, and we 
will take a look at them and provide a response. But these are 
technical, legal questions that require quite a bit of review 
before you can respond. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Well I’ll be asking the same question again, 
Mr. Minister, because surely when you have 11 people sitting 
around you, you should be able to differentiate between a 
membership corporation and a charitable corporation. You 
could . . . I could ask any other question about business or the 
corporation or private or independent or whatever it would have 
to be called, and your officials would have the answer very 
specifically. 
 
Surely something as simple as a membership corporation and a 
charitable corporation, you should know the difference for that. 
Section 2(9) of the Act states that if a membership corporation 
carries on certain activities — that’s section 2(9) — if a 
membership corporation carries on certain activities it is then 
deemed to be a charitable corporation. Could you explain this 
process please? How does a corporations branch . . . How does 



620 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 1999 

your corporations branch go about deeming a corporation to be 
a charitable corporation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I’ll thank you for that question again. And 
we’ll take it and, after some careful consideration, provide a 
response. 
 
We have very good lawyers in the Department of Justice, and 
one of the ways that we deal with legal questions, like all good 
lawyers, is to carefully review the question, then do research, do 
reflection, and then provide an opinion. And we’re not in a 
position, in this format, to give you the kinds of technical 
answers to the questions that you’re asking. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I was under the 
impression that’s why you had your entourage with you, to go 
ahead and provide that information, and that the research was 
supposed to be right there with you. 
 
One of the conditions, one of the conditions under which a 
membership corporation is deemed to be a charitable 
corporation — and I would hope that you have your people 
right there do a little digging on that right now — one of the 
conditions under which a membership corporation is deemed to 
be a charitable corporation is if the corporation solicits 
donations from the public. 
 
That’s fairly simple. Is that correct, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — We’ll put that question into the other list 
and we’ll provide the answer after due reflection and thought 
about it. All the officials are here today prepared to answer 
questions about the budget and about the estimates, and we’re 
prepared for that and we look forward to some questions that 
are relevant to why you’re here. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Well this just somehow doesn’t seem that 
these questions should be that difficult, Mr. Minister. 
 
Charitable organizations. You just listed earlier on that there 
were dozens if not hundreds of these that have gone through 
this process. So this isn’t one isolated little corporation or a 
little company that’s found a little loophole someplace. You by 
your own statement earlier on said there are numerous ones of 
these, and it’s surprising there can be numerous ones of these 
existing and having moved from one situation to another and no 
one in your entourage knows anything about it. 
 
Mr. Minister, recently a non-profit corporation called Tommy 
Douglas House was formally dissolved. And you’re aware of 
that, Mr. Minister. For 20 years Tommy Douglas House 
operated as a membership corporation even though it is 
common knowledge that it solicited donations. Everyone across 
the province knows that. Some of these donations were 
subsequently turned over to the New Democratic Party. 
 
Mr. Minister, why was Tommy Douglas House never deemed 
to be a charitable corporation? And you, Mr. Minister, should 
know all about Tommy Douglas House. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — That’s another question that involves 
some thought and some care in response, and I’ll take notice of 
it and provide you with a response. 

Mr. Heppner: — Well there will be a lot of time I guess that 
will need to be taken because when people like the members on 
the other side of the House who’ve had a major part in Tommy 
Douglas House now seem to have to do research to find out 
what their organization was all about, things must have been in 
major disarray there. 
 
Mr. Minister, Tommy Douglas House routinely solicited 
donations from people and businesses who wanted to avoid 
having their names disclosed under The Elections Act, 1996. In 
a newspaper clipping from the Regina Leader-Post, June 5, 
1996 a Regina business executive is quoted as saying and I 
quote: 
 

They (meaning you the NDP) make it clear that there are 
two ways you can make a donation, either by giving 
money directly to the party and having your name listed or 
privately giving money to Tommy Douglas House. 

 
I also have transcript of a June 6, 1996 CBC (Canadian 
Broadcasting Corporation) interview with Brian Leier, one of 
the directors of Tommy Douglas House. He says: “that 
donations to Tommy Douglas House come from bequests, from 
the Premier’s dinner, from private donations.” 
 
Mr. Minister, you should be aware of this, and I have the 
following question — but this is kind of a moot point since 
Tommy Douglas House has been dissolved — but I like to 
answer the question . . . or ask the question anyway. Given the 
fact that Tommy Douglas House Inc. raised money by 
collecting donations from the public, should it not have been 
deemed a charitable corporation pursuant to section 2(9) of the 
Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Once again this is a very specific, legal 
question and we don’t respond to those without appropriate 
research and review, and we’ll be in a position to provide that in 
due course. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Will you make a commitment then to have 
the answers for some of the questions — in fact all of the 
questions I’ve asked so far — at the next sitting of the 
Committee of Finance, Department of Justice . . . Department 
of Finance? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — We’ll certainly be ready to provide 
information about how this non-profit corporations Act works, 
and the information around these various questions, the next 
time that we’re here in the committee of Justice provided that 
we have enough time. I mean we obviously wouldn’t be ready 
next week. 
 
(1145) 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Okay. You’ve said that you will provide us 
with the process that’s involved. I specifically want to know, to 
this question: should Tommy Douglas House not have been 
deemed a charitable corporation pursuant to section 2(9) of the 
Act? Will we have an answer for that at that time, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Yes, we’ll provide the information about 
how Tommy Douglas House was dealt with as it relates to that 
specific question. But it’ll take some time to do that. 



April 16, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 621 

Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. We’ll be expecting those answers 
at the next time that we meet in this particular fashion because 
we have a lot of time. We realize that your Premier would like 
to hold an election in June and your members would like to 
have that held before all of this comes out. But we’re quite 
prepared to be here for a fairly lengthy period of time to make 
sure we get the answers to this. 
 
Because you, Mr. Minister, and the other members of the NDP 
over on that side, have been involved in Tommy Douglas 
House, and a number of them have been involved in some of 
these other charitable organizations and we’ll want to know 
specifically what did happen and what should have happened. 
And we’re very key on what should have happened and we 
believe didn’t happen in those particular cases. 
 
And while you’re preparing a list of questions to have the 
answers for at that next particular time, Mr. Minister, I have one 
or two more questions that I’m going to add right now. And I 
would imagine you will give us the same answer. But I just 
want those on the record so that you can prepare yourself with 
your officials for that, for that particular time. 
 
Section 191 of the Act deals with the revival of a non-profit 
corporation that has been dissolved. It says any interested 
person may apply to have a corporation revived. And we want 
to know your definition of an “interested person”. You may just 
write that down and keep that for that next time because I don’t 
expect an answer today. And also under what conditions the 
director of corporations would grant a revival? 
 
So would you add that to those list of questions? We will be 
looking forward to the answers. And we will be here till we do 
have the answers on all of those, regardless of what the timeline 
on that happens to be. So with that in mind I think that at this 
time the committee should rise and report progress. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 11:51 a.m. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 


