





























































Hansard: April 20, 1999


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 649 
 April 20, 1999 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I have a petition to present on behalf of the 
Saskatchewan Disenfranchised Widows Action Group. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to have the Workers’ 
Compensation Board Act amended whereby benefits and 
pensions are reinstated to disenfranchised widows and 
whereby all revoked pensions are reimbursed to them 
retroactively with interest to April 17, 1985. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, signatures on this petition all come from the city 
of Saskatoon. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, I also have petitions to 
present today on behalf of Saskatchewan’s disenfranchised 
widows. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to have the Workers’ 
Compensation Board Act amended whereby benefits and 
pensions are reinstated to disenfranchised widows and 
whereby all revoked pensions are reimbursed to them 
retroactively with interest to April 17, 1985. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions come from the Saskatoon area, Mr. Speaker, 
and I believe also from the Estevan area. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, reading a 
petition in regards to real farm safety net program. Reading the 
prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
demand that the federal government work with 
Saskatchewan to put in place a farm aid package that 
provides real relief for those who need it, and that the 
provincial government develop a long-term farm safety net 
program as it promised to do when it cancelled GRIP 
against the wishes of farmers. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the petition I present today is signed by 
individuals from the communities of Stockholm, Langenburg 
and Esterhazy. 

I so present. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to 
present a petition in support of Saskatchewan’s disenfranchised 
widows. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to have the Workers’ 
Compensation Board Act amended whereby benefits and 
pensions are reinstated to disenfranchised widows and 
whereby all revoked pensions are reimbursed to them 
retroactively with interest to April 17, 1985. 

 
Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are all from the 
Saskatoon area. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise on 
behalf of farmers of the province of Saskatchewan with a 
petition. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call upon provincial and 
federal governments to immediately take steps to end 
unfair world subsidies and provide farmers with prompt 
relief from declining incomes, and act as watchdogs 
against rising input costs which are harming the rural 
economy. 

 
And as in duty bound your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the signatures are from the good people of Melville, 
Neudorf, Lemberg, and Duff. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This afternoon I rise 
to present petitions from citizens concerned about the state of 
our highway system. The prayer of relief reads as follows: 
 

That we call on our governments to dedicate a significantly 
greater portion of fuel tax revenue towards road 
maintenance and construction so Saskatchewan residents 
may have a safe highway system. 

 
Your petitioners come from North Battleford, Battleford, 
Pentane, and especially Lloydminster where there are a lot of 
concerned citizens. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
honoured once again to present petitions on behalf of those who 
are concerned with the education of children with special needs 
in our province. And I’ll read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide essential funding and ensure the delivery of 
scientifically proven, diagnostic assessment and 
programming for children with learning disabilities in 
order that they have an access to an education that meets 
their needs and allows them to reach their full potential. 
 
And as in duty bound your petitioners will ever pray. 



650 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 1999 

The people who have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, today 
are from Choiceland, Shipman, Regina, Saskatchewan. 
 
And I present on their behalf with pleasure. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise today 
on behalf of Saskatchewan citizens who want to see meaningful 
legislation enacted to protect children at risk due to the child 
prostitution trade. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to enact 
provincial legislation that would inject a stay-away order 
restraining anyone who interferes with the healing process 
of victims of child prostitution; anyone who threatens in 
any way the healing while it is taking place is subject to a 
large fine; provide police with the authority to search a 
place where they believe a child is being held by pimps or 
perpetrators of this crime for the purpose of engaging in 
child prostitution activities. 
 

And the signators on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Kennedy, Langbank, Kipling, Wawota, Keels and Regina; a 
total of 100 signatures added to those already presented in the 
legislature. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk:  According to order the petitions presented at 
the last sitting have been reviewed and found to be in order. 
Pursuant to rule 12(7) these petitions are hereby received. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today it’s my great 
pleasure to introduce to you and through you to all members of 
the Assembly a group of students seated in the west gallery. 
 
There are 15 students there from O’Neill High School right in 
the constituency of Regina Coronation Park. But in addition, 
there’s 21 students from the Bayonne area of France. These 
students are part of a French exchange program, and the first 
part of it is here in Canada and then later on I understand many 
of the O’Neill students are going to go back to the Bayonne 
area and pay a visit there. 
 
With these students there are teachers Denis Genets from 
O’Neill here in town and Mrs. Patricia Leblanc and Mrs. 
Martine Pasquerom who is from France. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will be meeting with this group about 2:30 and I 
very much look forward to visiting with them and dealing with 
any questions or comments that they might have at that time. I 
ask all hon. members to join me in welcoming our visitors to 
the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of 
the official opposition I would like to join with our colleague in 

welcoming the students and chaperons from France. Je vous 
souhaiter bienvenue en Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Speaker, I happen to be privileged to 
come from a very large family of relatives and one of them is in 
the gallery today — Charlene Krahn. Charlene’s grandmother 
and my father were cousins so you know how far the 
relationship goes. She is today with her friend, Lisa, and baby, 
Hanna Gibbins. Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all members of the 
legislature to join me in welcoming these young people to the 
legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, as has been pointed out, we are 
graced with the presence of many young people. On behalf of 
the Liberal Party I also want to add our welcome here this 
afternoon, and especially to our young friends from France — 
bienvenue. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, with late breaking news. It’s my 
pleasure, on behalf of the Deputy Premier to introduce a group 
of 24 students seated also in the west gallery, and these are 
grade 7 and 8 students. They’re from Herchmer School. And 
their teacher with them today is Aaron Anderson, and the 
chaperon is Lynn Pichette. 
 
I gather that there is a visit with the MLA (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly) around 2:30 and hopefully the Deputy 
Premier or appointee will be able to join them at that time. But I 
ask all members to join me in welcoming this fine group from 
Herchmer School. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Salvation Army Luncheon 
 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is my 
pleasure along with the Leader of the Official Opposition, to 
attend a luncheon — and I believe the Minister of Social 
Services — of the Salvation Army. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think each and every one of us in this Assembly 
here this afternoon know what work the Salvation Army has 
done not only in our province but across this great nation and 
certainly worldwide. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just a few facts. Did you know that in 1998 the 
Salvation Army in southern Saskatchewan helped 5,700 
families, 8,700 adults, supplied 12,500 children with food and 
clothing, gave out 6,100 toys during their Christmas program. 
As well, over 15,000 hours of volunteer time have been given to 
the Army. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the table I was at this morning we talked about the 
current situation in Kosovo, and I am sure we’re all well aware 
of the fact that even in situations of trauma throughout the 



April 20, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 651 

world, the Salvation Army has been there to provide not only 
for the physical, but the spiritual well-being of individuals. 
 
Today I think it would remiss if we did not say thank you to 
such a fine organization for the humanitarian work they do for 
all mankind. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Harris Area Business Loans Association 
Program Recognized 

 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Friday I 
was privileged to attend a gathering in a farm shop at Harris of 
the Eagle Creek Rural Development Corporation to celebrate 
the new jobs they have created through the Small Business 
Loans Association. 
 
This group has created 33 jobs through the energies of this very 
co-operative community, with businesses including a hair salon, 
grocery store, home improvement operations, and a custom ag 
operator. 
 
I had the honour of presenting Norm McFarlane, Chair of the 
Eagle Creek Rural Development Corporation, with a certificate 
acknowledging their success in creating jobs which I’m told 
will soon increase to approximately 43. 
 
The Eagle Creek RDC (rural development corporation) noted 
that this year’s budget doubles the available funds for the SBLA 
(Small Business Loans Association) to make loans up to a 
maximum of $10,000 from a pool of 100,000 from 5 and 50. 
 
The Eagle Creek RDC was formed in the early ’90s and is made 
up of the town of Zealandia, the village of Harris, the RM (rural 
municipality) of Harris, as well as a portion of the RM of 
Marriott. 
 
Currently this RDC has 19 entrepreneurs using the SBLA 
program; 14 of these are new businesses and five were already 
in existence. Since its inception, it has loaned approximately 
$92,000 to help new businesses and expansions and it’s very 
proud to report that there has not been one failure in any of 
these loans. 
 
This is truly a remarkable achievement for a rural business 
organization that has proven the vitality of rural economic 
development. 
 
Congratulations to Norm McFarlane and the Eagle Creek Rural 
Development Corporation for their part in building 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Funding for Emergency Services 
 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, recently Battleford’s residents 
were hit by an increase in the cost of ambulance service. The 
cost of a basic ambulance call has gone up an incredible $80, 
placing a heavy burden on our seniors. Battleford’s residents 
will now pay $225 for a basic call; far more than the $135 
charged in Regina or $175 in Saskatoon. 

Battleford’s residents are asking why there aren’t standard rates 
across the province and why we are being discriminated 
against. 
 
Despite large increases in funding for health from the federal 
government, the provincial budget this year contained no help 
to communities like North Battleford with ambulance costs. 
 
With no help from the province, the district felt it had no choice 
but to increase rates so as to maintain valuable emergency 
service and replace aging equipment and increase the salaries of 
our EMTs (emergency medical technician). 
 
We now hear reports that the problem may be spreading across 
the province. The president of the ambulance association is 
warning that this government’s inaction is endangering 
ambulance service across the province, and increases across the 
province may be necessary. 
 
I urge the NDP (New Democratic Party) government to avoid 
repeating recent mistakes in health care by making emergency 
medical health workers and ambulance equipment a priority. 
 

SUMA Likes Infrastructure Portion of Budget 
 

Mr. Jess: — Mr. Minister, the monthly newsletter of SUMA 
(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association), The Urban 
Voice, has an interesting front page article on our budget — on 
our good news budget, which the members opposite have no 
stomach to discuss. The article is on infrastructure funding in 
the budget, a topic obviously of specific interest to 
municipalities, and it’s worth quoting. 
 
The title of this article is “Infrastructure funding: important step 
forward.” It begins by outlining the $10 million for 
infrastructure and then says, quote, “We appreciate the support 
given by the province in the midst of many other competing 
needs.” 
 
The article goes on to point out that this money comes without 
federal government participation, and says, “We particularly 
want to commend the province for being willing to take this 
positive step despite the absence of a national commitment.” 
 
The article expresses hope that our provincial support will 
trigger another commitment from the federal government to 
join a three-government effort like the one which existed 
between ’94 and ’98. Mr. Speaker, we realize that 
municipalities are working hard to satisfy competing interests. I 
was pleased to read then that they recognize and appreciate our 
efforts for them in the face of the same kinds of demands. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Congratulations to Mallard Industries 
 

Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Recycling is an 
integral part of waste reduction in many communities within my 
constituency. Today it gives me great pleasure to bring to your 
attention a non-profit organization, Mallard Diversified of 
Wadena which was recently awarded the 1998 Saskatchewan 
Waste Minimization Award for non-profit organizations. 
Mallard Diversified programs involves 34 disabled employees 
and has been operating for 25 years in Wadena. 



652 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 1999 

In 1998, Mallard shoe repair division repaired 750 pairs of 
shoes; the oil ecocentre collected 9,000 litres of oil. They 
collected and recycled 4,000 pounds of household plastic, 
17,040 pounds of household glass, 16,500 pounds of clothing, 
6,000 tonnes of newsprint, 552 tonnes of cardboard, 24 tonnes 
of mixed waste, and 24 tonnes of magazines. Mallard recycled 
and diverted 1,369,062 containers and 2,008 . . . 208,226 
pounds of material from the landfill. The efforts of this 
organization not only benefited the community in reducing 
waste at the landfill, but they provided employment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask the House to join with me in 
congratulating the staff, the board, and the employees of 
Mallard diversification in their contribution to the reduction of 
waste in their community. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Successful Year for Weyburn Co-op 
 

Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’ve spoken before about the spirit of co-operation the people of 
Saskatchewan exemplify. Today I will present another example 
of the important role co-operatives play in my constituency of 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
The Weyburn Co-op has just had a very good year. As a matter 
of fact, 1998 was their second best year on record. Sales at the 
Weyburn Co-op were $20.4 million. 
 
Veteran allocations were just about three times higher than the 
last year. Over $700,000 were handed back to members. Five 
per cent for gas was paid out, which amounts to about two and 
three-quarter cents per litre at the pumps, and 4 per cent for 
food. This equates to two weeks of free groceries. This shows 
the strength of Weyburn Co-op. 
 
Congratulations to the Weyburn Co-op board, general manager 
Don Kraft and his staff, and the Weyburn Co-op membership 
for a successful year. By working together, everyone benefits 
— good service, good returns, good patronage. 
 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, co-ops are alive and doing very well. 
Congratulations to the Weyburn Co-op. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Parkland Region Science Fair Award Winners 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
my pleasure to announce that I attended the Parkland Region 
Science Fair Awards in my home constituency of Yorkton this 
past weekend. It’s one of 11 regional fairs that go on across the 
province, of which the Department of Education participates to 
the tune of about 50,000 and SaskEnergy for another 25,000. 
 
And kids from all over the Parkland area came together to have 
their science project judged in a variety of different categories. 
And I have to say I am continually amazed by the creativity, the 
depth of knowledge that our young minds display in 
competitive events such as this. And I always come away 
knowing a little more than I did when I arrived. 
 

And I would like to recognize the top three winners in the 
House this afternoon, Mr. Speaker. The third place overall 
winner was won by Robbie Wonder from Foam Lake. The 
second place winner was presented to Terri Poulson of Foam 
Lake. And the special achievement award for the first-place 
winner was presented to Ambrely Faye, also of Foam Lake. 
 
I am also proud to say these winners will be representing the 
Parkland area this spring and be attending the Canada-wide 
science fair in Edmonton. And I would like to congratulate 
Robbie and Terri and Ambrely on their regional awards and 
wish them the very best of luck at the Canadian finals and 
continued good work by the teachers from Foam Lake. Thank 
you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Star Café in Marcelin Celebrates 75 Years 
 

Mr. Renaud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The member of 
Redberry lost the toss and I, a former resident of Marcelin and 
the MLA for Carrot River Valley, take great pleasure in 
congratulating the Star Café on 75 years in business. 
 
The café was established in the early 1920s by W. G. and 
Jennie Howe, with the help of their son, Dave, and Uncle Mah. 
In those days a whole meal could be purchased at the café for 
35 cents; that included soup, dinner, dessert, coffee. 
 
The café also looked after the small appliances and accounting 
needs of people in the community. 
 
The café still provides fast, delicious meals and appliance 
repairs, golf clubs, TVs, stereos — you name it, Dave has it — 
to Marcelin residents and surrounding area. 
 
The Star Café is a great example of the contribution Chinese 
Canadians have made to the economic and social structures of 
our rural towns. The small-town café is as much a signpost of 
rural Saskatchewan as the Wheat Pool elevator and the Co-op 
store. 
 
Dave Howe is now the sole owner of the café and he remains 
active in the community. Dave sponsors an annual tennis clinic 
for the local schools, has held the Dave Howe golf tournament 
for the past 25 years. 
 
He has emceed every event ever held in Marcelin. And Dave is 
also a recipient of the Saskatchewan Order of Merit. 
 
I’d like to personally thank all of the people at the Star Café for 
their hard work and all of the patrons that make a daily visit as a 
part of their routine. 
 
Congratulations on 75 years of successful business. I know they 
remain proud to provide such an essential service to the 
constituents of Marcelin. Many past and present members have 
visited the Star Café and I . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The hon. member’s time has expired. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



April 20, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 653 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Member from Cypress Hills 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Premier. 
 
Mr. Premier, yesterday a member of this Assembly was found 
guilty of an extremely serious crime, the crime of child sexual 
abuse. 
 
The child sex trade is unacceptable, Mr. Premier, and it must be 
stopped. As elected officials we must send the message of zero 
tolerance loud and clear. The very first Bill introduced by the 
Saskatchewan Party in this session was an Act to protect 
children involved in prostitution. The very first Bill introduced 
by the government of the day in this session deals with the same 
issue. 
 
Mr. Premier, the Saskatchewan Party has called on the member 
for Cypress Hills to take the appropriate step and resign. That 
has not happened at this time. Will your government introduce a 
motion calling for his removal from this House? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As the 
member opposite will know, we have been in discussion with 
the opposition parties and with the independent member, and 
the government will be proposing a motion before orders of the 
day to deal with this matter. 
 

Funding for Education 
 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, my question is for the Minister of Education. Mr. 
Minister, school division boards across Saskatchewan are 
finalizing their budgets and the news isn’t good for taxpayers. 
Eight years of NDP government has buried Saskatchewan 
families with a mountain of taxes. And while the NDP lines the 
government bank account with $1 billion in new taxes, funding 
to school divisions has been cut to the core. 
 
Now school boards across the province are being forced to 
increase property taxes just to maintain basic services. Mr. 
Minister, last week the public and separate school boards in the 
city of Saskatoon increased property taxes by almost 7 per cent, 
and they are blaming the tax increase on your NDP government. 
 
Mr. Minister, taxpayers can’t take another hit. Does the 
government have a long-term plan for reducing the mountain of 
NDP taxes, or are you just going to keep gouging taxpayers 
until they finally flee the province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, first of all I want to say 
to the member opposite that he should examine first of all what 
happened through the course of the ’80s in this province of 
which his party was in government. And during that period of 
time we saw the foundation grant and the contribution to 
education go, in this province, from 55 per cent to 45 per cent 
over a period of 10 years. That’s the record of the Tory 
Conservative Party over that period of time, which this member 
now represents. 

Over that period of time, Mr. Speaker, what this government 
has done since we’ve been in power is that we’ve taken the 
foundation operating grant in this province and we’ve increased 
it. And this year when you take a look at the foundation 
operating grant in this province, Mr. Speaker, you’ll see that it’s 
just over $400 million. This is the largest investment that we 
have seen in the foundation operating grant in the history of this 
province, Mr. Speaker. And I am proud of that because this 
government and this administration cites education as one of its 
primary objectives to increase and grow in this province, and it 
will continue to be that into the future, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. You 
know, I know the minister has not been in charge of the K-to-12 
systems for very long, but the minister has to bring himself up 
to speed very quickly. 
 
The changes to the property tax, Mr. Minister, have resulted in 
the fact that this government only supplies 39 per cent on the 
average of the cost of education. At the same time, Mr. 
Minister, since 1991-92, when the grant given by the 
government was about $470 million, you have never matched 
that amount in the entire eight years. You are below what you 
gave the boards of education in 1991-92, Mr. Minister. You 
have . . . you have taken about $450 million from boards of 
education. That’s fact, Mr. Minister. 
 
You know, Mr. Minister, I guess you know when you look at 
the fact that you’ve got a billion dollars in new taxes and a 
billion dollars in new utility rates, it’s no wonder that school 
divisions across the province are being forced to increase 
property taxes. 
 
Mr. Minister, does the NDP have a plan for relieving the tax 
burden for property owners? What action is the NDP taking to 
stop the tax increases from chasing people and businesses out of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — If the member opposite would just 
examine the growth in this province over the period of time that 
we were in administration and over the time that his party was 
in administration, you will see that today we have 300,000 more 
people living in this province and more children going to school 
than during the time that the member opposite’s party was in 
government. So we just have to examine the record. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — But I want to say to the member opposite 
that when you take a look at what we’re doing in education on 
this side of the House and what the opposition parties suggest 
they’re going to do — over the last two years we’ve increased 
the base in operating grants by ten and a half per cent over the 
period of two years; when you look at what the member and his 
party are speaking about, it’s 1 per cent which is the cost of 
inflation on an annual basis, which is less than one-third of 
what the education requirements in this province are. 
 
Now what the member opposite should be doing is he should be 
reading his party’s agenda — his party’s agenda which are to 
freeze education in this province, Mr. Speaker — and not his 



654 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 1999 

agenda, his own personal agenda which doesn’t match with 
what the Conservative party has to say in their mandate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, there’s a couple of things that 
the minister has to realize. In 1991-92 the grant to school 
boards totalled $470 million. You know the decision made by 
school trustees at that time in ’91-92 should have been to ask 
this government for a freeze — a 10 year freeze for the amount 
of money allocated to school boards. Because for every year for 
the last eight years they would have been significantly better 
than what they are today. That’s reality, Mr. Speaker. 
 
At the same time as this government has lowered the amount of 
money that they are offering to school divisions in capital and 
in operating grants — those two have diminished year after year 
— the amount of money that school boards have had to pay has 
risen by $150 million. That’s the amount of money that school 
taxpayers will have to pick up. 
 
Mr. Minister, what is your plan for addressing the high tax level 
in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s amazing that 
the member opposite has forgotten his roots. Because when I 
said earlier, Mr. Speaker, that when you take a look at the past 
administration of the Tories, of which this member now 
supports, and I want to say to the member opposite when he 
examines that he will see that from 1991 . . . from 1982 to 1991, 
his party and the people whom he supports reduced the portion 
of property tax . . . or reduced the portion of the operating grant 
that the province provides by over 10 per cent. It went from 55 
to 45 per cent. That’s the record of the member opposite — not 
our record, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What we’ve done over the last several years is we’ve taken the 
foundation operating grant, over the last couple of years we’ve 
added another ten and a half per cent per year because we 
believe in education in this province, Mr. Speaker, and are 
going to continue it for the betterment of young people in this 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Minister has to get in 
touch with some school divisions very, very quickly to 
recognize that the operating grant given to school divisions in 
many instances has declined by 175,000, 200,000, 220,000. 
Those are examples that the school divisions are receiving in 
less money — less money, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now you know what’s going to happen? There’s going to be 
closure of schools, Mr. Speaker. We are hearing from many 
communities where there will be grave discontinuance. 
Communities like Qu’Appelle, communities like Elfros, and 
Ebenezer, have all been informed that there’s a potential that 
their schools are going to close or there is going to be a control 
on the number of programs. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker . . . 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. Now there seems 
to be great enthusiasm for both the questions and the answers, 
but I will ask the co-operation from members on both sides of 
the House . . . Order . . . on both sides of the House to permit 
the questions to be heard and to permit the answers to be heard 
as well. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, not very many days ago the Saskatchewan Teachers’ 
Federation indicated that they are very, very fearful that there 
will be program cuts, there will be increased classroom size, 
and there will be a reduction of teachers. Mr. Minister, what is 
your plan to reduce the amount of taxes in this province so that 
we can have a quality education system continue? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting that the 
member opposite has today forgotten about his involvement in 
serving on the school board of which he spent a fair number of 
years, Mr. Speaker, in the Crystal Lake. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
interesting that he’s forgotten that history because he sits, Mr. 
Speaker, as the champion of school board closures, the 
champion of school closures, Mr. Speaker, in the area that he 
lives. 
 
And he’s on record, Mr. Speaker, in his own paper, Canora 
Courier, where he talks about the importance and the necessary 
. . . and how it’s necessary to ensure that when you close 
schools, Mr. Speaker, in this province, that you ensure a good 
compliment of teachers and that you have good quality 
education. You’re on record, the member from Canora, about 
this. 
 
So I want to say to the member opposite, when you examine 
your record during the time that you served on the school board 
in the Crystal springs, now today which is the Canora School 
Division, you were involved in closing more schools, Mr. 
Member, you were involved in closing more schools than any 
other representative on your side of the House today. And you 
have the audacity to stand up here and talk about the record, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Property Taxes 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister for Municipal Affairs. As if the 
education tax increases weren’t enough, property taxpayers are 
also being asked to pay more municipal taxes, thanks to your 
NDP government. No sector has been hit harder by the NDP 
over the last eight years than municipalities. 
 
Urban and rural municipalities have seen provincial grants more 
than cut in half since your government was elected, but the 
roads still had to be maintained, the water and sewer systems 
still have to operate, the policing and fire services still had to be 
provided. So the only choice municipal councils have in light of 
massive NDP funding cuts is once again to raise taxes. 
 
Madam Minister, do you plan on continuing to raise property 
taxes and force more people out of business and out of the 
province? What is the NDP government doing to ease the 
property tax burden that is killing many communities and 



April 20, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 655 

driving jobs out of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Speaker, municipalities helped 
greatly by co-operating and using restraint in their operations to 
help us, as another level of government, to get control of the 
finances and put this province back on a positive path. And we 
appreciate their contribution; we appreciate their contribution as 
locally elected responsible leaders, Mr. Speaker. If we had had 
such responsibility in elected people when the Tories were 
government, we wouldn’t have been in that situation. 
 
So they joined hands with us and they helped us in the fight. 
 
Now that things have begun to improve, we have instituted the 
grants-in-lieu program to pay a total of $12 million taxes on 
government property which goes to municipalities and school 
boards. We’ve provided $4 million a year in assistance for the 
costs of RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) policing. We 
have this year given the $10 million that one of our members 
referred to in a statement for infrastructure. We’ve increased 
revenue sharing. 
 
So together, just like we did the tough things together, we’re 
doing some positive things together now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Madam Minister, the cities of Saskatoon 
and Regina were both forced to raise property taxes because of 
your government off-loading. Towns, villages, and rural 
municipalities across the province are raising taxes too because 
of your NDP government’s mismanagement. SARM 
(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) President 
Sinclair Harrison called your latest NDP budget a black day for 
Saskatchewan — a black day, Madam Minister. 
 
The hard, cold reality is that property taxes are going up 
because the NDP has used municipalities as a ready source of 
cash. Thanks to your government, Saskatchewan people pay the 
second highest taxes in the country and taxes are going up once 
again. 
 
Madam Minister, will you admit your NDP government has 
deserted municipalities and forced property taxes through the 
roof? And will you take immediate action to stop these tax 
increases? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I think all the members 
of the House should take careful note of the direction of the 
Saskatchewan Party as epitomized with these last two 
questions. And basically it amounts to what — and I’m not very 
fond very often of citing editorials of the Saskatoon 
StarPhoenix, as much as they’re not very fond of writing 
favourable editorials about this government — but in analyzing 
the platform of the Saskatchewan Party, or what we know them 
to be — the real Tory Party — this is what the Saskatoon 
StarPhoenix said, quote: 
 

What’s most striking about the party’s platform is that 
apart from the tax cuts it has eschewed all other spending 
priorities in favour of highways. While a good case can be 

made for fixing up a deteriorating highway system (here’s 
the key words, Mr. Speaker), it appears that a Hermanson 
government would for four years do nothing to address 
other pressing issues (do nothing to address other pressing 
issues). 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, to wrap up, and, Mr. Speaker, to wrap up, 
that’s exactly their position. They want to lower taxes and lower 
revenues while spending more, so they say. But their platform 
says it won’t do it at all. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it didn’t work in the 1980s and it just doesn’t add 
up in the 1990s either. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Court Injunction by the Saskatchewan Association 
of Health Organizations 

 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question this 
afternoon is for the Premier. The injunction that’s in place is 
like a cocked gun still pointed at the head of nurses. The 
injunction is just your club to ensure nurses sign the agreement, 
isn’t it, Mr. Premier? Your precious election is more important 
than bargaining in good faith and keeping nurses in 
Saskatchewan. Admit it. 
 
Mr. Premier . . . Mr. Speaker, to the Premier, you have an 
opportunity to continue to bargain in good faith. Will you 
remove the injunction so nurses don’t have to feel you 
breathing down their neck unless they ratify the agreement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. Leader of the 
Third Party understands — most surely if he doesn’t, his 
seatmate does — that the application for the injunction was 
made and is made and is in the property now of the courts, but 
was made by SAHO, the Saskatchewan Association of Health 
Organizations. 
 
The Government of Saskatchewan is not a party to the 
injunction. The best is that Justice lawyers are there holding a 
watching brief. This is a matter of which the court has now 
seized the jurisdiction, and in the light of that, I think it would 
behoove us all to allow the judicial system to proceed in its 
normal and usual fashion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, up to this point in time, while the 
Premier feels he has won, the truth is he’s lost. The whole 
province has lost, and what’s worse is that the confidence of the 
nurses has been lost. They have no confidence in their future in 
Saskatchewan. The Premier’s take-it-or-leave-it bargaining 
style has damaged the nursing profession in this province for 
years to come, in those coming years when I may need some 
help from those great people. 
 
Don’t believe me? Well put down your polling sheets, Mr. 
Premier, and talk to some of the nurses. The Premier’s threats 
forced the nurses to accept the settlement. 
 
Mr. Premier, you’ve done enough damage to nurses already. 
Mr. Speaker, I ask the Premier to do the right thing now and ask 



656 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 1999 

the court injunction to be withdrawn. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t really quite care 
how the Liberal Party characterizes what my role and the 
government’s role was. The facts are clear. I endeavoured for 
11 hours, off and on, to meet with both sides to make sure that 
we could come to a settlement, which did not work out. 
 
Then on Saturday night before the settlement on Sunday 
morning, essentially an arrived arrangement and agreement was 
made between SAHO (Saskatchewan Association of Health 
Organizations) and the nurses’ union. That’s where the matter 
stands. 
 
That is I think an honourable agreement and I think it has the 
basis of building from there, recognizing nurses’ grievances, 
and continuing to build the best health care system that we 
have. 
 
But there’s one big difference between us and the Liberal Party. 
So long as I have anything to say about the public policy of this 
government, I will never, ever argue that the laws of this 
legislature, even if I don’t like them, should be disobeyed. Nor 
will I ever countenance anybody to disobey an injunction, an 
injunction issued by a court, as your Liberal leader did. 
 
Imagine the folly of that. The Liberal leader says, elect me as 
Premier; I’ll pass a law; if you don’t like it in your mind, you 
don’t have to follow it. 
 
Is that your view of democracy? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier’s holier-than-thou 
attitude is quickly forgotten in his past actions when he tore up 
the GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) contract for 
farmers; when he refused to listen to the mediators in the 
judges’ issues with this Premier, with this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the talk among nurses now is not about all the 
nurses who will be coming to Saskatchewan. It is about nurses 
who are leaving, the younger nurses who are going to other 
places because the government does not want them here. 
 
Mr. Premier, your NDP health plan has done everything it can 
to either cut nurses’ jobs, encourage nursing shortages, or force 
nurses out on the picket line. Your plan does nothing to 
convince nurses to stay in Saskatchewan. Those who do stay 
will look for casual work as a way to escape the working 
conditions your policies have forced on these nurses. 
 
Can you explain why you have done everything you can to 
drive out of the province, nurses, and nothing to convince them 
to stay. Is this a personal vendetta against nurses who dared 
defy you, or do you feel overworking and underpaying nurses is 
the only option to keep your health care system afloat? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member’s 
question and premises are, to be blunt about it, in one word: 
incredible — incredible. 
 
In Alberta, the nurses are negotiating now with the Alberta 

health authorities and the Alberta government. In a statement of 
today’s date, April 20, 1999, under the headline, “Nurses 
pessimistic about contract talks” here’s what the Alberta nurses’ 
negotiating president says about our arrangement in 
Saskatchewan. Quote: 
 

“In Saskatchewan not only were wages addressed, there’s 
agreement on recruitment and retention as well as on 
enhancing benefits,” Smith said. “It was not a single 
faceted package that had to be in place to resolve it. That’s 
the same as what we said here. It’s not a single issue.” 
 

In order words, she is lauding the agreement that the nurses and 
SAHO arrived at. That’s what the Alberta nurses’ president is 
doing. 
 
And moreover, I’d like to know from that hon. member, 
knowing exactly where that hon. member’s background has 
been, and an honourable one it has been, do you condone your 
leader’s call publicly that the laws of this legislature and the 
injunction rules of courts should be defied? Yes or no? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, we wouldn’t be having this debate 
if it wasn’t for that Premier and that government creating the 
mess and destroying the health care system in . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order! The Chair is 
having great difficulty being able to hear the question being put 
and I ask for co-operation of members of the House . . . Order. 
Order. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I mentioned 
initially, we would not even be having this debate had it not 
been for that Premier and that NDP government’s 
mismanagement and mishandling of our entire health care 
system and bringing this province to the brink of a disastrous 
health care program. 
 
The Premier should be listening to what the nurses here in this 
province are saying, not reading the Alberta newspapers. If he’s 
heard the voices of the young nurses here, Mr. Speaker, then he 
would hear from nurses like Sally Burnett, who after graduating 
in this great province with a nursing degree, who after looking 
for full-time work in Saskatchewan answered an ad for full-time 
work in Montana. Are you proud of that? 
 
Ms. Burnett now works full time in Wolf Point, Montana. They 
pay for continuing education expenses. They pay her even 
while on education leave, and best of all, Mr. Speaker, overtime 
is optional and guilt-free. Like Sally, young nurses can leave 
the province for more money and less grief. Mr. Speaker, what 
does the Premier say to those young nurses like Sally. What can 
he can say to the young nurses who can pick up and leave 
Saskatchewan for more money and less stress? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, what I say to this 
particular young nurse is what I say to every nurse and every 
Saskatchewan people. This province is a wonderful place of 
employment opportunity, whether it’s in health care or a whole 



April 20, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 657 

variety of other areas. 
 
During the strike, I’m advised, during the strike Regina District 
Health Board hired a nurse a day, hired a nurse a day during the 
strike. And I can tell the nurses of Saskatchewan that as 
difficult as it was for them and for all of us and the people of 
Saskatchewan, the president of the Alberta union of nurses said 
what I just quoted to you a few seconds ago. 
 
Now in all of your attempt to be holier-than-thou in health, 
you’ve refused to answer whether or not it is the official 
position of the Liberal . . . the Liberal Party position, as it must 
be, that they would defy the law and defy the injunction. 
 
I’ll ask you another question since you refuse to ask those two. 
Would you have committed 22 per cent increase for nurses? 
And if so, where would you have gotten the money? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Closure of Royal Canadian Mounted Police Detachments 
 

Ms. Julé: — My question is for the Minister of Justice. Mr. 
Minister, yesterday in question period you said the communities 
of Consul, Eastend, and Climax were told the RCMP (Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police) was not leaving the area. Mr. 
Minister, the concern is not that RCMP will leave the area. 
People in those communities along with the town of Val Marie 
are concerned they will not have RCMP living in their 
communities. They are concerned the small detachments 
established in those towns will be closed. They are worried that 
their communities will be policed from Swift Current, Maple 
Creek, and Shaunavon. 
 
Can you give the people of those four communities the 
assurance, Mr. Minister, that RCMP officers will continue to 
live and work in their existing community detachments? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In this province 
we have a police force that we engage, the RCMP, on a contract 
basis. And they provide policing throughout the province. And 
this started out as many of us know this year, with the Great 
March West, and we’ll be celebrating that. 
 
Over the years many things have changed and transformed. But 
what I do know about this particular question in this particular 
area is that the people down in that community need to work 
together with the RCMP to decide what are the policing 
services that they need in those communities. It’s my 
understanding that the policing service as it is now is going to 
continue. But that doesn’t mean that it will be there forever in 
the same way because, as we know, the province changes and 
different things happen. 
 
And so practically, practically what we’re doing in this 
particular area is working with those communities through the 
RCMP, and the continued discussion takes place. But as I said 
yesterday there’s no plan to leave those particular communities 
at all. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to 

introduce a motion with respect to the member from Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Suspension of Member 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I move, seconded by the member from Humboldt: 
 

That given that Jacob F. Goohsen, the member for Cypress 
Hills, was convicted on Monday, April 19, 1999 of an 
offence under section 212(4) of the Criminal Code of 
Canada, and that section 40.2 of The Legislative Assembly 
and Executive Council Act states that: “Nothing in this Act 
shall be construed as affecting the right of the Legislature 
to expel or suspend a member according to the practice of 
Parliament or otherwise”; 
 
That pursuant to section 40.2 of the Legislative Assembly 
and Executive Council Act effective immediately the 
member for Cypress Hills is suspended from sitting and 
voting as a member of this legislature, and is ineligible for 
the pay or benefit or any allowance, grant, indemnity, 
disbursement, reimbursement, or salary provided pursuant 
to that Act and be it further resolved that the suspension 
shall continue until all available appeal rights are 
exhausted or expire; and should the conviction be upheld 
the member for Cypress Hills is expelled and his seat shall 
be vacant. 

 
I so move, and I request leave of the Assembly for a two minute 
recess before voting occurs on this motion. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
The Assembly recessed for a period of time. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, after consulting 
with members of the Assembly I think we all believe that we 
should give the member for Cypress Hills 24 hours to appear 
and make whatever statement he may wish to make. 
 
So after consultation, it is our view that the vote would be more 
appropriately held tomorrow. So I close the debate. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Members of 
the Assembly, we agree with the 24-hour suspension. 
 
We believe that it would give the member from Cypress Hills 
the opportunity to come to this House and do the appropriate 
action of resigning. We believe he deserves that opportunity. 
 
And therefore I would move adjournment of debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(1430) 



658 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 1999 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — I am pleased to give you the answer to that 
question, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The answer to item no. 1, question 57 is 
tabled. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Convert question no. 58. 
 
The Speaker: — Item no. 2, question 58 is converted to notice 
of motions for returns (debatable). 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — From an open and accessible government, 
Mr. Speaker, question no. 59. 
 
The Speaker: — The answer to item no. 3, question 59 is 
tabled. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 2 — Negotiations with Nurses 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
this has been a tough two weeks in health care. It’s been tough 
on everyone in this province particularly, Mr. Speaker, on 
nurses and on patients that were residents in the hospitals 
during the nurses’ strike. 
 
This motion, Mr. Speaker, condemns the NDP government, 
particularly the Premier, the member from Riversdale, for his 
arrogant style of negotiations and the arrogant style in which he 
dealt with nurses. And in particular, Mr. Speaker, the arrogant 
way in which he spent taxpayers’ money to vilify nurses in this 
provinces. Vilify the nurses of this province, Mr. Speaker, 
because they would not agree with his style of negotiations. 
And we believe that is not the role, not the honourable role for 
the Premier of this province, Mr. Speaker, to be vilifying the 
people on the tax rolls, the people who we are calling to look 
after our ill and injured in our hospitals, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, nurses in this province . . . nursing in this province 
is an honourable profession. And the way that the Premier was 
treating them, Mr. Speaker, dishonoured this House and the role 
of nursing in attempting to picture them solely as greedy, 
wanting 22 per cent. Because that is exactly what the Premier 
was doing. 
 
Here he stood in the House today, Mr. Speaker, and read out a 
quote from Alberta saying that in Saskatchewan the settlement 
wasn’t just about salaries. It was about working conditions. It 
was about overtime. It was about nurses having enough people 
on the wards to service the ill and the injured. 
 
And yet in the advertising and in his speeches inside and 
outside of this House during the strike, Mr. Speaker, the 
Premier’s only contention was that it was 22 per cent. Over and 
over again, 22 per cent, 22 per cent — how can we afford 22 
percent? And yet he stood in his place today and said oh no, it 
wasn’t just about salaries. There were other things there. 
 

Well, Mr. Speaker, those were certainly not a part of the 
advertising campaign that the Premier, and the Minister of 
Health, and the member from Lloydminster ran against the 
nurses in this province. They spent the nurses’ money in this 
province to attack the very nurses that today the Premier was 
standing up and talking about as not wanting just salaries, but 
other things as well. It was simply unfair, just as this 
government has been unfair to all sectors of society, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
In question period my colleague spoke about how unfair the 
Department of Education was being to the taxpayers of this 
province, the property taxpayers, by downloading onto them. 
That has been a hallmark of this government. To initiate 
negotiations, initiate contracts, to sign contracts, and then turn 
around and break them. And, Mr. Speaker, in this nurses’ strike 
I fear that is exactly what’s going to happen. 
 
They signed a memorandum of understanding and put in place 
some binding arbitration to deal with some of the issues. Well 
we saw binding arbitration earlier, Mr. Speaker, when it came 
to judges. We even had a Bill presented to this House by the 
minister of Labour that said, we will honour the binding 
arbitration between the Government of Saskatchewan and the 
Provincial Court judges. 
 
And when that agreement came back, what happened? The 
government simply broke the legislation, refused to accept the 
arbitration report, and came back into this House and changed 
the rules and deemed it to have happened before the 
negotiations took place — deemed it to have happened — 
which is basically what the government was doing with their 
back-to-work legislation. They didn’t deem it in that particular 
case, but they said, you will accept our outline of what health 
care remuneration should be — 2, 2, 2, and 1, and that’s it. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the nurses of this province were not 
prepared to accept that. And that’s why they were out on an 
illegal strike for nine days and 18 hours, since they did have 
actually about six hours of legal strike in there before this 
legislature, by a unanimous vote of the government side with a 
unanimous opposition from the opposition side, and passed 
back-to-work legislation, Mr. Speaker. And it was a sad day in 
this province when that legislation passed. 
 
And I think that the members that voted in favour of that 
back-to-work legislation, Mr. Speaker, are going to pay a 
penalty for that. They’re going to pay a penalty for that at the 
polls in the upcoming election. 
 
Now the Premier has talked quite often, Mr. Speaker, about 
how four years is the proper mandate time and that he would 
return to the polls every four years. Well, Mr. Speaker, four 
years is up in June. And it will be a good measure of the 
courage and the willingness to follow his word of this Premier 
if we actually get an election this June. 
 
I’m looking for an election this June, Mr. Speaker. I’m looking 
forward to it. And when this House wraps up at the end of this 
session, Mr. Speaker, I look forward to bidding a fond farewell 
to a good number of the members opposite. I will wish them 
well in their life, but I don’t expect to see them back in this 
House. 



April 20, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 659 

And I will not be standing in this spot, Mr. Speaker, after the 
election. I will be standing on that side looking this way. And 
there will be considerably fewer members on this side of the 
House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the member from Carrot River chuckles and laughs back 
here. He knows, Mr. Speaker, he knows that he will not be 
returning to this House after the next election. Even the member 
from Regina Albert South — even the member from Regina 
Albert South — he will not get his sophomore spurs in this 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker. He will be simply a one-term member. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the nurses’ strike in this province is going to have 
a telling effect on a good many people. Last night over at CBC 
(Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) Radio, they had a panel, 
Mr. Speaker, to talk about health in general, but in particular 
everyone wanted to talk about the nurses’ strike. And it was 
very interesting what some of the comments were that came out 
of that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One of the panel members that was on there was a fellow by the 
name of Steven Lewis, and he was the CEO (chief executive 
officer) of Health Services. And his comment, Mr. Speaker, in 
describing Saskatchewan’s health care system was that our 
health care is a third-rate desert. Not even a first-class desert — 
a third-rate desert, Mr. Speaker. And yet Mr. Alan Backman, 
who is the government’s representative on the SAHO board — 
so he’s a government appointee, Mr. Speaker, on the SAHO 
board — he went on to say that people from around the world 
were coming to Saskatchewan to learn and study and take home 
with them the Saskatchewan model of health. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know what the government opposite 
is selling to these people if they are indeed coming to visit 
Saskatchewan because we have the longest waiting lists in 
Canada for surgeries; we’ve just gone through a nurses’ strike 
because conditions are so terrible in our health care facilities. 
Why would anyone want to copy Saskatchewan? 
 
By assuming that there is a Saskatchewan model, Mr. Speaker, 
is that to say that there’s also a Manitoba model of health care? 
Is there an Alberta model of health care? Is there a BC (British 
Columbia) model or an Ontario model? I thought we were all 
under medicare, Mr. Speaker, that we all had to adhere to the 
five principles of medicare. 
 
Now I recognize that in Saskatchewan adherence to the five 
principles of medicare is kind of a flexible thing, particularly 
for the government opposite where access . . . Access, Mr. 
Speaker, is a great problem in Saskatchewan. Just ask the 
people that leave this province to gain access to health care, to 
get an MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) or to get a CT 
(computerized tomography) scan or to get cataract surgery or 
any of the other surgeries that people need and can’t get in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, because it’s simply not available in 
a proper time frame in Saskatchewan. 
 
Last night at the CBC forum, there was a doctor there who 
spoke about 21 days for cancer surgery. And he went on to 
describe a number of cancer surgeries that if you don’t get the 
surgery within 2 days there isn’t any point in having it, and yet 
in Saskatchewan people are waiting on average 21 days for 
surgery. And he described a number of types of surgeries — 

that he has talked and met with people here in Saskatchewan 
that have to have surgeries on a very immediate basis and can’t 
get it. 
 
He was taking to some colleagues from California and asking 
them how long would it take from the time someone walked 
into their office with a particular kind of cancer to the surgery? 
Two days. What’s the outside limit — what’s the longest 
anybody would have to wait? Three days. And yet the 
government members opposite vilify the American health care 
system, and yet you get your surgeries in two or three days. 
 
In Saskatchewan you wait 21 days for cancer surgery. But we 
have the best health care system in the world according to the 
members opposite — the best. 
 
When you wait 7 . . . no, 1400 times longer, almost, than you do 
in California for surgery . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Maybe 
my math isn’t quite up to what it should be. Well let’s say ten 
and a half times — ten and a half — ten and a half times longer 
. . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Arithmetic never was a Tory strong 
point. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Yes, that’s why I have to help my son 
do his math — I learn it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have seen a number of other examples like 
that. We have one MRI operating in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, one MRI. Our neighbours across the border in North 
Dakota have 12 for 660,000 people. We have one for a million 
people. And yet according to our members opposite, according 
to the members opposite, we have the best health care system in 
the world — the best health care system in the world. 
 
And aren’t they proud of it? They’re proud of the fact that it’s 
going to take you nine months to get an MRI — they’re proud 
of that. When we can phone up Williston and we can be in there 
tomorrow, Mr. Speaker, we can be in there tomorrow. But not 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
Larry Navin . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh the member 
from Lloydminster wants to enter debate. She says because 
there’s so many millions of people that aren’t covered. Well, 
Madam Member, Mr. Speaker, go down there and talk to the 
people. I’ve talked to the members in the House from Williston. 
And there isn’t a single person in Williston that doesn’t have 
access to health care. Not one. Not one, Mr. Speaker — not one. 
 
The members opposite say that in Alberta there are so many 
hundred thousands of people that haven’t paid their health care 
premiums. And they’re probably right. But not one of those 
people, not one of them, is denied health care — not one is 
denied health care. 
 
That’s the truth, Mr. Speaker. Because they have access. And 
they have access a lot better in Conservative Alberta than they 
do in socialist NDP Saskatchewan. And that’s the facts. 
 
They brag about, oh well we’re going to have three MRIs. Yes, 
we are at some point in time . . . 
 



660 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 1999 

(1445) 
 
An Hon. Member: — September. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — September. Well it was promised for 
December last year and now she says September. The NDP 
have a very flexible timeline when it actually comes to the 
truth, Mr. Speaker. It moves continuously. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think the members opposite should be 
admitting that their health care is a disaster; that the Premier’s 
intervention in the health care system, in the strike, was a 
disaster. The fact that this government has refused to recognize 
their role and their responsibility in the health care system is 
what has led to this disaster. 
 
The government members opposite last year elected the 
president of SUN (Saskatchewan Union of Nurses) to be one of 
their colleagues — sits in the cabinet, sits in the cabinet as the 
Associate Minister of Health. And I know that the member from 
Lloydminster was jealous of the fact that that member from 
Saskatoon Eastview became a cabinet minister and she didn’t, 
because she obviously wants to get up and participate in the 
health debate. And she’d like to be able to do that as a cabinet 
minister but I’m afraid, Mr. Speaker, it’s not to be, it’s not to 
be. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the member, the past president of SUN, was 
elected as a member of the NDP government, as a cabinet 
minister, and yet she stood in this House, Mr. Speaker, and 
voted against her union. She voted to put her union back to 
work, to force a settlement on her past colleagues. And we 
heard the response, Mr. Speaker, when she did that. We heard 
the galleries booing that member. Doesn’t happen very often, 
Mr. Speaker, in this House but they booed the member from 
Saskatoon Eastview. 
 
And I believe, Mr. Speaker, that they indeed have that right to 
do so. While it may not be proper decorum in the House for 
members in the galleries, people in the galleries, to participate 
in the debate, it certainly did give an indication of how strongly 
the nurses were feeling about that issue. Mr. Speaker, I believe 
it would have been incumbent on the government members 
opposite to have allowed their members to vote freely — to 
vote their consciences. 
 
The member from Regina Albert South says they did. They did 
have the right to vote freely. And I’m sure that the nurses will 
be pleased to hear that, that the member from Saskatoon 
Eastview was free to vote however she wanted — however she 
wanted — and she chose to vote for back-to-work legislation 
for her union. I’m sure the nurses are going to be very pleased 
to hear that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The other part, Mr. Speaker, and I mentioned it earlier, was the 
ad campaign in the newspapers and on the radio that this 
government ran against the nurses. I believe that only inflamed 
the issue. It certainly didn’t have anything to do with 
negotiations with the nurses because they weren’t impressed 
with it at all. It didn’t have anything to do with SAHO because 
they were already in place to be at the negotiating table. They 
had their marching orders from the government. 
 

Mr. Speaker, it was simply crass politics. It was only for 
politics that the government was spending the taxpayers’ money 
to vilify nurses in public. It was nothing but pure crass politics, 
Mr. Speaker, and should be condemned. 
 
And that’s what this particular motion does, Mr. Speaker. It 
condemns the government for those crass political actions. 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would move, seconded by the 
member from Moosomin: 
 

That this Assembly condemns the NDP government, and in 
particular the Premier, for their arrogant handling of the 
strike by Saskatchewan Union of Nurses and for their 
expensive propaganda war which only served to make the 
situation worse. 
 

I so move. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to be able to stand in the Assembly this afternoon and 
speak to the motion that’s before the Assembly in regards to 
health care in this province and the deplorable state that we find 
our health care system in today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me begin by just reading a bit out of one of the 
letters, many letters that I received, and I know my colleagues 
received letters, not only from nurses and nursing unions but 
certainly from individuals across this province over the past 
number of days in regards to the specific situation that we have 
found ourselves in in the health care field. And I quote from a 
letter: 
 

We are aghast and appalled that the NDP government, the 
founders of Medicare and protectors of workers’ rights 
would be so callous as to violate those very principles. By 
taking away our rights to collective bargaining and 
refusing to address our health care issues, safe patient care 
is jeopardized. 
 
Laws for collective bargaining were in place long before 
Roy Romanow came to office. Suddenly the law is adapted 
for . . . 

 
The Speaker: — Order. Now I listened to the reference the 
hon. member made from which he was quoting, and I don’t 
recall hearing it being a published reference, and remind him 
that in using proper names here we do make an exception when 
it’s a published reference that one is referring to. Otherwise 
hon. members are required to refer to members by their roles in 
the Assembly. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure. This may be on all 
members’ desks; I’m quite sure it is. But for the sake of the 
Assembly, I’ll put the Premier in the place of the name of the 
member in this letter. 
 

(The Premier) . . . has referred to the nurses’ strike as a 
“runaway train”. Let us say that the “runaway train” started 
with health care reform, which when translated, meant the 
closure of small hospitals, staff cuts, and bed closures. 

 



April 20, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 661 

Mr. Speaker, as I read this letter and many of the other letters 
that I’ve received on my desk — and there’s no doubt in my 
mind that not only members of our caucus, the Saskatchewan 
Party caucus and the official opposition have received these 
letters; no doubt many of the members, government members 
including the Health minister and the Premier have been 
receiving the same letters. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it would seem to me that if the government, 
if the Premier of this province, is indeed listening, the Premier 
will start to listen very carefully. Because while we can argue 
the whole debate about health care and about workers, and in 
this case before us, specifically the nurses, that they’ve taken an 
oath. And I’ve heard many people talk about the fact that nurses 
take an oath to their patients. 
 
The members of this Assembly take an oath to represent their 
constituents, to speak out on the issues, to represent the issues 
and the concerns of their constituents. And certainly as we’ve 
been into the debate of health care in the province of 
Saskatchewan over the past number of years, and most recently, 
the strike by the nurses in the province of . . . in this province, 
we have an oath as well to represent the issues and the facts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can assure that this whole debate of health care, 
even in the constituency that I represent, that many people in 
my constituency, in the Moosomin riding, certainly recognize 
the contribution that nurses make to the health care, the role of 
health care in delivering the health care services in this 
province, in our communities, as well as to the economic 
viability, if you will, of our community and many small 
businesses and farms as well. Having been . . . or being married 
or being a spouse of a member who may have a business. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think what the debate before us says and 
says very loudly and very clearly that many people across this 
province are beginning to really question the commitment the 
NDP Party has, and the Premier and this government have, to 
real health care in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we look at health care, I don’t doubt that as 
we look at the 52 hospitals closures that have taken place since 
1991 — 52 . . . or 53 actually with the Plains hospital, 53 
hospital closures, the reduction of nurses and other support staff 
in the province of Saskatchewan and in the delivery of health 
care, one has to ask — and as I get it every day — people are 
asking, well, if we cut 52 facilities out of the picture, we’ve 
reduced the workforce as a result of the reduction. The 
individuals, the nurses in those facilities weren’t moved to other 
facilities. 
 
Actually many jobs were cut from the system. And then the 
government and the Minister of Health stands up in this 
Assembly and tells us we are putting more today into health 
care than we have in the past. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the Minister of Finance indicated, over $1.9 
billion now going into health care delivery, funds for health 
care delivery services in the province of Saskatchewan, one has 
to ask where is the money going? 
 
We have patients on waiting lists, and the member from Regina 
South knows what the waiting lists are in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 
 
We have in a couple situations, Mr. Speaker, we have instances 
where individuals are prepared to donate organs to help another 
member, whether it’s a family member, and this is a very 
serious situation. And they’re on waiting lists, Mr. Speaker. 
Situations where their lives are threatened and they’re on 
waiting lists. We have people waiting for cancer treatments in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I’m sure the Premier and, as we’ve heard, the Minister of 
Health would argue today that they’re on waiting lists because 
the nurses went on strike and the nurses weren’t doing their job. 
 
And as my colleague, the member from Cannington mentioned, 
what we have seen is an attempt by this Premier and by this 
government to vilify the nurses rather than sitting down and 
coming to a reasonable collective agreement, using the 
collective agreement process that this letter talks about and 
indeed entering into meaningful negotiations to address the 
concerns of health care workers across this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I’ve indicated over the past few weeks, 
legislating caregivers back to work is one thing; expecting them 
to go back to work and feeling good about the workplace that 
they have just walked out of because of the stress factor that 
they face in delivering the services that they feel obligated and 
. . . a feeling of frustration because they don’t feel they’re able 
to give the quality of care that they actually committed 
themselves to — the oath that they swore when they became a 
professional and took on the position of being a registered nurse 
in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
When we look at this debate, Mr. Speaker, what I find is that at 
the end of the day while many nurses are going back to work 
and even, as we’ve seen by the media and I’ve heard personally, 
I’ve had nurses calling me personally, people are just saying 
that the situation has not certainly corrected itself. In fact they 
feel, they feel that the workplace has become more of a stressful 
place to go to work. 
 
Why do they feel that? Because, Mr. Speaker, they feel they’ve 
been forced back into something that they were having 
difficulty in working with in the first place. And they feel that 
they’ve been forced back by a government that has shown a 
contempt for the parliamentary process, the democratic process. 
And they also feel that they have let their patients down, their 
workplace down. 
 
And at the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, I guess what I hear and 
what I heard even coming back to the Assembly on Monday 
morning was nurses were basically saying, well what did we go 
on strike for? It doesn’t appear that we’re getting any more than 
what we were originally offered in the first place. They feel let 
down. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I guess as members of this Assembly we can only 
hope that the agreement the nurses signed on Sunday morning 
with the Premier, offering to do full and serious and sincere 
bargaining, that out of that process of bargaining over the next 
few weeks, Mr. Speaker, that indeed the issues that the nurses 
brought to the forefront, that the public in general supported the 
nurses on, will be addressed. 



662 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 1999 

(1500) 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is my fear that if the government, led by the 
Premier of this province, do not listen very carefully and do not 
through their bargaining agent, SAHO, sit down and sincerely 
bargain the issues of very importance to the nurses, that we may 
find ourselves in a situation where we’re really scrambling to 
find the staffing that will be needed to fill hospitals. 
 
Because there’s no doubt in my mind that there will be many 
nurses across this province who, having the opportunity, will 
look at other avenues and other areas where they will decide to 
ply their trade, where they will move to, because they will feel 
. . . They’re feeling that they’re really not needed or wanted in 
the province of Saskatchewan. And they’re going to look at 
communities and locations where they feel the opportunity to 
work and to provide the training and the expertise they have and 
provide the care will be offered to them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the motion before us basically says that the 
government has fumbled the ball. The motion before us, 
basically what it says, Mr. Speaker, is that the Premier fumbled 
the ball. And what it says is that the government really didn’t 
enter into those meaningful negotiations. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, I would have to suggest — and many 
people share this opinion — that the government was basically 
looking at a reason to bring in back-to-work legislation. It’s 
almost like they wanted to see the nurses go on strike. They 
wanted to have the opportunity to say to the electorate of 
Saskatchewan; we’re in control; we know what we’re doing; 
we’re going to make sure that nurses are back to work; we’ll 
bring in legislation if they go on strike. They were just waiting 
for them to go on strike. 
 
And if the member from Lloydminster doesn’t believe that, Mr. 
Speaker, I’ve been told directly by individuals who were at the 
bargaining table, of the many occasions they were at the 
bargaining table on one day, they’d go to the bargaining table 
the next day and find that the representatives of SAHO had 
totally changed and they had to basically go through the 
process, the motions, all over again that they had discussed the 
day before. And it was from one day to the next; it just seemed 
that there was no meaningful effort or attempt or willingness, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, to address the issues in front of them. 
 
That is why I believe, Mr. Speaker, when it came — Mr. 
Deputy Speaker — when it came to the end of the day, that is 
why the nurses, after they had sat down and the Premier had 
met with them for 12 hours, well everything we have seen and 
heard indicates that that meeting on that . . . that meeting on 
Wednesday — I forget the exact date — where the Premier says 
he met with the nurses, was the representative of the nurses 
were only with the Premier for a just a few short moments of 
time; I believe less than an hour. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, what that is saying and what the nurses 
took from that was the negotiations were not as meaningful as 
the Premier and the Minister of Health would like us to believe. 
As a result the nurses responded. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we talk about this province, we talk about 
— and I believe the province of Saskatchewan is a good 

province — and in fact it’s a great province. I appreciate the 
fact that I’ve had the privilege of living, being born and raised, 
in this province. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I do like the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I believe this province has so much to offer. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this province has so much going 
for it. And yet when we listen to the government, the 
government seems to be at the present time . . . or the last few 
days was more in a confrontational mode rather than it was in 
actually dealing with individuals such as the nurses. 
 
It’s interesting, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when the nurses went on 
strike and then defied back-to-work legislation, how quickly 
when the SEIU (Saskatchewan Employees’ International 
Union) contract came up the Premier moved in and instead of 
threatening legislation basically said would you agree to a 
mediator. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we see what took place as 
a result of a mediator moving into the situation. 
 
One has to ask — and certainly those are some of the issues that 
we’ve raised and asked the government to do — one has to ask 
themselves where would we be today? Would we have gone 
through 10 days of a nurses’ strike if the Premier, when he had 
met with the nurses on that Wednesday, would have sat back 
and said, well, I don’t think we’re really going anywhere, and 
rather than pushing this issue because I think we’re just in more 
of a confrontational mode there was . . . It was very obvious 
that SAHO had drawn the line in the sand, and certainly the 
government had, and SAHO really had no place to move 
because their orders basically come from the department. The 
only negotiating power they have is what the department gives 
them, and the nurses had their line drawn in the sand. 
 
Would it have been that difficult for the Premier to say, I think 
at this time we need the opportunity for some cooler heads to 
prevail. Would it be possible for us to agree to a mediator and 
sit down and allow nurses to continue to perform and continue 
to work the floors of the hospitals, and allow a mediator to sit 
down and come to an agreement before we get to the 
heavy-handed tactics of back-to-work legislation. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe, I firmly believe that nurses 
would have certainly agreed to that. Before they made that final 
decision they would have agreed to allow for a process of 
mediation to take place if that might have worked. And I’m sure 
that they would have entered into it wholeheartedly if they 
knew that SAHO and they could sit down and bargain all the 
issues — like the workplace problems, like the recruitment 
issue, like addressing the issues of the Dorsey report and 
implementing all the concerns surrounding the Dorsey report. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what nurses were telling me, they 
didn’t expect that to be implemented all in one day. They didn’t 
expect that to be implemented all in one year, that the issues 
and the equality as a result of the amalgamation of unions to be 
settled in one year. But they wanted a commitment by the 
government, through SAHO, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to sit down 
and meaningfully address these concerns and agree to a time 
period whereby the inequality or equality concerns would be 
addressed and would be implemented. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe, in talking to the nurses I’ve 



April 20, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 663 

talked to, that they would have been more than happy to agree 
to and accept that. That was a workable agreement. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what I found in talking to most of the 
professionals, talking to business men and women in our 
community, and as I indicated earlier in suggesting it to the 
Speaker, many people in our rural communities certainly are 
tied directly or indirectly to the nursing boards or the health 
care profession as the health care . . . whether it’s hospitals or 
care homes, are major employers in our smaller communities. 
 
And most people felt that if meaningful negotiations were 
entered into, that the health care system would continue to 
function and no actions would be taken. And they were 
dismayed to find that the government basically states this is the 
end of the road, this is the bottom line, we’re not prepared to go 
further; and they weren’t prepared to move, and if need be we 
will indeed implement back-to-work legislation. And that, Mr. 
Speaker, just infuriated the situation, and as a result we have 
had a 10-day strike. 
 
When I think about the issues that led up to it. I look at a 
Leader-Post headline, Monday, March . . . Monday, April 19. 
We see, and I quote from this Leader-Post article. It says: 
 

Just two days after meeting with SUN, Romanow then met 
with the Service Employees International Union (SEIU) 
representing support workers in the health sector. 
 
A journalist asked Romanow how he can avoid the fact 
that he has set a precedent after meeting face-to-face with 
two health unions. 
 
“By saying no to some of them, if not all of them,” he 
replied with a laugh on Wednesday after question period. 
 
“Do I regret it? Not at all. Would I do it again? You’re 
doggone right.” 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, with words like that I can see why the 
nurses responded in the way they did. 
 
And it was just an indication, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the 
whole confrontation we just faced was a confrontation that, it 
appeared, was being used for political purposes rather than at 
sitting down. Because the Premier wanted to have this issue of 
health care debate and the union agreements all settled and out 
of the way so that he could call . . . set himself up to call that 
June election. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what’s taking place today doesn’t 
necessarily mean we’re not . . . that a June election is certainly 
not in the cards. At least I don’t believe that it has interfered. 
While some of the media would argue that . . . media is arguing 
that the Premier is now backing away from a June call, my 
feeling is that a June call is certainly available and an option 
that the Premier has to consider. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if you have any insights as to 
whether June is on or off that the opposition caucus would 
certainly seek your guidance in that regard. However, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I would like to suggest to you that my 
colleagues and I, if indeed the Premier wants to and is prepared 

to call a June election, we will be ready. And we’re more than 
willing and ready to enter into that fray right now. 
 
Because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the province of Saskatchewan 
needs to have the opportunity to judge this government on their 
record, a record that as we see certainly is dismal in many areas 
of the province. While many of the members would argue that it 
is one of the best records that people across this province and 
across this country have ever seen, Mr. Deputy Speaker, many 
people are questioning the integrity and the willingness of this 
government to set an agenda and have a vision for the future. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s no doubt that the government, and 
certainly the Premier of this province, have to take the blame, 
have to accept the blame for the condition of health care in the 
province of Saskatchewan. They have to accept the blame for 
where we sit today. The fact that we have a workplace . . . 
People going back to a workplace, going back to a workplace 
where there are certainly a lot of annoyances amongst the 
workers. There’s a lot of . . . a feeling of betrayal. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think each and every one of us as 
possible health care users, because we’re not guaranteed even, 
even today that we may not sometime even later today as a 
result of an emergency situation be called upon or need to use 
. . . utilize the health care system. 
 
And I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if for some reason I was to 
end up in an emergency ward, I would want and I will want to 
feel that I have a person caring for me who doesn’t have a 
grudge on their shoulder. A person who is really applying a . . . 
is conducting themselves with the utmost of professional 
conduct. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what I hear in talking to nurses is 
there’s a lot of dismay. It . . . as my colleague indicated, it will 
take some time for us to overcome the difficulties of the past 
strike action that was taken and the 10 days of strike action that 
was taken. 
 
So Mr. Deputy Speaker, having made those few comments, I 
certainly would have to agree with my colleague, the member 
from Cannington, that this government has to accept 
responsibility. 
 
And the sooner this government accepts responsibility and 
recognizes the responsibility it should accept and apologize for 
some of the . . . for the issues that it has led us, the people of 
Saskatchewan, down on, in. And indeed we hope, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that meaningful negotiations now take place so that at 
the end of the day, when everything is said and done, that all the 
nurses across this province can feel comfortable and that they 
have received the fairest . . . And I believe they’re looking for, 
what they’re looking for is a fair and meaningful contract that 
would give them the opportunity to apply their services to 
indeed meet the needs of the patients across this province so 
that everyone can be assured that health care continues to be a 
number one — not only a number one priority, but a top quality 
service to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ve been listening 



664 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 1999 

to some of the remarks made by the members opposite and I 
must commend the member from Moosomin that he actually 
had some suggestions, some positive suggestions which I think 
shows that he has been doing some listening, and so I was quite 
pleased to hear that. 
 
I can’t say the same for the member from Cannington that 
spoke before him. Because the rhetoric coming from that 
member on question period and today is full . . . seemed to be 
quite full of venom and to the extent that sometimes his face 
gets so red when he’s talking about these things that I wonder 
that he may not have to access that system if he gets any more 
excited about it. 
 
The problem is, Mr. Speaker, I think that he doesn’t quite 
believe in everything that he’s saying, because from him it’s 
been words of condemn, condemn, condemn, condemn and 
blame, and condemn and blame. And, Mr. Speaker, so as a 
result of listening to that and having a look at the motion that 
was presented before that, when I finish speaking I will be 
moving an amendment to that motion. And the amendment will 
read this: I will move: 
 

That all the words after the word “Assembly” be removed 
and replaced with the following: 
 
That the Assembly encourage the government, the 
negotiators for SAHO, and the negotiators for the health 
care unions to conduct the current negotiations in a fair, 
even-handed, and thorough manner, balancing the best 
interests of health care professionals, the public, and the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 
 

Why that motion, Mr. Speaker? Because when you take it all in 
balance, when I take it all in balance, what I have heard as I 
have been . . . throughout the strike, what I’ve heard from 
nurses and other health care workers and administrators prior to 
. . . in the months prior to the strike — actually in the year prior 
to the strike — what I’ve heard directly from nursing managers 
prior to the strike, is that the working conditions for the nurses 
have been getting more and more complex, more and more 
difficult, more and more demanding, and that it’s been rather 
frustrating. 
 
(1515) 
 
And I was so pleased when these issues were addressed at least 
in part in the budget. A hundred and ninety-five million dollars 
in additional money to the health budget, the biggest amount 
ever — the biggest amount ever added to a health budget. 
 
And what was it there for, Mr. Speaker? Well it was there to 
address most of the causes that have been identified through the 
strike. Right in the pamphlet that we put out, Mr. Speaker, that 
the Government of Saskatchewan put out on the budget: it’s 
entitled “. . . building our future . . . the Saskatchewan way,” 
based on the Speech from the Throne for Saskatchewan 1999. 
And the issues were identified right in the pamphlet: $195 
million for what? 
 
For, number one, a plan to reduce waiting times for key 
procedures. Key procedures, Mr. Speaker. Because we are 
finding that the waiting times in some cases was getting longer 

than we were comfortable and we used to, and we would think 
that in our society we should be able to streamline those. 
 
Number two, improvements for cancer treatment. With more 
technology available, better success rates with certain 
procedures. We have learned how to do certain things, the 
medical system has learned how to do certain things better. We 
want them to do more of it. 
 
Number three, the multi-year plan for women’s health needs. 
An identified need, Mr. Speaker, and we’re willing. And I’m 
very pleased the Minister of Health was able to get this item in 
there. 
 
Less time spent on administration, Mr. Speaker. There has been 
already a decrease in the amount of time spent by 
administration . . . in administration, the amount of money spent 
in administration. And in my own district, the number of 
administrators has been reduced tremendously. The number of 
nurse . . . the number of managers has been reduced. In fact, it 
created a problem during the strike because we didn’t have 
enough nursing managers and other managers to handle it, but 
fortunately there were some workers that were able to come in 
and spell off during the very intense times. 
 
But point number five, and perhaps most significantly dealing 
with the issue at hand, and I read directly from the government 
handout, the official handout, purpose for the 195 million is to 
work with health providers to make sustainable improvements 
to working conditions and terms of employment so they can 
provide better care. Exactly, Mr. Speaker, what the nurses were 
fighting for in their contract talks, exactly what. 
 
And that’s why I was so pleased that, with the exception of 22 
per cent on the grid, that the talks are leading to solving the 
issues which have been identified for some time, however, the 
methodology of addressing them has not yet been totally agreed 
to. But I therefore encourage those negotiators in SAHO, those 
negotiators with the people that negotiate for the health care 
unions to conduct the negotiations with this end outcome in 
mind. 
 
Mr. Speaker, nothing speaks — affects a person, I guess — 
more directly in health care than personal experience. You can 
read a lot of books. You can listen to a lot of people. But if you 
actually are able or have the opportunity or — perhaps it’s not 
such a great thing — but to actually go to the hospital with a 
relative or a friend or on your own and experience for yourself 
what is happening, you get a pretty good feeling and it verifies 
what you may have picked up in the literature. 
 
And I have to say that over the last few years, last three or four 
years in particular, when I’ve had those opportunities to visit 
some of their major hospitals, and not just as a politician but as 
a relative or a friend for somebody in need of services . . . Just 
today as a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, I have a very close 
relative who is in the one of the Saskatoon hospitals undergoing 
a operation, a cancer . . . involving cancer. This operation had to 
be postponed as a result of the strike. I was so impressed when 
yesterday we got a phone call from the doctor in charge and 
asked us to bring our relative in to the hospital by 3 o’clock so 
that the operation — pre-op could take place and the 
post-operation could take place today. 



April 20, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 665 

This is a case involving cancer; it’s a case where the doctor said 
this has to be done now. And you know I was so pleased that 
the system was able to respond to it now. 
 
I might mention that that this has been an ongoing battle and 
I’ve been in the hospital several times. Once — and you have to 
go through, as you know, through the . . . when you go to the 
hospital, you go to admitting and they send you to the 
outpatients and in each case you might have to wait your turn 
— once, I recall, it took an entire hour and a half to get through 
that process. 
 
The second time that I was in there, I happened to drop the 
patient off at the door and I went out to park the car. By the 
time I parked the car, he’d been through the waiting room and 
was into the in-patients. We were actually 15 minutes ahead of 
time. I went to the in-patients for company and within 10 
minutes the doctor was there. Five minutes later the testing 
process was done and we were out of there within 20 minutes. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, you get rather impressed with the way people 
react and the way people treat individuals who need help. I 
believe that they deserve nothing but praise for trying to . . . for 
working and putting . . . making the system work in the way 
that it does. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, the interesting thing is, when you 
look at the statistics, is that there are thousands upon thousands 
more like that. There are occasional cases that it takes a little 
longer — there are occasional cases. I had a situation myself 
where I had a little situation where I had to go see the doctor — 
I had a piece of wild rice stuck in my throat, Mr. Speaker — 
and I waited for two days and it wouldn’t come out. 
 
And when I went to the hospital, to the doctor, he sent me to the 
hospital because he couldn’t deal with it. His tweezers weren’t 
thin enough to reach down. So they sent me to the hospital. And 
I had to wait an hour, but, Mr. Speaker, when I looked around, 
the people that were coming in there were not nearly as well off 
as I was who had a mere little itch back here that had to be 
treated with a very specific piece of tweezer. 
 
But nevertheless it was a successful operation, Mr. Speaker, and 
the patient lived. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — I remember when President Johnson was 
telling us about his experiences with the medical system, but I 
want to bring another example. Well, no. What I wanted to 
mention . . . the reason I mentioned this, Mr. Speaker, this 
previous example, is I wanted to say that I’ve seen through 
personal experience, that the out-patient system that is being 
used in our hospital and our health system, the out-patient 
system works. And I also use that same example to show that 
the clinical system works. 
 
And I want to give you another example to show you, to tell 
you how I experienced that a palliative system works. And 
again it’s with my own family. A year and a half ago, well we 
went to the hospital. It was my father in this case. My father 
was suffering from an aneurysm. The doctor advised he’s had to 
have an operation. He had to have two. 

The operation was not successful, Mr. Speaker, but the thing 
that I recall very, very vividly is when the people in the hospital 
realized what was going to happen — that the end was near for 
my father — how they switched from the acute care system to a 
palliative system. I didn’t recognize it at the time of course; it’s 
thought a year later that I recognized what they were doing. 
 
But they went into a system which prepared myself, my wife, 
my brothers and my sisters, and my mother, for the eventuality 
of my father’s death. And, Mr. Speaker, I know also from 
looking at this that there are thousands more like that, and we 
are ever so thankful and grateful that we have a system, and 
proud that we have a system that works. 
 
So when I hear people on the other side saying nothing but 
condemn, condemn, condemn, I say to them take a look. Take a 
look at the full part of the glass not just at the empty part. Take 
a look at the entire part and stop focusing on that. And be of 
assistance. If you want to be of assistance, help us fill the glass, 
Mr. Speaker. Help us fill the glass. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our health system is based on five basic principles. 
They are enshrined in the Canada Health Act. These principles 
are often referred to — they’re significant. It was passed in the 
federal House of Commons; I believe passed by the Pearson 
government if I correctly remember. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as a matter of fact what happened, the reason it 
was passed, was because John Diefenbaker who happens to be 
. . . had been the prime minister from Prince Albert at the time, 
was looking at the Saskatchewan medicare system. And he 
thought, hey this is good enough for Saskatchewan, it should be 
good enough for Canada. And what he did is he set up a 
commission headed by Justice Hall, Emmett Hall. And Emmett 
Hall came back with the recommendation to implement these 
five principles of health. 
 
It started in Saskatchewan; went through the Conservatives; 
went to the Liberals; was accepted by the entire country; and is 
still accepted to this day, Mr. Speaker, as something that 
probably we identify more with as Canadians than anything 
else. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these principles — public administration and 
public funding. Why public? Well, Mr. Speaker, because it 
involves everybody. Everyone of us at some time or other 
accesses the system. 
 
Why public funding as opposed to private funding? I believe 
it’s cheaper, Mr. Speaker. It costs us in this province about 
$1,800 per capita per year. But I think if you look at the studies 
that have been done over the years it’ll tell you that . . . the 
studies will tell you that that’s still under 10 per cent of our 
gross national product compared to the cost in the States where 
it’s approximately 13 per of their gross national product, and 
here it’s accessible to all. We don’t have people that do not 
have insurance, public health insurance. 
 
So the first principle is public administration and public 
funding. Second principle, Mr. Speaker, is that it’s universal. 
That is, it be made available to everybody not just some people. 
If we go to a two-tier system, Mr. Speaker, as is advocated quite 
often, particularly advocated in Alberta, advocated by some 



666 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 1999 

members of the Liberal Party across, then what happens is you 
end up with everybody not being covered. And quite likely a 
more expensive system. That’s principle no. 2, universality. 
 
Principle no. 3, comprehensiveness. The system should be 
comprehensive. It should cover all processes: acute processes, 
preventative processes, palliative care. It should provide also 
for alternate methods of health care and prevention, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
To be comprehensive it requires teamwork. And I think I want 
to emphasize that, Mr. Speaker. One of my mentors as I was 
going into politics and I was thinking about health was Dr. 
Orville Hjertaas, the man who we credit as being the doctor of 
medicare in Saskatchewan. He was the one that stood steadfast 
when Ross Thatcher was breaking down the doors of this 
legislature in protest and the KOD (Keep Our Doctors) were 
marching all over the place in Saskatchewan opposing 
medicare. 
 
(1530) 
 
All the doctors went on strike. Woodrow Lloyd had to deal with 
that — an NDP government. They were steadfast. And as a 
result we’ve got our medicare, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But Dr. Hjertaas stressed the concept of teamwork, that you 
have a whole lot to do and that you should disassemble and 
reorganize the military model of health care into a team model. 
And that’s what he practised in the community clinic in Prince 
Albert, which is now known as the Prince Albert Co-operative 
Health Centre. And his model was picked up in various places 
but it never did persevere and become dominant. And I think 
we’re the worse off because of that now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think the time is now to take another look at how we organize 
our system, our hospitals, and how we organize the way people 
interact. Should everybody just wait till they get an order from 
somebody else before they act? Particularly nurses? Particularly 
LPNs (licensed practical nurse)? Or could we form a more 
holistic system where people . . . where the caregivers consult? 
 
One of the things that we’re missing now, Mr. Speaker, in our 
system is the kind of care that my father used to talk about in 
what he called the old days. That was through the ’30s and the 
’40s where they knew the doctor and the nurse, and the doctor 
and the nurse knew them throughout, throughout their lives — 
certainly throughout any particular procedure. And so there was 
somebody there. There was that personal touch. Somebody that 
they knew cared and they knew understood the problem. And 
they were never lost; they wouldn’t get lost in a hospital 
corridor, or going from clinic to hospital, or from place to place. 
That human element of staying in contact with somebody that 
you know you could go to or feel confident in as you’re going 
through a process. We now have the high-tech, Mr. Speaker, 
but we don’t all necessarily have the high touch. And I believe 
what the nurses are telling us is that we have to pay a little more 
attention to the high touch. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m talking about the five principles of medicare: 
public administration, universality, comprehensiveness — that’s 
three of them. But the most important one, perhaps, is 
accessibility. You can have a system that’s universal and 

comprehensive, but if everybody can’t get at it, it’s not worth 
very much to those people that can’t get at it. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it’s important that it is accessible to the north 
part of Saskatchewan and the southern part, and the rural and 
the urban. And with today’s transportation and today’s 
ambulance system and today’s air ambulance system and 
today’s communications, we’re able to shrink a lot of these 
distances, Mr. Speaker, and there’s very few places that are 
more than 40 or 50 minutes away from a hospital or from acute 
care services of any kind in Saskatchewan — a very, very small 
percentage. 
 
And last of all, Mr. Speaker, in addition to those four principles 
— public administration, universality, comprehensiveness, and 
accessibility — is portability. That is, we should be able to take 
our medicare with us to Alberta, to Manitoba, or to Ontario or 
any other part of Canada when we’re going visiting or if we’re 
going on business. And that is by and large in place, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, prior to the session starting, I was in 
discussion with some nurses about what was happening in the 
hospitals and other health care workers, and I was given this 
little booklet, which is a summary of a study conducted by a 
company called E.C. Murphy. And the title of this study is 
called Complexity in Nursing. And it, Mr. Speaker . . . it was a 
study taken during the period 1994 to 1996 that involved more 
than 170,000 health care workers, which included 47,692, 
exactly, registered nurses, and 138 acute health care facilities. 
And this, sir, was done in the United States of America, 
published by E.C. Murphy, Ltd. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the study I found — although it was done in the 
States — seemed to address the issues which we have found 
right here in Saskatchewan. Although their system varies 
somewhat, but some of the procedures and the frustrations that 
their nurses are faced with I think are similar to what our nurses 
are faced with. 
 
And I want to read some parts of this study into the record, Mr. 
Speaker, because I think it’s something that . . . I think it’s 
something that our administrators, our health nurse managers, 
and perhaps even politicians ought to pay some attention to. 
 
It starts out this way, one of the items it says is: 
 

More than 65 % of the work performed by a nurse is, in 
some way, influenced by others, including physicians, 
administrators, regulatory agencies, or professionals from 
other disciplines.  
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this speaks to locus of control as we 
educators call it. If you feel that you’ve got some control of the 
situation that you’re responsible for, then you’ll do a better job 
of it. But if you feel somebody else is telling you what to do all 
the time or 65 per cent of the time as was found in this case, it 
makes much more difficult to be a professional on the job. 
 
Another item, Mr. Speaker. It says: 
 

A recent study of the registered nurse’s role supports the 
theory that complexity in the health care system has led to 



April 20, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 667 

complex work lives for nurses, with accompanying low 
morale, high levels of stress, fragmented care delivery 
systems, patient and physician dissatisfaction, and 
increased healthcare costs.  
 

This is in the United States of America, Mr. Speaker. But what 
do they mean when they say complexity? They define it, in this 
little booklet, and they say that: 
 

The average number of activities that a nurse has to 
perform is 74. 
 

Seventy-four different tasks on the job — that’s just the 
average. So those nurses that are working in situations which 
are considerably . . . which increase in complexity, I can see 
that figure going up to over a hundred. Now that’s enough to 
drive anybody batty, Mr. Speaker, even the most capable of us, 
of us human beings. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another item from the study: 
 

On the average (it says) 51 per cent of registered nurses’ 
time is spent on activities outside of the core of the 
registered nurse role definition. 

 
It would be interesting to find out what that percentage is here, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to just flip through and just give you one or two more 
quotes from here, Mr. Speaker. But here’s one of the things that 
they say when they talk about why the current solutions that 
have been presented to the nursing and acute care situation have 
not worked. And it says this is the reason: 
 

(Because studies in the past) retrospectively show whether 
things were “wrong” rather than assist nursing leaders in 
proactively putting the right person in the right place, 
doing the right work, at the right time, at the right cost. 

 
It says: 
 

. . . they do not (the studies on motion) do not produce a 
road map for achieving (this). By focusing on outcomes to 
the exclusion of process . . . systems make judgements 
about productivity of nursing units without regard to 
mitigating factors — such as complexity — that reduce . . . 
inefficiency. 
 

And in summary, Mr. Speaker, they say this: 
 

As demonstrated by the ineffectiveness of current tools, 
any approach to staffing or work redesigning based 
primarily on (full-time equivalents) is flawed in its ability 
to recognize the quality and quantity of nursing work . . . 
What our RNs do and how they do it are both more 
important than simply how many RNs there are. RNs may 
have overestimated the value of staffing ratios and skills 
mix in hospitals and underestimated the importance of the 
organization of nursing. And one might add, the 
organization of the rest of the health care system. 

 
Is the summary reached here, Mr. Speaker. 
 

So their conclusion is, based on that summary, and I’ll read one 
sentence and that is: 
 

By taking action to reduce complexity, nursing leaders can 
have a profound effect on staff morale, patient care, and 
the affordability of healthcare. Taking responsibility for 
work redesigning across systems can allow nursing to 
further the noblest aims of the profession. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, what I learned from all that is it verified 
some of the things that I’d been told as I go speaking to health 
care professionals. And it tells me that we could use an 
opportunity like the one that’s with us right now, to look at how 
things are organized in the system, see what kind of overlap 
there is in the system. 
 
The book also speaks to overlap. This study speaks to overlap. 
So that . . . not so that people will do more work — goodness 
sakes, they’re worked enough — but so that the work that they 
do is done more efficiently. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, it comes down to organization in many 
cases. As somebody that’s operated an office, which you have 
. . . I know, Mr. Speaker, that when you get your mail in the 
morning and you start opening it and if you just open some of 
them and put it from one side of the desk to the other side of the 
desk, come back later and redo that mail, move it one more time 
and a third time and fourth time, you’ll probably agree that 
wasn’t your most efficient day. 
 
But when you took your mail and you took it one step at a time 
and dealt with each one in hand and disposed of it, your 
organizational . . . and were organized in that fashion, you know 
that you could do . . . you could leave yourself a lot more time 
to do other things. 
 
Well there’s probably things like that that we can do in our 
system because we still are, by and large, very hierarchical 
within the system. And perhaps it’s time to take a look at that 
and look at the teamwork concept that I talked about earlier and 
that was recommended to me from away back, Mr. Speaker, by 
Dr. Orville Hjertaas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had talked earlier about the thousands more of 
. . . of thousands of procedures that were done and are being 
done by our system. And I just want to spend a minute telling 
you just how many thousands of procedures there really are. I 
have some stats that have been given to me and I want to just 
take and share this with you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
During a normal day, an ordinary day or an average day in 
Saskatchewan, there are 35,000 people that access our health 
system — 35,000 people. That’s like taking the entire city of 
Prince Albert and putting them through some part of the health 
system — see a doctor, see a nurse, go to a hospital, go to see a 
physiotherapist — involved in some way with a person that is 
being paid by the medicare system. See how complex this really 
gets. 
 
Last year, when it came to cataract surgeries, there were 11,000 
of them done in the province of Saskatchewan. That was up 300 
per cent over a period of 10 years. So we’re accessing the 
system far more and putting far more pressure on it than we 



668 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 1999 

ever have. 
 
You know how many visits there were to doctors over a period 
of one year in Saskatchewan for a million people? A person 
might wonder, well would it be sort of an average of one per 
person or two per person? The stats show that the average 
person visits a doctor 4.6 times a year; or for the million of us, 
4.6 million times there were visits to physicians. And they’ve 
got to cope with the 4.6 million visitors and they’ve got to keep 
track of this. And there were nearly a million visits to 
specialists. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the number of operations that are conducted in 
Saskatchewan last year were 91,000. That all has to be 
organized with pretests, post-tests. You need post-operative 
care; you need to have the lab system activated for that. 
Operations in some cases have gone up considerable; in the 
case of hip and knee operations, they’re up by 87 per cent. 
 
And the drug plan, Mr. Speaker. How many families in 
Saskatchewan access the drug plan? Eighty-eight thousand is 
the answer to that question — 88,000 or 30 per cent of all 
families in Saskatchewan access the drug plan per year. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, when I see all of these numbers and I put it 
to the personal experience that I’ve had in our system, I really 
have nothing but praise for the people that run it and the people 
that work in it. And I have nothing but support for good, 
positive suggestions as to how things can be improved so that 
we can maintain the system. 
 
(1545) 
 
I was very glad, Mr. Speaker, that in this year’s budget that 
there’s room made for another two MRIs. Last year there were 
5,000 MRI scans made in addition to 46,000 CT scans. 
Technology is working for us, Mr. Speaker. We’ve got the 
high-tech; what we need is the high touch. 
 
One more thing I want to mention, Mr. Speaker, and that is . . . 
There’s one more statistic and that is the preventative end. 
Because without the preventative end, Mr. Speaker, our system 
would collapse, and of course our health would collapse. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, there are annually, 400,000 immunizations in 
Saskatchewan. 400,000 people are immunized or in some cases 
are immunized more than once, but there are 400,000 
immunizations. And the significance of that, Mr. Speaker, is 
that that is a preventative method. That is something that keeps 
people out of the system and keeps us living longer. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, in a study done by the US (United States) 
Department of Health and Human Services, they credited that 
clinical medicine, as opposed to preventative medicine, is 
credited with only five of the thirty years that have been added 
to life expectancy since the turn of the century. Only five out of 
the thirty is due to clinical medicine — all the high cost stuff we 
do. 
 
Preventative medicine: immunization, washing your hands, 
good food, a little bit of exercise — that has been the main 
component of us living longer right across the nation, Mr. 
Speaker. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to close my remarks on this 
motion by making the amendment now, and the amendment 
will be seconded by the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow, 
or are we ready? The member for Battleford-Cut Knife, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So moved by myself, seconded by the member from 
Battleford-Cut Knife, I move: 
 

That all the words after “Assembly” be removed and 
replaced with the following: 
 
Encourage the government, the negotiators for SAHO, and 
the negotiators for the health care unions to conduct the 
current negotiations in a fair, even-handed and thorough 
manner, balancing the best interests of health care 
professionals, the public and the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Murrell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to take 
this opportunity to commend the people of Saskatchewan for 
their support, their co-operation, and their understanding of the 
extreme circumstances this province has faced during the past 
10 days: the co-operation with health facilities, using them only 
in emergencies; the support of both our government’s position 
and our registered nurses’ position; the understanding of our 
province’s financial situation. 
 
Health care has and will continue to change — technology 
advances, prolonged life, different illnesses — and these 
changes have a profound impact upon those people who work 
in the system. 
 
In the past eight years health delivery has been restructured. 
With the changes to boards and districts, the basic needs of our 
communities are being addressed by people who live and work 
in our communities. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, services were amalgamated, boards were 
consolidated, administration costs were reduced, services were 
enhanced, and problems were created for staff members through 
the Dorsey report recommending the combining of various 
collective agreements. 
 
For example, Mr. Speaker, you might have one union 
representing the hospital workers, another union representing 
long-term care people, another union representing mental 
health, and another union representing home care. 
 
Mr. Dorsey indicated the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses would 
represent all of the registered nurses. SEIU, or Service 
Employees’ International Union, would represent the support 
workers and various health districts. CUPE, or Canadian Union 
of Public Employees, would represent other support staff in 
other health districts. 
 
SUN now represents most in-scope nurses in this province that 
work in health districts. And they are trying to negotiate a 
master agreement that basically covers 10 different agreements. 
 
Issues that have to be resolved are different hours of work, 



April 20, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 669 

different vacation leaves, different benefits, different rates of 
pay — many issues, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Our government determined that it was extremely important 
that we have the mandate which all other public sector workers 
have had — that’s 2, 2, 2, and 1 — and that there would be 
funds available to deal with the serious issues that arose out of 
Dorsey to deal with some of the imbalances in the system. 
 
Money was provided for that. This government recognized the 
importance of pay equity, and now the health sector will be able 
to evaluate the job process to get equal pay for equal work in 
order to improve the wages of people who work in the health 
sector. 
 
The SUN’s collective agreement expired on March 31, 1999. 
And the past 10 years . . . the past 10 days have been a difficult 
time for all involved. But I believe that we will ultimately have 
a stronger health care system. The framework agreement signed 
by SUN, SAHO, and the Premier allows flexibility to address 
the conditions of work and nursing practice issues. 
 
The main issues are salary increases of 2 per cent for each of 
the next three years. An additional 1 per cent to cover 
professional fees, health and dental benefits, recruitment and 
retention of nurses. Workplace issues including seniority, 
nursing practices and the creation of more full-time jobs have 
been addressed. 
 
This contract is worth 13.7 per cent over three years. The same 
rate provided for recent agreements with CUPE and SEIU. This 
framework will result in a contract that is fair to nurses, fair to 
other health care workers, and affordable for taxpayers. 
 
Measures will be taken to improve working conditions allowing 
them to concentrate on quality patient care. Our leader and our 
government are committed to building the best health care 
system. And with our partners we will refocus on achieving 
this. By listening to and by respecting each other we will find 
solutions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the threat of privatization of health care in Canada 
is the biggest challenge we face. This government will do 
everything to oppose what I believe is the greatest danger 
facing health care. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, our position is clear. But, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, the position of the Tories is also clear. The Tories 
believe in a privatized American style system which costs more, 
has higher administrative costs, lower quality of care, and 
provides coverage for fewer people. A party that wants to freeze 
the health budget, other than for the rate of inflation along with 
the freeze on education, for not one year, not two years, but for 
five years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, other leaders may have had . . . Mr. Speaker, other 
leaders may have done things differently, but the Liberal leader 
. . . Mr. Speaker, other leaders may have done things 
differently, but the Liberal leader, we know his position — the 
law doesn’t matter to him. And the would-be leader of the 
Tories, we don’t know — silence. No press releases, no memos, 
no public appearances, no phone calls. Ten days of the nurses’ 
strike and not a word from the Tories’ leader — silence. 

Where’s Elwin? 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is proud of the health care 
provided to the citizens of Saskatchewan. Universal health care, 
accessibility, portability, comprehensive coverage, and 
non-profit, public administration — the foundation of the 
Canada Health Act; the cornerstones on which health care will 
be maintained and enforced. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my constituency of Battleford-Cut Knife 
encompasses three health districts and each district is unique. 
But all three responded promptly to ensure the quality of care 
for our people was there, everyone co-operating and responding 
to the needs. I commend everyone for the job well done. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also like to commend the nurses of the 
Wilkie area for their commitment to the health centre 
fundraising project. Mr. Deputy Speaker, Friday evening nurses 
catered an excellent meal for the public enjoyment. I’m not sure 
of the total funds raised for the meal and the silent auction, but 
it was a very well-attended event. 
 
I am proud of my leader, my government, and our 
Saskatchewan people. Therefore it is a pleasure for me and an 
honour to second the amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you for the applause, members opposite. 
I assume that was intended for me. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have to say that two weeks ago when the 
news came over that the Premier was meeting for the day with 
SAHO and SUN, I was relieved. I was initially impressed that 
the Premier was going to try to resolve this dispute without 
disruption to our health care system. 
 
And when I heard that it went on for 11 hours, I took that as a 
good sign that no one had left after a few moments but that the 
parties had remained talking to each other for 11 hours. I 
thought that was a good sign. 
 
So you can imagine how I felt when I was told that, in point of 
fact, the Premier had spent all of about 15 minutes with the 
executive of the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses and that, in 
point of fact, the negotiators had spent most of their day cooling 
their heels in a side room. And I was even more disappointed 
then to learn that the NDP’s efforts that day were directed not 
so much at the negotiations with SUN but rather printing off the 
Bill to send the nurses back to work and arranging for ads to go 
out in the province’s newspapers accusing the nurses of being 
greedy. 
 
So getting the legislation in place and getting this expensive 
media campaign in place was apparently the real priority of that 
day rather than attempting to negotiate a settlement which 
would have avoided the disruption to our health care system. 
 
Well I have said in times past that I think we all accept that in a 
democratic system it sometimes becomes necessary to legislate 
an end to strikes in the public interest. We all know that there 
are times in a democratic society where the interests of a 
particular group or individual have to take second place to the 



670 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 1999 

public interest, to the good of the whole, and our challenge is to 
balance that meeting the public interest and the public good 
with individual and group rights such as collective bargaining. 
 
And then I remembered that it had only been a week or two 
previously that the federal government had legislated an end to 
the grain handlers’ strike. And that was another clear case . . . 
that was another clear case where . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . We know that over the grain handlers’ strike, all parties in 
this Assembly took the position that it was necessary to 
legislate an end to the strike in order that the disruption to grain 
shipments and the losses to our farmers would end. However, as 
I thought through this more, it seems to me that there is the 
world of difference between the legislation in the case of the 
nurses in Saskatchewan and the legislation in the case of the 
grain handlers. And what is it? 
 
(1600) 
 
The government made a sincere, honest, and long-term attempt 
to negotiate a settlement with the grain handlers. The grain 
handling system had been disrupted and shut down for some 
time, and our federal government was forced to take the 
position that collective bargaining in this case had tried and 
failed and had to be supplemented by legislative action. 
 
The federal government took the position that the interests of 
one group could not be allowed to compromise the interests of 
the nation and the national good. And I think all members of 
this House are in agreement with that. 
 
In the case of the nurses’ strike, though, calls were going 
through in the middle of the night to have us return at 8 in the 
morning to legislate an end before the strike started. Well 
negotiations were going on apparently and ostensibly for the 
purpose of avoiding an impasse; in point of fact, the 
government’s efforts were directed at a media campaign trying 
to turn public opinion against the nurses. 
 
And most upsetting of all, apparently very little time was 
actually spent negotiating with the nurses. Apparently they 
spent that 11 hours by and large cooling their heels in a side 
room. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I accept in theory — I accept in theory, and the 
Liberal Party certainly accepts in theory, that there are times in 
a democratic society when collective bargaining breaks down 
and legislative action will be required to protect public safety 
and the public good. 
 
But I respectfully submit, Mr. Speaker, that in this case 
collective bargaining was not tried. It was instead a case, not 
that collective bargaining had failed, but it hadn’t been used. It 
was circumvented and it was circumvented because SAHO had 
been told in advance that they did not need to get a settlement 
because government would legislate a settlement. 
 
While I certainly accept that sometimes we need legislative 
action to protect the public interest, it seems to me first of all 
there has to be an honest and sincere attempt to try and make 
collective bargaining work and succeed. That did not happen in 
this case. 
 

In this case SUN was negotiating with a government which did 
not want the collective bargaining process to succeed. 
 
We also know, Mr. Speaker, that the problems in our health 
care system did not emerge overnight. We know that the 
problems have been of some years’ standing. When we laid off 
600 nurses; when the graduates of our nursing programs were 
leaving for Texas because there was no work for them in 
Saskatchewan. And well, our nurses who did stay here found 
that they’d spent several years sitting on casual lists as health 
districts refused to offer permanent and full-time positions. 
 
I may say, Mr. Speaker, our health districts may have been 
spoiled in the days of nursing surpluses. They have found a 
number of advantages to placing nurses on casual lists as 
opposed to offering them full-time employment. But now the 
situation is changing. And I am frankly getting calls from health 
districts where they are telling me that it’s getting hard to 
maintain a casual list. And they’re running into nursing 
shortages. And some of our health districts are wondering why 
people are not prepared to go to, say, Meadow Lake to sit on a 
casual list. 
 
Well in a day and age of nursing shortages, it is being highly 
unrealistic for any health district to think that someone is going 
to move into rural Saskatchewan to sit on a casual list. They are 
simply going to have get with the program, and I am hopeful 
that this settlement will move in that direction. 
 
In that regard, Mr. Speaker, I am told that Hafford Speers has 
been circulating an appeal for someone to move to Speers to sit 
on a casual list. If they are serious in my friend’s seat in 
Redberry, if they are serious about providing any health care at 
all there, they will have to allow full-time appointments. 
 
During the recent strike, of course, I had a number of calls, a 
very large number of calls, and I met with a large number of 
people. And I reminded them that I am not the only MLA for 
the Battlefords, and they told me that, well they were trying to 
get a hold of other MLAs in the region and they could not, that I 
was the only MLA that they were able to talk to. 
 
And well . . . I tried to keep my constituents aware of my 
position on the health crisis by being on our radio and being in 
our newspaper and being available to talk to constituents, 
nurses and patients, and people working in the health district 
and the board. 
 
They told me they were trying to get a hold of other politicians 
in the region. They were trying to get a hold of the other MLAs 
and they simply could not be contacted and they did not return 
their calls. 
 
I think it is important that we as elected officials advise our 
constituents as to where we stand on the pressing issues of the 
day and that we are at all times available to our constituents to 
hear their concerns and to receive their input, even in the times 
we know that input may not be what we want to hear. Even 
when that input may be somewhat unpleasant to our ears. When 
we are elected officials, it is important that we be available to 
listen and to hear it. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the strike is over. We are all grateful for 



April 20, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 671 

that. We hope that our health care system will be functioning at 
optimum in the very near future. And we want that to happen. 
 
But I respectfully submit that in the last two weeks this 
province was not well served by its political leadership; that 
instead, instead we see a set-up to appear to negotiate when 
you’re really not negotiating, to set up the failure of those 
negotiations so that a legislative settlement can be imposed. 
 
And I respectfully submit it would have been a far happier 
precedent in this province if collective bargaining was sincerely 
and honestly tried, as it was federally in the case of the grain 
handlers’ strike, so that when the government moved, the 
government moved because it had no option but to act in the 
public interest. 
 
It was not a case with the grain handlers that the government set 
up the process for failure in order that they could look tough. It 
was a case that the federal government tried to allow the 
process to work and unfortunately it did not. 
 
There will always be a strong suspicion out there, Mr. Speaker, 
that in the case of the nurses’ strike, the process was not given 
an honest chance to work because the government wanted it to 
fail in order that they could legislate the nurses back to work, 
and that I fear will not set the appropriate environment for 
service in our health care by health care professionals who feel 
good about themselves and good about their employment, and 
we know they are dedicated to their patients. 
 
So I ask all hon. members on both sides of the House to step 
back, to not look at this from a partisan standpoint, but I ask 
members opposite, to say, was the rhetoric you used appropriate 
or was it an attempt to use nurses for your own political 
purposes? Could it have been done in a more harmonious, 
co-operative manner that would not have brought the health 
care system of this province to a state of collapse? 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the enthusiasm of my colleagues is 
overwhelming. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I’ve listened to the debate this 
afternoon beginning with the member from Cannington, the 
member from Moosomin, the member from Prince Albert 
Carlton, Battleford-Cut Knife, and now the member from North 
Battleford, I would suggest that we have been treated in some 
ways to portions of a very classic debate that has occurred not 
more than a few times in this legislature — being the debate 
over health care and how we as Saskatchewan people will 
choose to provide and to deliver health care to people in our 
province for our people — and there have been elements I think 
of a classic debate here if one listens. 
 
I would like to begin, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with a short story by 
way of illustration. I am told, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that there is 
somewhere off the coast of Greece an island; on which island is 
a monastery; which monastery is build up in the cliffs 
overlooking the sea. And I’m told that the only access to this 
monastery, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is by way of climbing into 
some woven baskets, which the monks in the monastery then 

proceed to winch up the side of the cliff and into the caves. 
That’s the only access in. It’s the only access out. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m told that a visitor to this monastery 
arrived, and the monks of the monastery came to the base of the 
cliff to lift the visitor up to the monastery. When the visitor had 
climbed aboard the woven basket, this visitor noticed that the 
rope suspending that basket, was very frayed, extremely frayed. 
 
And so this visitor says to her monk who was piloting the 
basket, she said, “Just by the way, how often do you change the 
ropes on these baskets?” 
 
And the monk replied, “Well, every time they break.” 
 
Now I use that little story, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in some ways 
as an analogy to where we face and what we face in health care 
in the province today and throughout this decade. We crafted in 
this province — and as the Premier has said, it has become our 
greatest gift to the nation — the concept and the philosophy of 
publicly funded, publicly administered health care. We 
pioneered it in this province. And the great debates which 
established hospitalization and medicare occurred in this very 
Chamber from these very benches. 
 
We, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in Saskatchewan, in some ways wove 
the basket and wove the ropes of health care delivery in 
Saskatchewan. Then you see, Mr. Speaker, along came a variety 
of influences — changing technologies, changing demands on 
the system by virtue of new illnesses, new technologies. Then 
we had the circumstance, Mr. Speaker, of the 1980s with the 
fiscal collapse of the province near, and all of these coming 
together in the ’90s have forced us all, have forced us all to 
re-think health care and the delivery of health care. 
 
(1615) 
 
Now there are those, Mr. Speaker, in this debate, who I believe 
would suggest that the ropes and the basket of publicly funded, 
publicly administered health care, medicare as we have known 
it, there would be some who would argue that this is no longer 
sustainable and that we should move from that into a privatized 
medicine. 
 
There are those as we heard from the member from Prince 
Albert Carleton today, who stood in this House and again 
reminded us of the fundamental principles of universal 
medicare, not only in Saskatchewan but across Canada, and 
there will be those today who will stand and defend those 
principles. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in my view, if we seek to preserve the five 
fundamental principles of medicare, it is incumbent upon us to 
reweave the rope, to reweave the basket, to reweave the 
delivery system that we might maintain that system. 
 
Now I listened very carefully, Mr. Speaker, to the member from 
Cannington in his presentation in this House today. And he 
came very close if not over the line to recommending to this 
House the Americanization of health care in Canada. 
 
He spoke quite eloquently about what he sees as the beneficial 
aspects of the Americanized model of health care delivery. He 



672 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 1999 

spoke to us about waiting times in California, suggesting that 
the waiting times in California may be considerably shorter than 
the waiting times in Canada or Saskatchewan. He spoke with 
glowing terms of the situation in Montana. 
 
What the member from Cannington failed to provide to the 
members of this House was that further piece of information 
which is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, yes the waiting lists in California 
may be shorter if you have the resources to pay for them. If you 
have the resources in Montana to pay for the MRI, you can get 
it. But if, Mr. Speaker, you’re of a circumstance where you do 
not have those kind of financial resources available to you, Mr. 
Speaker, you do not have coverage at all. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, my source for making that comment, my 
source for making that comment, Mr. Speaker, that in the 
United States of America if you do not have the resources you 
do not have coverage, is none other than the TIME magazine. A 
very recent copy of the TIME magazine — well recent, January 
25, 1999 — the TIME magazine, American edition, reported 
that 43.3 million Americans, 43.3 million Americans have no 
health coverage at all. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Not true. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Well the member from Kindersley says it’s not 
true. TIME magazine, January 25, 1999 says it is true. Take 
your pick on who you believe. 
 
Then, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I heard the member for Cannington 
defending the health care system in our neighbouring province 
of Alberta. They choose, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as you know, to 
fund a portion of their health care system through a health care 
premium. As opposed to an education and health tax, the sales 
tax, they choose to fund their health care system through a 
health care premium. 
 
The average family in Alberta will be paying this year $816 in a 
health care premium, which will be more than the average 
family of the same size in Saskatchewan will pay in E&H 
(education and health) provincial sales tax. Alberta chooses to 
collect that tax through a health care premium. 
 
But as a premium . . . And the member from Kindersley points 
out that the E&H tax does not in fact pick up the whole tab for 
health care. That’s for sure. That’s for sure. But neither, I would 
remind the member, does the health care premium in Alberta 
pick up the whole tab for health care in that province. 
 
What I am trying to say, Mr. Speaker, to the member from 
Kindersley and all members, that with the premium system here 
is what you run into. Here is exactly what you run into. A 
headline in The Leader-Post reporting from the Government of 
Alberta, the Department of Health in Alberta, the headline 
reading, “Many Albertans behind on health care premiums.” 
Now this was reported in March of this year — March of this 
year. 
 
Last month, this year, the Alberta Department of Health has 
reported that 123,000 — 123,000 of its health care insurance 
plan accounts, or about 23 per cent, are now not up-to-date in 
their health care premiums; they are delinquent. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that’s one-quarter of the families who are obliged to 

pay health care premiums in Alberta. 
 
Now the compassionate Government of Alberta has taken it 
upon themselves then, to assign collection agencies — 
collection agencies — to 40 per cent of those accounts. 
 
Now I heard a member from the Saskatchewan Tory Party say 
today, but don’t you worry; everybody in Alberta is covered. 
Everybody’s covered. That’s what they claim. Even though 
they don’t pay the premium. The Conservatives in 
Saskatchewan say, well never mind, they’re covered anyway. 
 
Well let me just read on from this report from Alberta Health 
and a response to it. I’m quoting now, Mr. Speaker, from this 
article which appeared in The Leader-Post on March 1, 1999: 
 

. . . for some Albertans like Dave, an Edmonton 
food-service worker, (it is not) reassuring (when they say 
that everyone will receive coverage). 
 
Dave, who asked that his last name not be made public, 
was working for an Edmonton hotel that was deducting 
(his) premiums from his pay. 
 
The hotel owners eventually went broke. Several months 
later Dave found out they had not been remitting the 
premiums to the province. 
 
Dave’s first clue (was) that he (had) several hundred 
dollars in arrears when a collection agency started calling 
him. 
 
He tried unsuccessfully for months to tell the agency and 
Alberta Health he didn’t owe the money but (he’s) given 
up. 
 
“Alberta Health said I wasn’t to deal with them anymore, 
deal with the collection agency . . . And (it’s) a lot of fun to 
deal with (them) — harassment at its finest.” 
 

Now here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the key point. This 
individual 
 

. . . says he’s afraid to go to a doctor or a hospital fearing 
(that) he might get inferior treatment because he’s so far 
behind on his premiums. And it would alert the collection 
agency to his whereabouts. 
 
“I just can’t get sick,” he said . . . 

 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I hear the Tories here saying, well 
don’t worry. In that system in Alberta which is moving more 
and more to the American style, everyone is covered. Well 
that’s what the Tories in Alberta are saying too. 
 
Here’s another article, this one from the Calgary Sun . . . 
Calgary Herald, dated March 15, this month. The Minister of 
Health in Alberta . . . deputy minister of Health —sorry — the 
deputy minister of Health in Alberta says that every Albertan 
has the right to basic medical care and doctors cannot refuse. 
 
However, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the AMA — the Alberta 
Medical Association — president, Dr. Rowland Nichol, 



April 20, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 673 

disagrees. He says, that’s not true, adding he had several 
patients at his Calgary practice whose medical needs were not 
urgent and so were told they would have to pay to get treated. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, add to that — because we’ve heard a lot 
about the Alberta system in this House from the Conservative 
party — add to that this, this from the Calgary Herald on April 
3 of this month, that’s in this very same month, 1999, headline: 
“Klein sees private hospitals someday.” 
 

Privately owned full-service hospitals might someday 
operate in Alberta, Premier Ralph Klein said Thursday. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what we have here, as I point out, is in some 
ways a very fundamental debate about how we will deliver 
health care in this province and in this nation. It’s important that 
we have this debate. It’s been held in this House before, and it 
should engage not just elected members but it should engage 
the entire population of our province. 
 
We are in some ways, Mr. Speaker, I think at a crossroads in 
health care delivery in Saskatchewan and in Canada. And some 
of the discussion if I may say, Mr. Speaker — Deputy Speaker 
— has arisen from the very controversial and recent nurses’ 
dispute. It has — if there are some silver linings I think in these 
disputes — it has caused many of us again to begin to think 
about the fundamental principles of medicare and how we will 
build this system in the future. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the motion which is before us and 
the amendment which calls upon this legislature to support the 
government and in particular the Premier for the handling of the 
strike by the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, this motion in 
some ways does cause us to think again about the role of 
government and the role of opposition. And I think again, in 
recent days we’ve had good illustration of both. 
 
It seems to me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the role of the 
opposition is an — it doesn’t seem to me, I know it is a very 
important role — and it is entirely appropriate, I believe, for 
members of the opposition to take up the cause of a group of 
citizens or a particular issue within our society and our 
community. It is entirely appropriate for the opposition to raise 
those concerns with vigour, to challenge the government of the 
day. And I would say in the past number of weeks the 
opposition parties of Saskatchewan have done that, and have 
done a fair job. 
 
But where, Mr. Speaker, opposition needs . . . where it 
sometimes crosses the line and becomes less than effective is 
when that presentation of the issue and the concern becomes 
only from the point of view of criticism; when it does not 
contain within it the seeds or prospects of solution; or to be very 
blunt, Mr. Speaker, when a leader of an opposition will 
recommend, will recommend to the population of 
Saskatchewan that it is appropriate to break a law or to avoid an 
injunction of a court. That, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in my view is 
opposition gone too far — too far. 
 
The role of government is a different role, Mr. Speaker. I had 
the opportunity to sit in opposition, and I had the opportunity to 
raise the concerns of individuals and groups within our 
community and our society. And I have seen now the function 

and the role of government. It is a different function and role. 
Whereas the opposition in the legislature has the luxury, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, the luxury of on a given day being of a single 
issue — government never enjoys that luxury. 
 
On every occasion . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I thank the 
member from Moosomin for complimenting myself and other 
members for their role in opposition. 
 
In government, Mr. Speaker, there is never the luxury, there is 
never the luxury of a day when a government can be of a single 
issue. Government requires the ability, the ability to manage 
and to govern and to balance the needs and the desires and the 
hopes of all aspects of the great Saskatchewan community. 
 
And so in health care negotiations, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is 
not the luxury of a government that we or any government can 
provide to one particular segment of health care providers, more 
or different than is provided and needed and deserved by every 
other sector of health care providers. 
 
In this current round of negotiations, contracts, collective 
bargaining, a firm position that this government has held, and I 
support it entirely, is the need to lift all of our health care 
providers, not just one group or another, but to provide lift to 
all. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have endeavoured to do that. We have 
endeavoured to be fair to each and every health care worker and 
provider in our province, whether it be a member of CUPE in 
support or a member of SEIU, service employees, in support 
roles or in licensed practical nursing; whether it be a member of 
SGEU (Saskatchewan Government Employees’ Union); 
whether it be a member of Health Sciences; whether it be a 
member of the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses; or whether it be 
a member of the Saskatchewan Medical Association. We have 
endeavoured throughout to bring balance and fairness to all 
health care providers. 
 
And as we seek to provide fairness and balance to all health 
care providers, we cannot on any day, Mr. Speaker, forget that 
we have responsibility for other important public services 
whether it be in the field of education with our teachers and our 
trustees, or whether it be in the line delivery of government 
through departments like Social Services and Social Service 
workers, or whether it be to third-party funded. Whether it be to 
the infrastructure of our province — the roadways, the parks — 
there is not a day, Mr. Speaker, that government can neglect 
those priorities as well. 
 
In each and every decision of government and each and every 
activity of government it is important to seek balance in the 
very high priority of health care, but equally in education, social 
services, and so on. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there cannot be a day in government 
that one neglects or forgets to whom we are responsible — that 
being the electors and the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. And each 
of our decisions must be made with the public interest in mind. 
 
And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the context of the most recent 
dispute and the activities of that dispute within the union, within 
government, within SAHO, I believe this government has 



674 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 1999 

sought from day one, and continues to seek through the 
bargaining process, fairness, fairness to the members of the 
Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, whose issues have been 
recognized by this government; fairness to all health care 
providers and professionals; fairness to the broader public 
service; and fairness to the taxpayer of Saskatchewan. 
 
That has been our goal and, Mr. Speaker, I believe we are 
achieving that goal. 
 
(1630) 
 
And though it’s been difficult, though it’s been difficult, we 
will not, we will not forsake the requirement of balance. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, much has been said in this House and 
elsewhere about the course of events that led us to a 
province-wide nurses’ strike. Negotiations had been proceeding 
with SAHO, the employer. It became clear to our government 
that those negotiations were not moving; that they were in fact 
stalled. We were also acutely aware that the contract expired 
March 31 and acutely aware that the Saskatchewan Union of 
Nurses had taken and received support for strike action — had 
taken a strike vote and had support for strike action. 
 
Knowing the crucial role that nurses play in health care 
delivery, understanding from the health care administrators in 
SAHO that the absence of the nursing profession in our health 
care system could only be tolerated for a very short period of 
time, knowing the role of nurses and the importance, the 
Premier of this province offered to meet with the employees, 
members of SUN, and with the employer, SAHO, to seek a 
mechanism to find ways to try and bridge the impasse, to bring 
the parties into discussion, into negotiation, looking towards a 
fair collective agreement. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that meeting happened in this building 
over a period of hours at the end of which time a memorandum 
had been drafted, at which time the parties were invited to 
return to review that memorandum and to work on it further, if 
necessary, in the hopes of securing a collective agreement. 
 
It didn’t happen, Mr. Deputy Speaker. For a variety of reasons, 
it didn’t happen. No use pointing fingers. A variety of reasons, 
it didn’t happen. At the end of the process that we’re now . . . at 
the point of the process which we’re now in, again. The 
employers, SAHO, and the employees in the dispute, members 
of the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, have reached a point of 
agreement — again with the Premier — around a memorandum 
of understanding. Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, there have been 
changes in that memorandum but not fundamental changes; the 
fundamental memorandum had been established prior to the 
strike. 
 
So I want to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker — from my point of 
view, and I believe from the point of view of the citizens of our 
province — it was an important, it was an important struggle, 
an important effort that occurred in the Premier’s office, under 
the auspices of the Premier to try and seek agreement. Because, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, not only is it the role of government to 
seek balance and to seek to be responsible to all services and to 
the people of our province, it is also the role of government to 
seek to build bridges, to seek to find compromise between 

struggling groups. 
 
It is sometimes the role of the opposition — and I understand 
this too — to foster conflict, to point to the problems. It is the 
role of government, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to find solutions, to 
find compromise and, where it’s important, to build bridges. 
 
I saw that, I saw that in what happened in this building with the 
Premier, the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, and the 
Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations — bridges 
were being built. And ultimately, Mr. Deputy Speaker, those 
bridges I believe have resulted in the memorandum of 
understanding which has brought the nurses back to work and 
the parties back to the table, which will become the basis for a 
very fair, negotiated collective agreement. 
 
I do not want to take much more time. I know other of my 
colleagues want to enter the debate. But I do want to, I do want 
to point out one or two of the achievements that this very 
difficult process of a strike, of some very high feelings. I want 
to achieve . . . or I want to point out what I believe this process 
in fact has achieved. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as you might remember — not many 
others might, but as you might remember — I did spend some 
time in the portfolio of Health as Minister of Health and I do 
have some very vivid memories of the now current member 
from Eastview Saskatoon approaching me on behalf of her 
colleagues in the nursing profession and making some very 
passionate arguments for issues that have been very important 
to nurses, not just in the last year but if I may say over the last 
five and even ten years. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I review this memorandum of 
understanding which will form the basis for the collective 
agreement, there are now provisions within this memorandum 
that nurses in this province have been fighting for for years — 
important provisions that will improve their workplace and will 
show significant improvement for patient care in our province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, within this memorandum of understanding 
signed by the current president of the Saskatchewan Union of 
Nurses, signed by the current president of the Saskatchewan 
Association of Health Organizations, and signed by the current 
and future Premier of the province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in this 
memorandum of understanding are these words, for instance: 
 

The principle of threshold ability or sufficient ability shall 
govern in job postings, layoff and recall. 
 

For the first time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the nurses of 
Saskatchewan will enjoy these provisions of seniority for the 
first time. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, listen to this. Within this memorandum 
won through this struggle: 
 

Decisions of the Independent Assessment Committee will 
be binding. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have had in Saskatchewan independent 
assessment committees that have been formed by nurses and 
health care providers. To date the results of those committees, 



April 20, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 675 

the decisions made by those committees have not been binding. 
Now they will be binding. A significant goal of the nursing 
profession over many years has been achieved in this 
memorandum of understanding. 
 
Here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a very important issue to many of 
the nurses that I know and know as friends. This memorandum 
of understanding reads 8(1) and (2). 
 

SAHO and SUN are committed to the principle of creating 
more permanent full-time jobs by addressing, among other 
issues, overtime and sick leave. 
 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, an important, an important issue for the 
nurses of our province to see more of their positions become 
full-time positions. 
 
And finally, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to refer to another 
segment of this memorandum of understanding, the segment on 
recruitment, retention, and quality of care. The new fund which 
will be set up, the parties have agreed jointly to enter into 
discussions with Saskatchewan Health regarding the 
administration of a new fund. And so the parties will jointly 
administer this fund to address recruitment, retention, and 
quality of care issues for nurses. And the parties understand that 
subject to 14 below, Saskatchewan Health will provide $7.4 
million to this fund. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, before I take my place, I’m reminded that 
there’s an old hymn that has within its lyric, words to this 
effect: “By dross to consume, and thy gold to refine.” 
 
We have been through a very fiery period. But out of the fire, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe gold is refined. And I believe for 
all the hurt and all the pain that many of us and all of us have 
felt — whether we have been a patient, a client of health care, 
whether we have been a nurse on the picket line, whether we 
have been called to responsibility in government or in SAHO 
— through this very difficult time, through this fire, I believe 
we have refined some gold. 
 
Some of that gold, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is reflected in this 
MOU (memorandum of understanding), and it will be reflected 
in the collective agreement. Some of the gold is that we are 
again beginning to think and debate about the future of health 
care in our province. Some of the gold, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
will be in the new relationships which must be built around 
collective bargaining. In the relationship between government, 
SAHO, SUN, and all health care providers, there is gold that 
has been refined. 
 
And so I am very, very happy to be supportive of the 
amendment that has been moved and seconded — moved by the 
member from P.A. (Prince Albert) Carlton, seconded by the 
member from Battleford-Cut Knife — which calls upon this 
legislature to offer its word and voice of support to the Premier 
of this province, to this government for its work throughout this 
very difficult period of time, to bringing us I think what can be 
gold for our future. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
follow the member from Moose Jaw in his ever well-spoken 
remarks about the situation we have gone through over the past 
few weeks, the need for healing, and the foundation that the 
memorandum of understanding provides in moving along in 
that direction. 
 
I think that he has laid out a compelling argument as to why this 
agreement is indeed a fair one. He has certainly laid out a solid 
argument in terms of why the role of the Premier was an 
important one. 
 
And I think that he has also laid a good, solid basis for us to 
continue this debate around the issues that were framed by the 
member from Cannington and I think the position put forward 
by the . . . the counter position put forward by the member for 
Prince Albert. 
 
This dispute was resolved by a strong show of leadership on the 
part of the nurses’ union, on the part of SAHO, and on the part 
of the Premier. And I think that it’s important that we 
understand that. 
 
It is interesting that the memorandum of understanding that has 
been now signed is striking in its similarities to what was being 
discussed that Wednesday before the nurses walked out on to 
strike. I think that is very important to look at. And I think that 
speaks very highly of the Premier of this province that he was 
able to find that middle ground. And perhaps, perhaps we all 
would have been better off if that Wednesday night parties had 
signed on and agreed and simply allowed the process to move 
forward from there. 
 
But none of that detracts the 10 days, 11 days that this province 
went through and the difficulties. It does not detract from the 
fact that there were important issues that needed to be moved 
into the public debate. 
 
The nurses certainly advanced their position, and I think that 
they put forward some compelling arguments on the problems 
in the workplace. I think that the work from the Minister of 
Health and the associate minister was extremely important in 
terms of showing that the government understands and has 
realized what does need to be done. 
 
And again the intervention of the Premier both that Wednesday 
before the strike and in terms of providing the memorandum of 
understanding, I think has brokered a good deal and a solid deal 
which will repair not only the situation with nursing, but in fact 
move ahead the whole situation in health care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to talk though about this question of 
leadership. And this is an important issue because the members 
opposite . . . And frankly I found their motion somewhat — and 
I don’t want to overstate it — but somewhat offensive saying 
they were arrogant. 
 
This is certainly . . . I’ve heard this from other places. I was 
reading an article by Verne Clemence in the Saskatoon Sun on 
the 18th of the month. And he says: 
 

The NDP shrugs off public censure and controversy in the 
belief that it’s untouchable, thanks to an opposition in 



676 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 1999 

disarray or in jail. 
 

Well I’m not sure I completely agree with Mr. Clemence. We 
have not shrugged off the criticisms that have been made about 
our government. And not all the members opposite are in jail. 
So in these two areas he’s wrong. 
 
We have attempted to listen to what the public had to say, we 
have attempted to listen to what health care providers have had 
to say, and we have attempted to act in a manner in the public 
good. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think if any of us had the opportunity to have 
forgone a strike, we would have. I don’t know a member in this 
House, at least on this side, that stood and voted with any joy in 
their heart as we had to support to Bill 23 because it was the 
right thing to do. Public safety had to be protected. 
 
The fact that the Premier had intervened at the eleventh hour to 
try and bring two parties together, to try and find that common 
ground, I think speaks highly of his determination and his 
vision and his commitment to this province and to protecting 
our great gift of medicare. 
 
And it’s bothersome to listen to opposition members deride the 
Premier over his intervention. I think in some ways it shows a 
naïveté on their part about how the real process of government 
works. This is not about political gamesmanship. And I’ve 
heard the members opposite say that this is good politics for us. 
I can tell you as a member on this side of the House, I don’t 
think this was good politics. Any time you end up with a labour 
dispute, particularly in the health care sector, how could we 
think that that’s good politics? 
 
The Minister of Health, I think, put it extremely well in her 
letter to the president of SUN. And she said: 
 

Today we find ourselves in a situation in which nobody 
wins. Some patients have found themselves without the 
care of nurses. Some are being treated in strange 
surroundings far from home. Others are not receiving the 
full level of care that they would normally receive. Still 
others are having medical treatment delayed. We heard you 
. . . 
 

She goes on to say to the president of SUN, we heard you when 
the Premier intervened to try and bring the two sides closer. 
That’s what leadership is about. That’s what leadership is about. 
It’s about attempting to bring two parties together to find a 
compromise. 
 
On the part of this administration I think it was very positive 
that the Premier was able to make the commitments that there 
was additional money to deal with workplace issues. It’s 
certainly something that we have been chided for. There was a 
sense, I think, from the opposition that they had wished that 
things had gone worse for us. The fact that we were able to find 
the resolve . . . the fact that we were able to find the resolve, I 
think, is good for all people involved, and best in particular for 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
But it does beg the question: if it had not been this particular 
Premier, what would have happened? If it had been one of those 

other two would-be premiers, what would the situation have 
been? 
 
Well let’s look at their . . . During a time of — and I don’t like 
to use the word because it is overused and I think it demeans its 
value — but in a time of crisis, in a time of significant 
challenge, let’s look at what happened with the opposition. 
What was their alternative? 
 
In 10 days we heard not a word, not word one from the Leader 
of the Tory Party — not a word. Not one phone call. Not one 
press release., Not one statement publicly. 
 
You have to ask yourself, where was the Leader of the 
Saskatchewan Tory Party? Where was he? This is a man who 
says that he should be the premier of Saskatchewan, that he has 
a right to take that chair three rows in front of me and one row 
over. That’s what he says he has a right to and, yet in a time 
when people of this province are asking for leadership, where is 
he? To this day, we don’t know. To this day, the members 
opposite will not tell us where their leader was during this time 
of strife. 
 
Where was Elwin Hermanson? He certainly wasn’t leading. He 
certainly was not providing leadership nor was he providing a 
clear alternative . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well the 
member for Canora has a lot to say now. But the question is: 
where was your leader? Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure where he 
was. 
 
But it is interesting and I think it’s instructive that in a time 
when the people of Saskatchewan are coming to make a 
decision about what is right and what is wrong, what they 
support and what they don’t, what the alternatives are, Elwin 
Hermanson was nowhere to be seen. The man who says that he 
should lead this province could not even lead his own party in a 
time of strike. 
 
Well I’m not sure which is worse. Perhaps he’d seen the trial 
balloon floated out by Mr. Melenchuk. The Liberal leader saw 
that it was a lead balloon and decided he’d just stay quiet. 
 
Because I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, it was disturbing at best to 
hear the Liberal leader come out and raise the issues that he did, 
in the manner that he did, in a way that showed that he had 
thought through this issue not at all. Because I do not believe 
that any leader, any man or woman who would want to serve in 
this Legislative Assembly could condone breaking the law. 
 
I notice the member from Melville getting ready to leave. And 
it’s interesting because I would have thought that a former 
RCMP officer, I would have thought with the good legal 
counsel from the member for North Battleford that that Liberal 
leader would understand the law is the law. And we may 
disagree in this House about what should become a law, but 
once the democratic representatives have voted, once the 
Lieutenant Governor has given his Royal Assent, once the Bill 
is proclaimed, it is the law. 
 
And the fact that the courts themselves reviewed it, dealt with 
the injunction, and ordered the nurses back to work, and that 
that was defied, it’s unfortunate. But it is reprehensible that the 
Leader of the Liberal Party would in any way condone such 



April 20, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 677 

action. 
 
I just find this passing strange that the Liberal Party, a party that 
certainly once was elected as the official opposition not that 
many years ago, now finds itself in a third party position. I find 
it distressing that that party’s leader should suggest lawlessness 
as he prepares to take over, supposedly, which fortunately the 
electorate will not give him the opportunity. But in his province 
of Saskatchewan that’s what he would be advocating if he were 
Premier. I think that’s a sad comment. I think it’s a very 
unfortunate thing that this is what we have come to in this 
House. 
 
It is not a case of arrogance on our part. It is unfortunately a 
burden of responsibility that we are charged with making and 
passing laws. We debate them. We certainly go through a great 
deal of agony in terms of deciding an appropriate course of 
action, but once those decisions are taken, they’re taken. 
 
I think it is most unfortunate that the Conservative leader was 
nowhere to be seen. I think it was unfortunate that the 
Conservative members voted against it and then stand up 
pretending to support trade unionism forgetting, of course, that 
they have two Bills on the order paper which we’ve yet to see 
introduced. Two Bills: the trade union amendment Act, or is it 
the trade union democratization Act? 
 
Whichever it is, we know what its purpose is. Its purpose is to 
allow the unions to be broken. Let’s not forget the right-to-work 
Bill. We know what the right-to-work Bill is about. We haven’t 
seen it introduced; they were afraid to introduce it in this 
House. The right-to-work Bill from the Tories will allow the 
unions to be broken. 
 
They stand and they want to sing “solidarity forever”, but we 
know the only solidarity they have is with Mike Harris and that 
is not a pretty picture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there may be — there may be disagreements 
within the labour movement, there may be disagreements 
internally within the New Democratic Party, but I want to tell 
you, both of those are democratic institutions. Both of those 
will take the positions that they need to. I also want to tell you 
that within this caucus there was no division. Every single 
member did what they needed to do. There was a lot of debate. 
It was with heavy heart but we acted in the public interest. 
 
The result, as the member from Moose Jaw outlines, was that 
we came forward with an agreement which provides the basis 
for healing in health care. It provides for a fair wage settlement. 
It provides for significant enhancements to benefits. It provides 
for significant improvements to working conditions. 
 
That would not have happened if Mr. Melenchuk was 
continuing to break . . . advocate that we break the law. This 
would not have happened if . . . perhaps in retrospect Mr. 
Melenchuk wishes he had simply left himself chained to the 
doors of the Plains hospital. It was probably the safest place for 
him to be during that dispute. 
 
I can tell you it would not have happened if Elwin Hermanson 
were the Premier of Saskatchewan because we wouldn’t have 
seen Elwin Hermanson for 10 days. He would have been 

nowhere in sight. You have to ask yourself, is that really what 
we want in a provincial government? 
 
At a time of crisis, at a time when we reach the fork in the road, 
people want leadership. This Premier, this government, right or 
wrong, provided it. The opposition provided no leadership. 
 
And I think in a lot of ways . . . The members opposite say that 
they think now that we should proceed directly into an election. 
Mr. Speaker, I will tell you this. The Premier will call an 
election when he figures it’s the right time for the province to 
have an election. But if that election is now, I will campaign 
proudly on behalf of the New Democratic Party, and I will 
campaign proudly on behalf of this Premier because — the 
member for Canora will want to hear this — the reason is that 
this Premier and this government provided leadership at a time 
when leadership was needed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Well the member for Canora says we should 
check with the public. He didn’t bother checking with his public 
when he switched sides of the House. He didn’t bother checking 
with the public when he signed the Tory platform after running 
on a Liberal platform. That’s not what that member believes. 
It’s a nice idea to say he does, but it isn’t the case. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a great number of other things I would be 
willing to say, but I think at this point I would simply move to 
adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:56 p.m. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 


