





























































Hansard: April 14, 1999


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 557 
 April 14, 1999 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I have a petition to present on behalf of parents 
concerned about parental rights. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide a review process with respect to family 
intervention to ensure the rights of responsible families are 
not being violated. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition come from the 
community of Melfort. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As well, to present a 
petition, a petition calling for the scrapping of the Crown 
Construction Tendering Agreement. And I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to end 
its unfair tendering policies and immediately cancel the 
Crown Construction Tendering Agreement. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petition I present signed by individuals from the 
community, I believe, of Regina. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too have 
a petition from concerned citizens of Saskatchewan who are 
demanding review of parental rights. And the prayer reads as 
follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide a review process with respect to family 
intervention and to ensure the rights of responsible families 
are not being violated. 

 
The signators on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from Fosston 
and from Melfort, Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to rise 
today again in this House to present a petition on behalf of the 
people of this province. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to call upon the NDP 
government to provide funding in this budget to have the 
Swift Current Regional Hospital equipped and staffed as a 
specialty care hospital and to immediately provide funding 
for the purchase and operation of both imaging equipment 
and a renal dialysis centre. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these petitions in the thousands that we presented 
on this issue are from across the province. I won’t attempt to 
name all the communities involved but there are signatures 
from the communities of Ponteix, Aneroid, Kincaid, 
Gravelbourg, Mankota, Swift Current, and virtually all across 
the south and the southwest. 
 
And I so present. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I join with my 
colleague in bringing forward petitions in regard to the same 
issue, the regional hospital issue. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call upon the NDP 
government to provide funding in this budget to have the 
Swift Current Regional Hospital equipped and staffed as a 
specialty care hospital, and to immediately provide funding 
for the purchase and operation of both imaging equipment 
and renal dialysis centre. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, what I have here are more hundreds if not 
thousands of signatures to add and they are from Simmie, 
Kincaid, Shaunavon, many from Swift Current, Gravelbourg, 
Hazenmore, Ponteix, Meyronne, all across southwest 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present petitions 
this afternoon. The prayer of relief which calls on behalf of both 
the federal and provincial governments to dedicate a 
significantly greater portion of fuel tax revenues towards road 
maintenance and construction so our province’s residents may 
have a safe highway system. 
 
The petitioners this afternoon come from Cando, Gallivan, 
Rabbit Lake, Cando, Richard, Mayfair, Cut Knife, Vawn, 
Glaslyn, Battleford, and North Battleford. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I also rise on behalf of 
citizens with respect to our highways. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call on federal and provincial 
governments to dedicate a significantly greater portion of 
fuel tax revenues toward road maintenance and 
construction so Saskatchewan residents may have a safe 
highway system that meets their needs. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And the people who’ve signed this petition come from the good 



558 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 1999 

communities of Eastend, Climax, Frontier, Robsart. 
 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have this 
afternoon, Mr. Speaker, petitions from the RM (rural 
municipality) of Progress, No. 351, which surrounds the 
community of Luseland. 
 
And I’ll read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately start work on the rebuilding of our secondary 
highway system to provide for safe driving on what are 
becoming known as pothole roads, to enter into 
negotiations with SARM and SUMA for a long-term plan 
of rural road restitution reflecting future needs, and to 
provide safety for all drivers as new trucking regulation 
changes safety factors on these roads. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
As I said, Mr. Speaker, these come from the Luseland 
community and a few from Unity, and I’m happy to present it 
on their behalf. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the petitions presented at the last 
sitting have been reviewed and found to be in order. Pursuant to 
rule 12(7) these petitions are hereby received. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 25 ask the government the following question: 
 

How many firefighters are on permanent staff available to 
fight forest fires in this province; how many firefighters are 
on standby; what is the potential for forest fires in the north 
forest for this year; has any new equipment been purchased 
or any planned for this year; how much money is recovered 
by sending our men and equipment to out-of-province fires 
on an average and for last year; and do you have any 
make-work programs or training programs available to 
keep the crews busy between fires? 
 

I also give notice, Mr. Speaker, that I shall on day no. 25 ask 
the government the following question: 
 

Of the Minister of Justice and the Premier: does your 
government have a clear, simple-to-understand definition 
of the implications for nurses contained in the 
back-to-work legislation and subsequent court order; does 
your government intend on supplying such an explanation 
to rank-and-file nurses so they know where they stand with 
regards to the law; if contempt of court charges are laid, 
who can they be laid against, the union as an independent 
entity, the union executive members, and/or individual 
nurses; what are the implications for individual nurses? 
 

I so submit, Mr. Speaker. 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

The Speaker: — Hon. members, before we proceed to the 
introduction of other guests, I would like to welcome on behalf 
of the members of the Legislative Assembly a large number of 
special guests who are seated this afternoon in the Speaker’s 
gallery and in the west gallery. We are honoured to have 
members from 15 Wing in Moose Jaw. 
 
Let me now outline today’s 15 Wing introduction program, 
which is being held to honour 15 Wing. In just a moment, I 
shall invite the Premier, then the Leader of the Opposition, and 
the Leader of the Third Party to pay tribute to 15 Wing Moose 
Jaw, and the 75th anniversary of the Royal Canadian Air Force. 
 
Following these remarks, nine members of the Assembly will 
introduce their guests. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, colleagues 
in the Legislative Assembly, it is my pleasure today to welcome 
— as you have already done, sir — representatives of 15 Wing 
Moose Jaw, and to recognize the celebration of the 75th 
anniversary of the Royal Canadian Air Force. These men and 
women are a beautiful sight in this legislature for a whole 
number of reasons. 
 
I want to deviate from my script to say that in my own family a 
very close cousin of mine was a flyer and ended up retiring as a 
brigadier general in the Royal Canadian Air Force, flew the 
Burma Road, and also fought in the European theatre during the 
Second World War and luckily came back home safe and 
sound. And I well remember the stories and the anxieties that 
the family shared about this particular experience. And I can’t 
help but think of that when I see this spectacular group of men 
and women with us and their proud tradition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we in this province have been very proud, I would 
say indeed blessed, to have had 15 Wing in Moose Jaw and 
have enjoyed the service and the protection of the RCAF (Royal 
Canadian Air Force). And you sir, Mr. Speaker, as a 
representative of Moose Jaw, together with my colleague, know 
all too well the important role that the 15 Wing base has been to 
the city of Moose Jaw, to the people of Saskatchewan, for more 
than 60 years — not only militarily, keeping the peace; but also 
to the economies of Moose Jaw and indeed all of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I know that the contributions of 15 Wing Moose Jaw will 
continue to grow with the establishment of the NATO (North 
Atlantic Treaty Organization) flying training in Canada. In fact 
yesterday it was my pleasure and honour to meet with the 
French ambassador to Canada and this was topic number one on 
the agenda with the French ambassador. He’s got to join in and 
urge his country to join in on the NATO training. 
 
At the same time we celebrate the 75th anniversary of the Royal 
Canadian Air Force which has been serving Canadians and 
indeed the people of the world since 1924. The RCAF — I 
didn’t know this but if my historic facts are correct — started 
out as a small service providing forest fire and fisheries 
protection in its initial period. And then it grew to become a 
stalwart defender of democracy and freedom during the Second 
World War when 18,000 brave people gave their lives in the 
ultimate sacrifice for democracy and the rule of law. Later 



April 14, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 559 

today it will be my pleasure and honour to introduce to this 
House three veterans of that war. 
 
After the war the RCAF continued its service under that name, 
and later as the Air Command of the Canadian Armed Forces, 
contributing to Canada’s efforts to peacekeeping and disaster 
relief around the world. 
 
As a committed Canadian, as we all are here, I accept Canadian 
Armed Forces, but I’d be remiss if I didn’t say that I still prefer 
RCAF as opposed to Canadian Armed Forces. But nonetheless 
the Air Command of the Canadian Armed Forces. 
 
Mr. Speaker, through the war both in combat and in training, 
allied flyers, 15 Wing and the RCAF spread the good name of 
our province and our country throughout a grateful world. 
 
Since the war the air force and pilots trained in Moose Jaw 
helped provide those peacekeeping and disaster relief efforts 
that I mentioned a moment ago, also spreading further the good 
name of our nation and our community. And of course the 
Snowbirds have long been the international ambassadors of 
goodwill. 
 
Now before I conclude, Mr. Speaker, my welcoming remarks, I 
would be remiss very much if I did not remind each and every 
one of us here today that we have brave flyers and support crew 
who today are participating in the dangerous but necessary 
NATO (North Atlantic Treaty Organization) mission in the 
former Yugoslavia. And I’m sure I speak on behalf of every one 
assembled when I say that our thoughts and our prayers are with 
them and with their families. 
 
So I’m proud to honour and celebrate both the achievements of 
15 Wing and the long and glorious history of the RCAF. And 
like everyone in Saskatchewan I’m looking forward to many 
more years of that same service, pride and community. 
 
Congratulations and thanks to all of you. And thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, colleagues in the legislature, honoured guests, ladies 
and gentlemen, it is my pleasure to welcome everyone here 
today on behalf of the Saskatchewan Party in recognition of 15 
Wing Moose Jaw and the 75th anniversary of the Royal 
Canadian RCAF. 
 
In its infancy in the early 1920s the RCAF performed 
admirably, as indicated by the Premier, spotting forest fires and 
smugglers’ fishing boats. But it also was involved in helping to 
map our Canadian wilderness by the use of aerial photography. 
 
Canada distinguished itself during World War II to become the 
fourth largest Allied air force. Today the air force is an integral 
part of the Canadian Armed Forces and plays a strong role in 
protecting Canada’s sovereignty and in maintaining the peace 
worldwide. 
 
On behalf of the official opposition I would like to congratulate 
Colonels Hanton and Ouellet on their outstanding achievements 

and continued success with CFB (Canadian Forces Base) 
Moose Jaw. Also, congratulations to the Royal Canadian Air 
Force on their 75th anniversary. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is indeed my 
privilege and pleasure for me to be allowed to rise today to 
recognize the men and women of 15 Wing Moose Jaw and to 
extend on behalf of the Liberal caucus our heartfelt 
congratulations on this the 75th anniversary of the Royal 
Canadian Air Force. 
 
As many of you may know, the Royal Canadian Mounted 
Police, my alma mater, recently celebrated its 125th 
anniversary, so I know well the pride and the sense of 
accomplishment that the members of our armed forces, 
particularly the air force, must feel today. 
 
I have, Mr. Speaker, enjoyed many opportunities over the years 
as a former member of the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted 
Police) to both train, work, and, yes, even socialize with the 
members of our armed forces. I have fond memories of CFB 
Gimli, CFB Southport, and CFB Westwin, Mr. Speaker. I can 
tell you that there are no finer men and women than those who 
choose to serve their country. 
 
It is with that great deal of sense of pride that I greet those 
seated in your gallery and in the west gallery here today, and all 
members of armed forces. I would also like to extend greetings 
and support through you, Mr. Speaker, to all those brave men 
and women serving Canada so well throughout the Balkan 
region and indeed throughout the world. 
 
As we celebrate today, we must remember that at this very 
moment the pride of Canada goes in harm’s way. I am sure all 
members will join with me in wishing our forces who have 
responded to their call in the Balkans God’s speed and good 
luck. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — In just a very brief moment I will call on 
members of the Legislative Assembly to make specific 
introductions of the 15 Wing people who are here today, and as 
each group is introduced, I will ask that you stand and be 
recognized with your introductions. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m assuming that 
you will be introducing Colonel Ouellet. Before I start my 
introductions, I know this is not the debate but I was very much 
taken by the Leader of the Third Party’s welcome and 
congratulations and as he recited the various segments of 
service that he had the pleasure of participating with various 
members of the military, he talked about even participating in 
celebrations. I was wondering if he could tell us which were the 
hardest of those duties that he had to do from time to time. Just 
a joke, a mild joke. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to introduce to you, sir, four 
retired members of the Royal Canadian Air Force who are in 
your gallery. They will be our personal guests, the guests of the 
House, at a dinner this evening at the Government House in 



560 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 1999 

honour of the 75th anniversary of the RCAF and of 15 Wing 
Moose Jaw. 
 
I will ask each of them in turn to rise and be acknowledged by 
members of the Assembly. First, Honorary Colonel (retired) 
Frank Hanton. Col. Hanton was a fighter pilot in the Royal 
Canadian Air Force in Europe during the Second World War. 
He served in a number of squadrons and flew many missions 
over occupied Europe. 
 
On one of these, he was badly burned and became one of — as I 
gather they are referred to — one of the guinea pigs, the first 
people to undergo experimental — experimental plastic 
surgery. He received the Distinguished Flying Cross and 
attained the rank of squadron leader. 
 
After the war, Col. Hanton served many years with the 
Manitoba government air services. In 1978 he became director 
of Saskatchewan executive air and air ambulance. After 
retirement he served as principal aide-de-camp to the Lieutenant 
Governor of Saskatchewan. He was honorary colonel of 2 
Canadian Forces Flying Training School. 
 
Ladies and gentlemen of the House, please welcome Honorary 
Colonel (retired) Frank Hanton. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Next, Flying Officer (retired) Dr. 
Lionel Hastings. 
 
Dr Hastings served as a navigator and observer in bombers with 
the Royal Air Force during the Second World War. He had 50 
operational sorties. After completing his tour of operations he 
took a special detachment to a communications squadron in 
Belgium. 
 
He crashed in Belgium in October 1944 and spent seven months 
in hospital, also one of the famous guinea pigs. 
 
After the war, Flying Officer Hastings studied dentistry at 
Toronto and spent 24 years in private practice in Ontario. He 
came to Saskatchewan in 1974 and taught dental therapists for 
14 years before his retirement. He has also taught this 
profession and carried out similar duties in the People’s 
Republic of China. 
 
Members of the Legislative Assembly, please welcome Flying 
Officer (retired) Dr. Lionel Hastings. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Next, Wing Commander (retired) 
John Yeomans. 
 
Wing commander served with the Royal Air Force and the 
Royal Canadian Air Force during the Second World War as a 
navigator and staff officer. Shot down in southern Germany, he 
was a prisoner of war for 15 months in Germany and Poland. 
After the war he continued his career in the RAF (Royal Air 
Force) around the world in South Africa, Cyprus, Aden, and 
many other locations. 
 

His wife Elaine who is with him today was also an officer in the 
Royal Canadian Air Force and she might just stand and also be 
acknowledged. There she is. 
 
In 1976, he moved — they moved to Canada and in 1977 the 
wing commander became director of the Saskatchewan Central 
Vehicle Agency and held a number of important positions with 
SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation) 
before his retirement. 
 
Ladies and gentlemen of the Assembly, please welcome Wing 
Commander (retired) John Yeomans and Mrs. Yeomans. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — And the fourth person who served in 
this capacity is honorary Colonel Terry Lyons. Colonel Lyons 
served for 28 years in the Royal Canadian Air Force and Air 
Command. 
 
After retiring at the rank of lieutenant colonel in 1980, he 
worked for the private sector in Regina, was manager of the 
Regina Flying Club, was an executive with the New Careers 
Corporation of Saskatchewan, is now the honorary colonel of 2 
Canadian Forces Flying Training School at 15 Wing, Moose 
Jaw. 
 
Ladies and gentlemen of the Assembly, a welcome please for 
Honorary Colonel Terry Lyons. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — With the approval of the members of the 
Assembly, it is now the honour of the Chair to introduce to you 
the wing commander’s executive. The wing commander’s 
executive comprises a small staff that is intimately involved in 
day-to-day running of the wing and the planning and execution 
of wing level events. 
 
The staff is made up of the wing chief warrant officer who is 
the senior enlisted member and close advisor to the wing 
commander, the wing chief’s assistant, the executive assistant 
to the wing commander, the wing public affairs officer, and a 
civilian secretary. 
 
Together this staff organizes events from parades to visits of 
foreign dignitaries, handling the administrative details, and 
allowing the wing commander to concentrate on the 
decision-making and leadership of the wing. 
 
It is a pleasure for me to introduce to the House three specific 
individual members of the wing commander’s executive. 
 
First of all, Col. Mark Ouellet. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Col. Mark Ouellet is wing commander of 15 
Wing. A native of Edmonton, Col. Ouellet has served in Moose 
Jaw, Cold Lake, and Germany. He has been a flying instructor, 
member of the Snowbirds, and a fighter pilot. From last 
October to January, he was task force commander of Canada’s 
CF-18 fighter contingent in Aviano, Italy. He has been wing 



April 14, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 561 

commander of 15 Wing Moose Jaw since August 1998. 
 
Hon. members, Col. Mark Ouellet. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — If I may introduce now Honorary Colonel 
Doug Marr, himself a former member of the Canadian air force, 
had a distinguished career in the service of the city of Moose 
Jaw. He has been honorary colonel of 15 Wing since 1996. 
 
Honorary Colonel Doug Marr. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — And if I may now introduce the chief warrant 
officer, Bob Frosst. The senior enlisted member of 15 Wing, 
Chief Warrant Officer Frosst has been wing chief warrant 
officer since 1996. He has had a long and distinguished career 
in the Canadian Forces as a meteorologist and in professional 
development and training. He was awarded the Order of 
Military Merit last year, in 1998. 
 
Chief Warrant Officer Bob Frosst. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — And I would ask that if all together all the 
members of the wing commander’s executive would rise and be 
acknowledged by members of the House. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As the member of 
this legislature privileged to represent 15 Wing in this House, I 
want to extend a greeting to Colonel Ouellet, Colonel Marr and 
to all of our guests today, which also include the mayor of 
Moose Jaw, His Worship Ray Boughen. 
 
And I want all members in this House to take note that Moose 
Jaw Wakamow is the only constituency that has an air force. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, I would like to provide a special 
introduction to the members of the force that are seated in the 
west gallery. Mr. Speaker, seated in your west gallery are 
members of the 15 Air Maintenance Squadron. This, Mr. 
Speaker, squadron was formed on the first of April, 1993 when 
the Air Command Wing concept became effective. 
 
The squadron is a central maintenance organization under the 
leadership of an aerospace engineering officer, currently Major 
N.D. Bell. The squadron is composed of 258 people; five 
officers, 249 non-commissioned members and four civilians. 
 
The squadron, Mr. Speaker, is responsible for aircraft 
maintenance activities for all of the 97 CT114 Tutor aircraft 
throughout the Canadian Forces, including 2 Canadian Forces 
Flying Training School, 431 Air Demonstration Squadron — 
the Snowbirds, the Flying Instructors School, the Aerospace 
Engineering and Test Establishment at Cold Lake and the 
Central Flying School in Winnipeg. Mr. Speaker, these are the 
men and women who truly do give our air force its wings. 
 

Mr. Speaker, with the advent of NATO flying training in 
Canada, 15 Air Maintenance Squadron is scheduled to disband 
in August of the year 2000. And, Mr. Speaker, we will miss 
them — we will miss them. 
 
I will ask that Captain Thompson, the Deputy Commander and 
members of 15 Air Maintenance Squadron rise and be 
acknowledged. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — I thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I’m 
privileged on behalf of my colleague, the member for Thunder 
Creek, to tell you a little bit about No. 2 Canadian Forces 
Flying Training School, Mr. Speaker. 
 
2 Canadian Forces Flying Training School, the “Big 2,” 
provides basic flying training for all Canadian Forces pilots, 
and advanced flying training for all Canadian Forces jet pilots. 
In addition to Canadian military pilots, 2 Canadian Forces 
Flying Training School has been involved in training foreign 
pilots as well throughout its existence. 
 
The school motto is “The best in the West” and looking into the 
future, the school is looking forward to the challenge of living 
up to its motto before an international audience as the centre for 
NATO flying training in Canada. 
 
No. 2 Flying Training School was formed in Yorkton, 
Saskatchewan in September 1945 and moved to the Royal 
Canadian Air Force Station in Moose Jaw in June of 1953. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask that Lieutenant-Colonel Clements, 
commandant, and members of 2 Canadian Forces Flying 
Training School to please rise and be acknowledged here in this 
legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also want to 
acknowledge all those who have already been introduced and 
say what a . . . how pleased I am that I’m a friend of Mr. 
Calvert who owns the only air force in Saskatchewan. 
 
The wing operations branch supports 15 Wing and its aviation 
units in our primary mission of providing jet pilot training for 
the Canadian air force. The wing operations branch operates 
under the command of the wing operations officer and consists 
of the following agencies: 
 
Wing operations centre, in addition to providing flight planning 
services, acts as a coordination centre for 15 Wing aircraft if 
they encounter difficulties when away from Moose Jaw. 
 
15 Air Traffic Control Squadron provides safe, orderly, and 
expeditious air traffic control services to 15 Wing aviation units 
and other aircraft. Aircraft traffic movements in 1998 numbered 
over 158,000. 
 
Military police provides professional security and police 
services. 
 
Firehall provides all fire services to 15 Wing, including both 



562 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 1999 

structural and aviation-related, conducts safety inspections, 
provides hazardous material control, and is responsible for 
occupant extrication in the event of a vehicle or aircraft 
incident. 
 
Meteorological section provides weather forecasting and 
observations, briefs pilots, and answers any technical 
weather-related inquiries. 
 
Transport provides snow and ice control for 15 Wing, including 
all runway surfaces, administers a vehicle pool, and conducts 
driver training and vehicle accident investigation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask Lieutenant-Colonel Major and members of 
wing operations to rise and be acknowledged. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Murray: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m indeed honoured 
this afternoon to introduce the wing comptroller branch. 
 
The wing comptroller branch is responsible for administering 
military pay and benefits, managing the wing’s multi-million 
dollar budget, maintaining personnel records, and arranging the 
long-distance moves for service members. 
 
The challenges which the traffic technicians and resource 
management clerks face hinge on the fact that everything they 
work on affects service members personally. Payrolls must be 
on time, promotions actioned, moves properly arranged, and 
careers managed from enrolment to release. As a result, clerks 
and technicians are required to deploy wherever the Armed 
Forces goes. In the recent past, members of the comptroller 
branch have been sent to the Golan Heights in the Middle East 
and to Ellesmere Island in the high North. As members of the 
logistics branch, they strive to live up to the branch motto of 
“Service Second to None.” 
 
I ask Major Cornfield and members of the wing comptroller 
branch to rise and be acknowledged. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is 
my pleasure and indeed a privilege to recognize the people who 
really make those planes fly — the pilots. 
 
The flying instructor school is responsible for the teaching of 
new instructors destined for instructing undergraduate pilots, 
providing the initial training for fighter pilots, all the 
post-graduate jet conversion training, and the Canadian 
astronaut flying program. 
 
I ask Major Thorneycroft, commandant, and all members of the 
flying instructors school to rise and be acknowledged. Major. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Having grown up 
in Moose Jaw, it’s a great deal of pleasure for me to also rise 
and to introduce a section of the unit out there, the 15 service 
support branch. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the 15 service support branch is a multi-faceted 
organization responsible for all administrative and logistical 
support to the operation of the wing. This support includes 
medical and dental services, pastoral services, human resources, 
supply services, loss control management, telecommunications, 
and information management and information technology 
services. 
 
The branch is also responsible for providing personnel support 
programs, which include fitness, sports and recreation, and a 
number of other programs that contribute to the quality of life 
of military members and their families. As well, 15 service 
support branch oversees the support provided to the wing by 
industry partners such as Bombardier, Frontec, and Aramark. 
Finally the branch includes the air reserve flight which provides 
valuable augmentation to various units of the wing. 
 
I would ask, Mr. Speaker, that Lieutenant-Colonel Kelly, 
commanding officer, and members of 15 service support branch 
to rise and be acknowledged. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m indeed 
honoured to stand today to acknowledge the air demonstration 
Squadron 431 — the Snowbirds. The Snowbirds are an 
excellent example of the professionalism found throughout the 
air force and the Canadian Forces. Not only do they 
demonstrate the teamwork required to exhibit skilled precision 
flying, but they also embody the dedication of the highly trained 
men and women of the Canadian Forces. 
 
Their air shows are renowned across North America. They are 
excellent ambassadors for Canada and the Canadian Forces. We 
in Saskatchewan, and I know particularly the people of Moose 
Jaw, are proud to be the home of the Snowbirds. Unfortunately 
the Snowbirds are away on tour. However, their logistics 
officer, Captain Perry, is here to represent them and I ask him to 
please rise and be acknowledged. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I thank hon. members for your introductions 
of our guests of 15 Wing, and we’ll now continue with the 
introduction of the guests. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. Today I have the privilege of introducing members of 
Saskatchewan’s Provincial Advisory Committee for the 
International Year of Older Persons. 1999 has been designated 
by the United Nations General Assembly as the International 
Year of Older Persons. Canada’s theme, “Canada, a Society for 
All Ages” was approved by federal, provincial, and territorial 
ministers responsible for seniors in June 1998. 
 
The theme is to encourage an intergenerational approach to 
celebrate the contributions seniors have made and continue to 
make towards the continued growth of our country and our 
province. 
 
In Saskatchewan an advisory committee of 12 people has been 
appointed to provide leadership to seniors, their organizations, 
and to communities and corporations in the promotion of IYOP 



April 14, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 563 

(International Year of Older Persons) activities throughout 
1999. 
 
I would like now, Mr. Speaker, to introduce the advisory 
committee members to you, and ask that they stand as I 
introduce each person. Reverend Wes Ashwin is chairing this 
committee. He is also Saskatchewan’s representative on the 
Canadian Coordinating Committee which is overseeing the 
implementation of the IYOP plan in Canada. 
 
Elmer Noble represents the Saskatchewan command of the 
Royal Canadian Legion. Now this is a person that’s very 
familiar to members of the Legislative Assembly, the Hon. 
Sylvia Fedoruk, Mr. Speaker, former Lieutenant Governor of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Marjorie Willson, IYOP Chair 
and vice-president of the Saskatchewan Seniors Mechanism. 
Frank Draper, president of the Saskatchewan Seniors 
Mechanism. Ed Simonar, president of Saskatchewan Seniors 
Association Incorporated. Ruth Weinhandl, first vice-president 
of Saskatchewan Seniors Association Incorporated. John Bryde, 
a member of the Regina Senior Citizens Centre Association and 
the Seniors Education Centre at the University of Regina. 
Rowena McLellan a member of the Saskatoon Council of 
Aging. And Eric Bergeron, a member of the Fédération des 
Asnee Fransaskois, a provincial French seniors’ organization 
affiliated with the national Fédération des Asnee. 
 
Not with us today, Mr. Speaker, are Alpha LaFond of the 
Muskeg Lake First Nations and Emma Pratt of the Ochapowace 
First Nations. 
 
These individuals, Mr. Speaker, bring to the Saskatchewan 
Advisory Committee an impressive wealth of experiences, 
insights, and perspectives, and I am honoured that these busy 
men and women are working on our behalf to lead International 
Year of Older Persons activities in Saskatchewan. 
 
Please join me in expressing our appreciation for these 
Saskatchewan seniors who are truly making a difference for us 
all. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 
welcome the members of the Saskatchewan Provincial 
Advisory Committee for the International Year of the Older 
Persons. 
 
Their commitment to the recognition of seniors and the 
beneficial role they play in Canadian society is unparalleled. 
And for that, on behalf of the official opposition, I thank them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would ask leave 
to add our voice on behalf of the Liberal caucus to our seniors 
and the people that will be working on behalf of those of us, 
and as the member from Rosthern and I may well be recognized 
as being the appropriate representatives to bid you all thank you 

and welcome here. 
 
And if I may, Mr. Speaker, I too find it very interesting that the 
seniors do have a great deal of humour, ideas, opinions, that is 
communicated to a lot of us, to the people throughout the 
province in a publication that’s called Senior Living, which I 
read and I find not only enlightening but amusing. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to tell you why I find some of this 
amusing for the benefit of the military personnel that are here. 
Some of the humour. “Murphy’s Military Laws: if your 
sergeant can see you, so can the enemy; the only thing more 
accurate than incoming enemy fire is incoming friendly fire.” 
 
And near and dear to me, Mr. Speaker, is another. This is part 
of this publication . . . I dearly enjoy it. It’s called “Lighten up 
your day.” And it does. 
 

An old gentleman was driving on the freeway at his usual 
speed which was too slow. A highway patrolman (RCMP) 
pulled him over and said, “I guess you know why I stopped 
you, sir.” 
 
“Sure I do,” the elderly gentleman said. “I was the only 
one you could catch.” 

 
So that once again I want to thank each of you that continue to 
bring your advice, your counsel, and your help to those of us 
that very much appreciate what you do for us. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, it’s my honour to introduce to you and through 
you to the members of the Assembly, some business people 
who are visiting the Legislative Assembly today. 
 
Seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, are Juan Manuel Baez and 
Ernesto Baez — if they could stand please. These gentlemen are 
with Identificacion Pesajet y Control SA de CV of Mexico. And 
Bill Elliott, a president of Massload Technologies of Saskatoon. 
Accompanying them is Inge Ryan from STEP (Saskatchewan 
Trade and Export Partnership). 
 
Mr. Speaker, these guests met with our Premier this morning 
for an hour and I understand they had a very productive 
meeting. Mr. Speaker, these business people exemplify the 
evolving landscape of the Saskatchewan economy. 
 
Last year during the Team Canada mission to Mexico, these 
two companies established a partnership through a signed 
agreement for $100,000 of loadcells from Mexico. This 
partnership has expanded into a joint venture marketing 
company in Saskatoon to market mass loads loadcells to 
Mexico and Latin America. 
 
This is good news for all of Saskatchewan. Not only will these 
two companies benefit, but this is an important contribution to 
the development of Saskatchewan’s interests and expanding 
commercial linkages with countries in that region. 
 
It is indeed an honour and a privilege to have these 



564 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 1999 

distinguished guests with us here today. I wish them all the very 
best in their endeavours and I would ask the members of the 
Assembly to give them a very warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Law Day 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Mr. Speaker, today is Law Day. The purpose of 
law in society, the Law Society of Saskatchewan reminds us, is 
to set the guidelines and rules by which the citizens of that 
society can live in harmony. I congratulate the law society and 
all professions which work to interpret, deliver, and enforce the 
law. 
 
I’m sure that the member from Melville, a retired and 
distinguished member of the RCMP, and the member from 
North Battleford, a lawyer himself, join us in our tribute. 
 
Unfortunately the leader of their party, Dr. Melenchuk, has in 
effect decreed that Law Day is irrelevant. Dr. Melenchuk says 
we have no responsibility to obey the law if we don’t like it. I 
wonder how his two members, professionals sworn to uphold 
and respect the laws of this country, feel about their leader 
inciting illegal actions. 
 
We shouldn’t be surprised with Dr. Melenchuk’s statements, 
though. This is the same man who stabbed the former leader of 
the Liberals in the back, with the assistance of the member from 
Wood River — no noted oath-keeper himself. 
 
No respect for democracy or the law. What a sorry record for a 
political leader. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Nurses’ Rally Song 
 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
night I took part in a nurses’ rally in Yorkton, and this was 
nurses from the East Central Health District. 
 
I’d like to quote, Mr. Speaker, from a song that the nurses sang 
last night and I’d like to just quote you a verse. I’d sing it for 
you but I don’t want to put you through that punishment. The 
verse goes, and I quote: 
 

Oh we don’t want him, you can have him . . . 
 
And by the way, Mr. Speaker, this is called “The Premier’s 
Polka.” 
 

Oh we don’t want him, you can have him, 
The Premier’s too tight for us, 
The Premier’s too tight for us, the Premier’s too tight for 
us. 
Oh we don’t want him, you can have him, 
The Premier’s too tight for us, 
Much too tight, way too tight, much too tight for us. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I could go on but I know for sure I’m going 
to be ruled out of order so I’ll stop there. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the impression I got last night that this . . . from 
local 43 in the East Central Health District is the opinion of 
nurses of our Premier. Also, Mr. Speaker, from calls we’re 
getting that I’m finding that no one — and I mean no one — is 
impressed with the government ads that appear every day in the 
newspapers, and other ads that are being paid for by the nurses, 
by the way, and other taxpayers, to bad-mouth nurses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many are saying, why not give the nurses a half 
page of these ads so that they can explain their side of the 
issues, the real issues. Mr. Speaker, I believe what this does is 
shows just how unpopular the Premier and his government is 
with everyone in Saskatchewan in 1999. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Fundraiser for Parkinson’s Disease 
 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, what does $36,800, Parkinson’s 
disease research, Regina Teachers Club, curling, and a hundred 
and ten thousand dollars have in common? 
 
Ben Holden, the 1999 Regina Teachers Club curling classic 
honorary chairman helped put together a one-day event last 
Saturday, a one-day bonspiel, with 36 teams and roughly 250 
corporate and individual sponsors. The day culminated with a 
silent auction at which they raised $25,000 and they raised it for 
Parkinson’s disease research. 
 
Saskatchewan neurologist, Dr. Ali Rajput, who is himself a 
world-renowned leader in research in Parkinson’s disease was 
very grateful for this year’s $36,800 which brings the Regina 
teachers’ total to a hundred and ten thousand dollars they have 
raised in the past four years. 
 
I want to congratulate everyone who was involved in this very, 
very worthwhile event, and wish Dr. Rajput the very best. And 
my thanks again to all of the teachers and sponsors. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Easter Musicale for Moosomin 
 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this past 
weekend the community of Moosomin was blessed with a fine 
presentation of an Easter musicale called The Door. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a lady in our community, Marilyn Lyman, I 
believe, was the one who had seen this presentation. And when 
she came back to her community she had gone to all the 
churches and asked individuals in the community if they’d like 
to be involved in this presentation to which, Mr. Speaker, they 
had as I understand it, some 100 participants who took part — 
whether as musicians or portraying different aspects of the 
Easter scene. 
 
The tragedy, Mr. Speaker, is that they only did three . . . 
actually they had scheduled three performances; they did a 
fourth one because it was so well-received. And the tragedy is 
that when my wife and I arrived, because we don’t live close to 
the community, the doors were closed for the third time in a 
row because of how well the presentation had been represented. 
 



April 14, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 565 

Mr. Speaker, I think what it does, it speaks very highly of what 
communities and individuals can do when they want to do 
something together. In fact it went over so well that there were 
people from as far away as Winnipeg, Manitoba; some people 
went out from Regina; people from the Oxbow communities. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, it’s something that we can commend the 
individuals of Moosomin and all those involved for their hard 
work in this presentation and we look forward to them doing 
this again in the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Banner Year for Southwest Credit Union 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Ho hum, Mr. Speaker, 
another good news story from flourishing Swift Current. This 
time I wish to report to the Assembly that once again the 
Southwest Credit Union posted a banner year in 1998. This 
marks the 58th year that credit union services have been 
available in Swift Current and it is fair to say, I think, that our 
credit union has been one significant reason our community has 
grown and prospered since 1947. 
 
At the annual meeting last month, general manager Fred 
Townley-McKay announced that the total assets increased by 
17 million to 255.7 million at year end. It was also announced 
that southwest will be amalgamating with the Gravelbourg 
Credit Union with its 24 million in assets and 2,300 members. 
 
One particularly interesting detail came out of the meeting, Mr. 
Speaker, and I throw it in for the benefit of the Tories across the 
way who want to return us to the glory days of the ’80s. One 
reason this was such a good year for the credit union is that it 
sold most of the farm land it had accumulated for foreclosures. 
Foreclosures, Mr. Speaker, made before 1993. 
 
When was that land forfeited? Why in the heyday of the party 
that claimed it was the farmers’ friend and defender of the rural 
way of life — claims, I believe, we still hear today. Hollow 
then; hollow now. 
 
My congratulations to the Southwest Credit Union on another 
banner year. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Government Insurance 
Crime Prevention Programs 

 
Ms. Murray: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I’d like to tell 
the House about SGI’s (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) 
support of the auto theft strategy. Property crime drives up 
insurance rates, creates concern and inconvenience for victims, 
and results in perpetrators spending time in jail. SGI considers 
crime prevention one of its top priorities and takes its 
commitment very seriously. 
 
SGI has been providing assistance to a number of 
youth-oriented programs across the province. In Regina this 
commitment includes SGI’s partnerships with Summer 
Unlimited and the Rainbow Youth Centre, organizations that 
offer programs to get youth involved in positive activities. 

SGI support also extends to Ataskata, an organization that 
works to get young offenders to turn away from criminal 
behaviour. As well, SGI works with police services across the 
province to assist them in their efforts to reduce the incidence of 
theft. 
 
Last fall, SGI introduced a crime prevention contest that aims to 
get students thinking about the consequences of criminal 
behaviour. The contest has met with so much enthusiasm that 
it’s been expanded this year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
These contributions directly support the youth initiative 
identified in the auto theft committee strategy. 
 
Another component of the strategy involves the improvement of 
security and detection options in vehicles. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to congratulate SGI and the organizations 
involved in this youth initiative. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Federal Gun Control Legislation 
 
Mr. Jess: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As you know, our 
government is not supporting or co-operating in any way with 
the injustice perpetrated by Bill C-68. You have heard it from a 
former Justice minister, Bob Mitchell; you’ve heard it from our 
current provincial Minister of Justice, as well as from the 
Minister of Environment who is adamant about this matter. 
 
More recently at the Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation 
convention in Lloydminster, the Premier of this province stated 
his and our government’s 100 per cent opposition to Bill C-68. 
Our position is firm. And I assure you, as a hunter myself, we 
will fight this matter all the way. 
 
The federal government of Justice has misled parliament about 
the implementation costs that have more than doubled since 
1995. Now we learn that the minister has known since at least 
August of ’96 that the number of guns and gun owners on 
which these estimates are based was fatally flawed. 
 
This government believes in the responsible use and storage of 
firearms, and we believe that the hundreds of millions of dollars 
spent on this program would go further if spent on police 
officers and crime prevention. 
 
This ridiculous Act is not effective as a matter of safety and 
flies in the face of our private rights as individuals. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Further Negotiations with Nurses 
 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Premier. Mr. Speaker, the health care system 
in this province is collapsing, and why? Because the Premier 
won’t blink first. 



566 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 1999 

Mr. Premier, the health care system is falling apart. People’s 
lives are at risk and nothing is being done because the Premier 
insists on behaving like a child in the middle of a temper 
tantrum. 
 
Mr. Premier, your behaviour is being described by the people of 
this province as infantile. This health care crisis was ignited by 
you, Mr. Premier. Now what are you as Premier going to do to 
get us out of this mess? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As the people 
of the province will know, the Premier of this province met 
with the leadership of the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses last 
Wednesday — one week ago. The Premier met with the nurses 
for several . . . over a course of several hours. I believe some 11 
hours, Mr. Speaker, and at that time the Premier listened and 
heard what the leadership was saying about certainly nurses’ 
issues in the workplace as it pertained to nursing practice, 
recruitment and retention and seniority, and the need to have 
action on the part of the employers. 
 
The Premier was under the impression that the leadership in 
both the employer and nurses’ organizations were going to go 
away and consult with their various committees and come back 
and meet with the Premier the next morning at 8:30. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s my opinion that the Premier did provide 
leadership and he did try and attempt to ensure that health 
services continue in the province. Unfortunately, the nurses 
decided to go on a general strike. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I believe 
that the people of the province believe that that explanation is 
inadequate. We are in crisis. It is not a good enough 
explanation. Lives are at risk. Patients are being airlifted out of 
this province. Families are being disrupted. Cancer treatments 
are on hold. And there’s no end in sight because the Premier 
insists on throwing a temper tantrum. 
 
Mr. Premier, that’s not leadership. That’s just childish. The 
people of Saskatchewan expect you to act in a more mature 
manner. 
 
Mr. Premier, what steps are you taking now? Are you talking to 
SUN (Saskatchewan Union of Nurses)? Are you listening to the 
nurses? Do you understand that nurses just want to be treated 
with dignity in a respectful manner and not like criminals? Mr. 
Premier, what are you doing to try to resolve this mess? 
 
(1430) 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, as I recall the vote in this 
legislature last Thursday, if I recall the results, the 
Saskatchewan Party and the Liberal Party voted against the 
legislation. We moved on the legislation because we felt it 
important to ensure that health services were continuing in the 
province given that we were hearing from the major health 
districts that they could not withstand a major withdrawal of 
service for any length of time. 

Mr. Speaker, we know that public safety is a top-of-mind issue 
for the citizens of this province and it is a top-of-mind issue for 
myself as the Minister of Health. 
 
We want to thank the nurse managers and the paramedics and 
the general physicians and specialists in this province for doing 
everything in order to ensure that our patients are being looked 
after as well as possible. And we also acknowledge that SUN 
has in some cases provided essential services, which has 
assisted with the situation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are hopeful that SUN will listen carefully to 
the court order and they will encourage their members to return 
to work because that’s how we’re going to settle this issue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
legislation brought in in this legislature was nothing but 
dictatorial muscle. That legislation was an injustice towards the 
nurses. That legislation did not allow for collective bargaining. 
 
Mr. Premier, when you brought in your back-to-work 
legislation, you said the health system couldn’t survive for more 
than a few hours without nurses. We’ve now had nurses off 
work for a week, and you stubbornly refuse to do anything 
about it, and all because you fear your pride will be hurt. 
 
Mr. Premier, this dispute isn’t going to be resolved by you 
holding your breath and stomping your feet. It isn’t going to be 
resolved by court actions and government advertising 
condemning nurses. It’s only going to be resolved by both sides 
compromising a little. And you have to take the first step, Mr. 
Premier. 
 
Mr. Premier, please humble yourself and start acting like a 
leader and take the first necessary steps to end this standoff. 
Will you do that, Mr. Premier? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I’d just like to remind the 
member that, I believe, a couple of weeks ago in this 
legislature, there were calls for this legislature to get the grain 
handlers and the inspectors in Vancouver back to work and to 
have the federal government order those folks back to work. My 
understanding, Mr. Speaker, is that they have returned to work. 
 
And in the history of this province, when there have been 
occasions when this legislature has found it necessary to 
introduce back-to-work legislation, people who have been on 
strike have returned to work, Mr. Speaker. We live in a 
province where people abide by the laws of the province and we 
would encourage, we would encourage the SUN to get and 
encourage their members to return to work and abide by the 
law. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Madam Minister, will you allow the nurses 
to be the law-abiding citizens they’ve always been by doing 
what your government did when it broke its own law in The 
Provincial Court Act with the judges? Will you undo the 
back-to-work legislation? 
 



April 14, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 567 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, the back-to-work 
legislation which was passed by this Assembly less than a week 
ago is back-to-work legislation that is the law of Saskatchewan. 
And as you know the Saskatchewan Association of Health 
Organizations has received a court order urging or ordering the 
leadership in the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses to ask — 
request — their membership to return to work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have laws. They are fundamental to the 
foundation of this country and to democracy, Mr. Speaker. And 
we would urge — we would urge — SUN to ask their members 
to return to the workplace so that we can get on with the 
collective bargaining that is so necessary to improve working 
conditions and nursing practice issues in the workplace, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Doctors Leaving Province 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is also 
for the Minister of Health. 
 
Madam Minister, as you just had an answer for, the NDP (New 
Democratic Party) has created the worst health care crisis in this 
province in 40 years. The front page of the Saskatoon 
Star-Phoenix today calls the nurses strike an “NDP labour 
nightmare.” 
 
Madam Minister, thanks to the NDP hospitals are closing across 
the province. After eight years of NDP mismanagement 
Saskatchewan’s health system has completely broken down. 
But it doesn’t stop with the nurses, Madam Minister. 
 
You’re NDP government is also doing an excellent job of 
chasing out doctors. Last week’s headline in the Maple Creek 
News declared, “Taxes drive doctors out of Saskatchewan.” 
Madam Minister, that makes five doctors the NDP have chased 
. . . has chased out of Maple Creek in the last three years. 
 
Why, Madam Minister? Well according to the doctors, it’s the 
NDP’s sky-high taxes . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. The hon. member has 
been extremely lengthy in his preamble and — order! — I’ll ask 
the hon. member to go directly to his question now. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Is that your plan for health care, Madam 
Minister, threaten the arrest of nurses and chase the rest of the 
doctors out of the province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — You know, Mr. Speaker, coming from 
the members of the Tory Party, it’s absolutely incredible. I 
mean this is the party that is saying that they are going to freeze 
health care spending at the rate of inflation, which in this 
budget year, Mr. Speaker, would mean $18 million. That 
couldn’t possibly deal with these wages and benefits and other 
issues that we have with various health care providers, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s almost laughable. I mean here we have a party 

that is sticking up apparently for leadership that avoids the 
legislation — avoids the law, Mr. Speaker. Here we have a 
party that runs around Saskatchewan saying that they’re going 
to do all of these things for health care, yet they’re going to 
freeze health spending at a time when our government has just 
put a $195 million into the health system or 1.9 million. 
 
Here we have a party that obviously says we can afford 22 per 
cent wage increases at a time when we need to put more people 
into the health system in order to deal with the workload. Mr. 
Speaker, I find the member’s comments incredible. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Next question. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the minister is 
incredulous. So are the people across this province at the 
disaster that they’ve created. She talks about sticking up. The 
only thing that’s being stuck up around here is the people there 
that are sticking up for their Premier who’s messed this whole 
thing up with his negotiations. 
 
The NDP’s outright assault on nurses and doctors is working. 
Thanks to the NDP government’s disastrous management of the 
health care system Saskatchewan is suffering through huge 
shortages of nurses. Those that are left are on strike because the 
NDP has created an intolerable working condition for them. 
 
The doctors are being driven out because the NDP has given 
Saskatchewan the second highest taxes in Canada. 
 
But don’t take my word for it, Madam Minister, listen to one of 
the doctors in Maple . . . what he’s saying from Maple Creek. 
He says: 
 

I enjoy it here . . . But to pay between . . . (48 and 50 per 
cent) income tax is just killing me . . . 
 
Moving across the border into Alberta allows doctors to 
form a company and be taxed . . . (between) 32 to 35 per 
cent . . . 

 
Madam Minister, what is the NDP doing to stop the exodus of 
doctors out of Saskatchewan because of your high taxes? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, the member still can’t 
add. The Tories couldn’t add in the 1980s — that’s why we 
have the $15 billion deficit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what they want . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — What they want apparently is more 
revenue — less taxes and more money . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Now the Chair is having some 
difficulty, hon. members, being able to hear the answer being 
put by the minister and the Chair asks for the co-operation from 
members on both sides of the House. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, let’s be clear about where we are in this process. 
We have a $2 million-a-day interest payment on the public debt. 



568 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 1999 

That’s money that’s leaving. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they obviously want us to capitulate to demands 
that we cannot possibly meet. They talk about a high tax system 
in the province of Saskatchewan. How does this work, Mr. 
Speaker? How does it work? We are apparently supposed to 
reduce taxes in the province, increase program spending, and 
somehow find the revenue. Mr. Speaker, it just doesn’t add up. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Alberta Nurses to Work in Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
also for the Minister of Health. Madam Minister, the Chair of 
the North Valley Health District has now confirmed that they 
will be bringing in nurses from Alberta to ease the pressure of 
the strike. 
 
Madam Minister, can you tell us what is the overall strategy 
from bringing in nurses from Alberta and other provinces? How 
many districts are going to do this and how many nurses will be 
involved? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, as I have said earlier, we 
are in a situation in the province where we have very few 
out-of-scope nurse managers. We are now into a close to one 
week of a general-wide, province-wide strike by all, practically 
all RNs (Registered Nurse) in the province of Saskatchewan. 
Mr. Speaker, we can solve this problem. We can solve this 
problem. 
 
What we are encouraging SUN to do is to ask their members to 
return to the workplace, and when we do that, we will be at the 
bargaining table immediately. And what we will do at the 
bargaining table is deal with nursing recruitment and retention, 
deal with pay equity, deal with nursing practices, so that nurses 
can provide the kind of nursing and care that they need to 
provide, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What we can’t do, Mr. Speaker, is to provide a 22 per cent 
wage increase at this time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Offer to Canadian Union of Public Employees 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, you 
are imposing a contract on nurses with your heavy-handed Bill 
23. You have said it and your Bill says it: there is no room to 
bargain. 
 
However, we have just received a memo that there are better 
deals for some but not for all. And we have it here — we’ll send 
a copy over to you, Mr. Premier. I’m going to quote from it. It’s 
from the CUPE (Canadian Union of Public Employees) Health 
Care Council to CUPE health care residents: 
 

In an attempt to assist with the current state of provincial 
health care negotiations, CUPE contacted the Minister of 
Health, Pat Atkinson. As a result of our intervention we 
have . . . 
 

The Speaker: — Order. Order, order, order. Order. The hon. 
member I don’t think identified the source he’s quoting from as 
a published source, and so I would ask that he honour the rules 
of debate which require that — from other than published 
sources — that he use that designation and recognize the House. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — The quote goes on: 
 

As a result of our intervention, we have been instrumental 
in achieving additional funding to provide for Extended 
Health Benefits and Dental Plan improvements for all 
Health Care workers. This additional funding will be 2.1 
per cent of payroll and will be OVER AND ABOVE ALL 
OTHER NEGOTIATED INCREASES. 
 

I would like the Premier to explain, confirm, or deny, are you 
playing political games with our health care workers in this 
province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I find it extremely 
interesting that, on the one hand, members do not . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Do you find it interesting Roy? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Excuse me, Mr. Speaker, I think I 
have the floor. I know that hon. member is notorious for his 
lack of respect for this institution, but let me finish the answer 
by saying I find it rather peculiar to have some members of the 
House — as the Saskatchewan Party members have been doing, 
the Tory Party members have been doing — criticizing me for 
the eleventh hour negotiations with the nurses, and in this 
particular member’s question, getting up, taking the exact 
reverse position, and criticizing the Minister of Health for 
trying to resolve a health dispute. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these people can’t figure out A from Z. They’re 
the most confused opposition. God forbid that we should ever 
put health care in the hands of Liberals or Conservatives. Just 
like the KOD (Keep Our Doctors) and anything that they’ve 
done in the years gone by, they will destroy this plan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Full-time Positions for Nurses 
 
Mr. McLane: — Mr. Speaker, in today’s paper, the NDP is 
continuing its smear ad campaign against nurses. After laying 
off 600 nurses and completely destroying their working 
conditions this government chose to use the heavy hand of 
back-to-work legislation and fines. No wonder we have a 
nursing shortage, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This morning I spoke with Rachael Tilson, a nurse from the 
Regina Health District.` Rachael tells me that she graduated 
from Kelsey in 1991 but couldn’t find any work in 
Saskatchewan as a nurse. Throughout most of the NDP years 
since then she’s worked full-time in Montana as a nurse. Last 
year she came back to a casual position at the Plains. We all 
know what happened to the Plains, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Despite a nursing shortage the best this government can make 
available to her, Mr. Speaker, is a permanent part-time position. 
 



April 14, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 569 

Madam Minister, how do you expect to keep nurses when all 
you’re offering is part-time work and smear-ad campaigns? 
 
(1445) 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, what I can indicate to the 
member that as part of this bargaining process with the 
Saskatchewan Union of Nurses and the employer that there has 
been discussion around language governing the conversion of 
casual and part-time jobs to full-time jobs, Mr. Speaker. We 
have been saying for some time, and I think the employer has 
acknowledged this, that it’s absolutely imperative that we have 
full-time jobs in the registered nurses area if we are to ensure 
that our graduates are going to stay in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
If you look at health care across the country it would appear as 
though we have seen the conversion to casual and part-time 
jobs in many, many provinces. Every province is dealing with 
this issue. And we believe that once the employer and SUN 
return to the bargaining table that language can be put into the 
collective agreement that would ensure more full-time 
positions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Well, Mr. Speaker, while the minister is 
waiting to make up her mind, Rachael and other nurses like her 
will be going back to Montana. Then where will we be with our 
nurses? 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a tale of two provinces. The province of BC 
(British Columbia) has announced that they’re going to spend 
over $50 million to fill 1,000 full-time nursing positions in that 
province. In the meantime they’re going to spend an additional 
$200,000 on an ad campaign to attract nurses. 
 
According to an article in today’s Vancouver Sun, Gary Moser, 
president of the Health Employers Association of BC said that 
with contract bargaining behind them, the nurses and employers 
can now work together toward the common goal of and I quote, 
“stealing nurses from other provinces.” It’s quite a contrast 
when Saskatchewan is doing everything it can to attack nurses. 
 
My question, Mr. Speaker, is to the minister. Why is she 
spending thousands of dollars to attack nurses while another 
NDP province is spending thousands of dollars to attract 
nurses? They want to attract. You want to attack. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member refers 
to the province of British Columbia and their recruitment 
campaign. I want to say to this House that there is a recruit . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. Speaker, do I have the floor . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. Speaker, I please would ask . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I suppose that I ought 
not to be surprised that the Liberal Party will not give me a 
chance to speak since the Liberal Party’s leader says publicly 
that the nurses of Saskatchewan should defy the law of this 

province and defy the court injunctions and therefore it should 
come as no surprise to me that they exhibit this lawlessness in 
this Assembly. 
 
What I was about to say, Mr. Speaker, is when the member 
talks about British Columbia and recruitment, it is an 
acknowledged fact that nurses are in high demand and are being 
recruited everywhere — in the province of Saskatchewan, 
British Columbia, right across the country. But what the hon. 
member did not tell the House in prefacing his question, was 
that the nurses in British Columbia settled for zero, zero and 2 
per cent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Alberta Nurses to Work in Saskatchewan 
 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, once 
again my question is for the Minister of Health. Madam 
Minister, you never even tried to answer the question I asked 
you. It was simple. Are you or any health districts bringing 
nurses from Alberta in to Saskatchewan to fill in while the 
nurses’ strike is on? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, what the province of 
Saskatchewan through the Government of Saskatchewan and 
the Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations is 
attempting to do is to return to the bargaining table as soon as 
humanly possible to get a collective agreement with the 
Saskatchewan Union of Nurses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we can resolve the issues. We can resolve the 
issues in the workplace to improve working conditions, Mr. 
Speaker. We can ensure that there are funds available to recruit 
and retain nurses for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we can deal with seniority provisions and we can 
convert casual to full-time positions, Mr. Speaker. But I want to 
assure the people of this House and to the people of this 
province that we can resume collective bargaining as soon as 
the nurses resume work in the workplace. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, once again my question is for 
the Minister of Health. And I repeat, are you or any health 
districts bringing nurses from Alberta in to fill in for 
Saskatchewan nurses while the strike is on? 
 
Question is plain and simple, Madam Minister: are you or are 
you not bringing in nurses from Alberta? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — The question is simple and the answer 
has been equally simple and clear. The hon. member will not 
accept it for political reasons, but the answer is clear. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a time for cooler heads to prevail. This is a 
time for compromise. This is a time for negotiation. 
 
This is not a time, like the Liberal Party, to advocate a 
continuing breach of the law. Nor is it a time for the 



570 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 1999 

Saskatchewan Party which advocates a five-year freeze on 
health care spending — five-year freeze on health care 
spending, five-year freeze on health care spending. Not a time 
for them to do this either. 
 
What this is, is a time for nurses to honour the law and to 
honour the judges. And we will have SAHO at the table and 
we’ll do everything that we can to achieve as reasonably as we 
can, within the fiscal capacity of this province as left to us by 
those people opposite, to have the best possible health care 
system in Canada — which we still have in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. Now the Chair is 
much encouraged that we have galleries filled with 
peacekeepers here today. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Motion to Recess 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the 
Assembly, I move: 
 

That the House do now recess until 4 p.m. to honour 15 
Wing and to recognize the 75th anniversary of the Royal 
Canadian Air Force, and that this Assembly reconvene at 
the call of the Speaker, ringing the bells five minutes in 
advance of reconvening. 
 

And I move that, seconded by the Minister of Municipal 
Affairs, Culture and Housing. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Speaker: — Hon. members, then, with the motion having 
been carried, I would invite all members and guests to a tea, to a 
Speaker’s tea, in honour of 15 Wing. It will take place in room 
218 on the west wing of the Legislative Assembly Building. 
 
And I will also direct the Sergeant-at-Arms to ring the bells at 
3:55 to summon the members to reconvene at 4 o’clock. If 
members and guests will just remain seated until the mace has 
been lowered. 
 
The House now stands recessed. 
 
The Assembly recessed for a period of time. 
 
(1600) 

PRIORITY OF DEBATE 
 

Layoff Notices — Shaunavon Hospital 
 
The Speaker: — The House will come back to order. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Earlier today I, 
by way of letter, informed your office that pursuant to rule 19 I 
was requesting authorization for a priority of debate motion to 
be heard. 

The Speaker: — I will ask the hon. member for Wood River, 
the House Leader of the Third Party, to very briefly advise the 
Assembly of his reasonings for his notice of motion under rule 
19 and request for priority of debate and to advise the House of 
the actions he wishes it to take. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The reasoning 
for this being so urgent and pressing today is the fact that 
tomorrow there are going to be layoff notices given . . . or acted 
upon in the Shaunavon hospital. 
 
We have nurses, four nurses, and 18 or 19 support staff that had 
some months ago received their layoff notices. They come into 
effect tomorrow. 
 
Given the climate of what’s happening in this province today, 
with other provinces openly raiding our health care 
professionals, we are of the concern — and this has been related 
to us by these health care workers — that if in fact we do not 
put a halt to this, they are more than likely going to be seeking 
employment elsewhere. This will have an impact on the 
community of Shaunavon and in fact the southwest part of the 
province as we will not get nurses to come back to this 
community. 
 
This is urgent and pressing today. We need some action by this 
legislature, by the government, to at least put a halt on going 
ahead with the layoff notices until we can find out if in fact 
these layoff notices are warranted. The board, the health district 
board, has made it very clear they need the staff; that in fact it’s 
due to financial considerations, the deficit they’re running. If 
they could get funding in the district, that in fact they would not 
let the staff go. That, I think, Mr. Speaker, constituted the 
emergency and pressing necessity of this going ahead. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The hon. member for Wood River makes the 
request under rule 19 that the business of the House be set aside 
under priority of debate pursuant to rule 19. And the Chair is 
prepared to rule on his request that the business of the House be 
set aside. 
 
Earlier today the House Leader of the Third Party provided a 
notice for priority of debate to the Office of the Clerk as 
required under rule 19(2). The notice was accordingly 
distributed pursuant to the notification provision of the rule. 
 
And members will be aware that it is the Speaker’s 
responsibility under rule 19(5) to determine whether that matter 
is proper to be discussed, and whether the matter should receive 
urgent consideration over the other business presently on the 
order paper. Having reviewed the member’s case, I am now 
prepared to rule on the matter. 
 
In reviewing any case for a priority of debate the Speaker is 
obliged to review the case in the context of both the extent to 
which it concerns the administrative responsibilities of the 
government, and whether the matter could come within the 
scope of ministerial action, and also the probability of the 
matter being brought before the House within reasonable time 
by other means. 
 



April 14, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 571 

The member has established that the issue he raises is of 
considerable importance to the public. He also points to the fact 
that funding of health care through the Department of Health is 
within the administrative responsibility of the government, and 
therefore within the scope of ministerial action. 
 
However with respect to bringing the matter before the House 
within reasonable time, it is clear that the member has had a 
number of opportunities to raise these concerns, including in the 
debate on the Throne Speech and in the budget debate at which 
time he could have moved the subamendment addressing this 
issue. 
 
This is not an isolated issue but rather it’s part of an ongoing 
concern on the broader issue of health care services. The 
potential layoffs cited in the notice are health district decisions 
that are not within the direct administrative responsibility of the 
minister. 
 
The member’s notice refers to the long-term effects of the 
potential layoffs. These long-term effects and the broader 
concern respecting funding may continue to be addressed by 
this House through the current review of estimates for the 
Department of Health in the Committee of Finance and through 
private members’ motions in the usual way. 
 
The Chair is not satisfied that the imminent layoff date stated by 
the member prevents the House from effectively dealing with 
these issues in the normal course of business. This matter can 
be brought before the House within reasonable time by other 
means, as is the case for other similar matters. Therefore the 
request for a priority of debate is denied. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, I request the question be 
converted to orders for return (debatable). 
 
The Speaker: — The item no. 1, question no. 52 is converted 
to notice of motions for returns (debatable). 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Social Services 

Vote 36 
 
The Chair: — Order. I would ask the minister to introduce his 
officials please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, 
with me today are Glenda Yeates, the deputy minister who is 
seated beside me. Behind Ms. Yeates, is Bonnie Durnford, the 
assistant deputy minister; behind me is Bob Wihlidal, who’s the 
executive director of financial management for the department. 
Beside Ms. Yeates is Phil Walsh, the executive director of 
income support; and behind Mr. Walsh is Richard Hazel, who’s 
the executive director of family and youth services. Thank you. 
 

Subvote (SS01) 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And good 
afternoon to the Minister of Social Services, and good afternoon 
and welcome to his officials. 
 
Mr. Minister, I would be happy if we could have just a great 
conversation this afternoon and a discussion surrounding the 
amendment to The Child and Family Services Act that your 
government has tabled. And I understand the tabling of that was 
with the intent of having some measures put forward that would 
stop the exploitation of children through the child prostitution 
trade. 
 
As I have looked through the legislation, Mr. Minister, I have 
noticed that there really aren’t any concrete measures other than 
one that I can see, that have been changed in that legislation, 
that will really be an effective help for children on the streets. I 
see that there has been a lot of wording, a movement around of 
words; I see that there are no measures in place that will 
concretely help those children on the streets. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I would like to know why there is nothing in 
this legislation about safe houses in the province, especially in 
the cities of Saskatoon and Prince Albert? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I’m somewhat at a 
loss, or Mr. Chair, I’m somewhat at a loss. Perhaps the member 
has not fully understood that we are in Committee of Finance, 
to deal with the estimates for the Department of Social Services. 
 
The member is asking very specific questions about legislation 
pertaining to an Act or Bill that is before the Legislative 
Assembly and is due to come up in committee in due course. 
And we would at that time be prepared to entertain any specific 
questions related to that legislation, but . . . and would of 
course, be prepared to entertain general questions related to the 
child and family youth services aspects of the department. But 
as to the particular Bill I’m not in a good position to deal with 
that here today. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, the reason 
that I’m bringing this up is because obviously there is money 
that is apportioned to Social Services for use for our children 
within the province. The children that are suffering from sexual 
exploitation on the streets should be . . . should be able to have 
some of that funding go toward things that they need, that the 
people of the province are demanding are done. And I’m going 
to be getting to the funding very quickly. 
 
In fact the first question I’ll ask you is: how much funding by 
the Department of Social Services in this budget has been 
apportioned or is set out for safe houses in the province of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, I want to thank the 
member for the question. This year we have budgeted 750,000 
in the estimates to deal specifically with the question of 
children who are at risk due to sexual exploitation in 
Saskatchewan; and particularly to support efforts in the cities of 
Prince Albert, Saskatoon, and Regina at this point, where the 
risks have been identified as having been . . . or are being . . . or 
are the greatest. 



572 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 1999 

We have undertaken community consultations with groups in 
those three cities. On the basis of those consultations we have 
set out a budget of 750,000. Some of that 750,000 will be going 
to support at this point a safe house which has been established 
in Saskatoon. 
 
Discussions are ongoing with groups in Prince Albert as to 
additional efforts that may be required to support the efforts that 
the community is undertaking. Some of the funds in Prince 
Albert are being utilized by the community to support outreach 
services through a children’s activity centre. 
 
In Regina discussions are ongoing with the groups and I 
understand that some of those discussions revolve around the 
establishment of a safe house in Regina as well. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. So within the budget 
right now there is no designated money specifically for use for 
safe houses in Prince Albert or in Regina. Is that correct? 
 
(1615) 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, I can tell the member 
that we feel that we have sufficient funds in our budget to 
support the efforts and the priorities that are identified by the 
community groups in Regina, Saskatoon, and Prince Albert. 
 
In Prince Albert, as I indicated, they feel that their priority is for 
support for a youth council and a youth drop-in centre. 
 
In Saskatoon, as I indicated, there is a safe shelter that is in 
operation. They feel that that’s their priority. 
 
In the case of Regina, there are funds in the budget to support a 
safe shelter in Regina. But any time it comes to real estate, 
there’s a certain reluctance to indicate to the public what it is 
that we’re prepared to pay or what it is that we’re prepared to 
support when it comes to real estate. Perhaps at the end of the 
day, when we’re all done and the safe shelters are operating, we 
would be in a position to be more forthcoming about issues 
related in part to real estate. 
 
But we feel that there are sufficient funds in the budget to 
support the operation of the safe shelters in Saskatoon and in 
Regina where they have identified that as a priority as part of 
their efforts and to support the operations in Prince Albert. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, $750 
million, that amount indicates to me that if you were going to 
apportion that between three cities for safe places, safe houses, 
for children to escape the streets — at least for a short time — 
that that would come to somewhere around 200 and maybe 
$10,000 per city for a safe centre. 
 
Two hundred and ten thousand dollars is a substantial amount 
of money, but I’m not sure it’s enough money to be able to 
maintain a safe place; to be able to purchase a place as well as 
to maintain that place with proper counselling services, medical 
services, and so on, and also to staff that place. 
 
Can you tell me just whether the people in Saskatoon have 
given you an indication about how much money they are going 
to need to provide for all services in that safe house and how 

much they will need for one year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, I just want to indicate 
to the member that the Department of Social Services is one of 
a number of agencies that are helping to support the operations 
of the safe house in Saskatoon. It’s my understanding that 
Saskatoon Tribal Council is also one of the parties that’s 
involved in supporting the operation of the safe shelter. And I 
understand that the Department of Justice is also providing 
support, and there may well be other community groups that are 
also providing support for the operation of that through the 
collective effort by the Communities for Children in Saskatoon. 
 
I would point out too, Mr. Chair, that in Saskatoon we have 
coming on stream in very short period of time the Saskatoon 
children’s centre as a means of providing additional services for 
children that are at risk, and also have made arrangements with 
other agencies, parts of the department in Regina, to expand the 
services that will be available for children that are at risk. 
Children that may be referred to those services through a safe 
house or in other means. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, another 
major component, I guess, of assisting children who are at risk 
and children who have not only been dealing with the emotional 
abuse of sexual exploitation etc., but they’ve also been dealing 
with — and trying to live with — addictions to drugs and 
alcohol, all of which seems to go together for these unfortunate 
children. 
 
Mr. Minister, it is my understanding that in the province of 
Saskatchewan services for youths that need drug and alcohol 
treatment are limited — and very limited. I understand that 
there are three spaces at the Calder Centre. And I think that the 
people of the province know as well as you know that with the 
closing of Whitespruce at Yorkton, which was very successful, 
there was a great sort of apprehension and fear on the part of 
people in the province that we would not have treatment centres 
and adequate treatment centres for youth of this province for 
drug and alcohol treatment. 
 
Mr. Minister, how much money has been specifically 
designated for the drug and alcohol treatment for the youth of 
our province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, I want to preface my 
response by saying that the member would be well advised to 
ask that question of the Minister of Health, because it’s the 
Health department through the health districts that ultimately 
provide services for people in Saskatchewan when it comes to 
addictions. 
 
We are interested in working with the various health boards and 
various health districts to try to provide for an integrated, 
coordinated response to needs that they determine are there and 
needs that we assess as being there, so that there is a good 
response, not only on the health . . . (inaudible) . . . by us to deal 
with children that are at risk. 
 
But again I would . . . I’m not in a position to answer the 
member’s questions as to the resources that are allocated for 
addiction services, because again that falls under the 
Department of Health and the health districts. 



April 14, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 573 

Ms. Julé: — Mr. Minister, it is the Department of Social 
Services who has the mandate and the responsibility — or 
should have the responsibility — to determine what kind of 
services are needed for the youth of this province. 
 
If you don’t have any figures in front of you, I can understand 
that. But as far as the responsibility to know and to instruct the 
rest of your government as to what kind of services are needed 
for drug and alcohol treatment, and certainly a very pointed 
suggestion on your part to them that the money should be 
designated for the youth of our province in these areas, is 
something I would have expected that you would have done in 
budget consultations. And in doing that, I would hope that your 
government would have given you some response about what 
kind of services you were going to have for youth in this 
province. 
 
Let’s just get back to the Calder Centre for a moment. Is what 
I’m hearing and the information I’m getting correct, Mr. 
Minister — is the Calder Centre only providing three spaces for 
youth that are addicted to drugs and alcohol? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Again, Mr. Speaker, I would 
advise that the member should ask that question of the Minister 
of Health when her estimates come before this committee 
because, again, I’m not in a position to clearly answer the 
question for the members. And I wouldn’t want to mislead the 
member by guessing as to what the answers might be and 
therefore would encourage her to put that to the Minister of 
Health. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Minister, I am deeply disappointed in a sense. 
And I don’t, I don’t mean to say that in a derogatory manner, 
but I am deeply disappointed that the Minister of Social 
Services, certainly whose mandate is to care for the children of 
our province that need care and aren’t getting it anywhere else, 
should see to it that he would know how many spaces there are 
in this province for youth that need drug and alcohol treatment. 
 
To be able to stand here today or to stand, as the minister has, 
and simply say he doesn’t even know how many spaces there 
are at the Calder Centre that are designated for youth is a bit 
shocking and to me a bit disconcerting. 
 
I would hope that you would have somewhat of a . . . in fact a 
very precise idea of what kind of treatment is available here, 
where it is, and how many spaces are being provided in relation 
to the number of youth that need those services. 
 
Can you not tell me something about what spaces there are for 
drug and alcohol treatment for the youth of this province, in this 
province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, children in 
Saskatchewan may at any time require any number of services 
from agencies over which, or departments over which, we have 
no direct control. It may well be, as the member suggests, that 
children in Saskatchewan need access to addiction services 
which are provided by health districts and are funded in part by 
the Department of Health. It may well be that children at times 
require access to special education services which are provided 
by school boards and which are funded in part by the 
Department of Education. 

It may well be that children at some point or another may 
require access to child and youth services or the mental health 
services that are provided in Saskatchewan, which again are run 
by health districts but funded in part by the Department of 
Health. It may be that children need access to recreation 
services which are provided by, in many cases, by local 
municipalities and are funded in part, I suppose too, by the 
provincial government. I don’t know about that. 
 
(1630) 
 
We try to work wherever we can at the local level, at the 
regional level where we have staff, with the service providers in 
those areas to bring to their attention the information that we 
have about the needs of services for children and for youth and 
work with them where we can to provide for an integrative 
response. But we are ill-positioned and we are not structured in 
a way to provide or to account for specific service deliveries in 
those areas. 
 
Now I understand that other provinces may have organized their 
services differently. That is to say they may have a department 
that has responsibilities for child and family services and then 
therefore have all responsibilities for all services that are 
provided to that sector of the population. But we’re not 
structured in that way. But we do try, as I said, to work with 
other departments and other agencies at the level that we work 
which is at the community level to provide for an integrated and 
coordinated approach to deal with the needs of children. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Minister, I understand that and I believe that 
what you are sort of referring to . . . although I am having a 
great deal of difficulty following what you’re saying, because I 
was specifying in my question that I wanted you to indicate to 
me how many spaces there were for youth in the province for 
drug and alcohol treatment. And I really didn’t get an answer to 
that. 
 
I believe what you’re saying is that the district health boards 
would be the ones that were determining the need for such 
treatment for children. And so it’s up to them basically to 
ensure that that service is there. That might well be so as far as 
a theory goes, but the fact is that there is . . . for children we 
don’t have crisis intervention in district health boards in most of 
them that I know of. There is in fact, a lack of crisis 
intervention for adults in our districts let alone children. 
 
I have been told that counsellors that work with families in 
districts are really backlogged, and a lot of counsellors simply, 
because they say it’s their preference not to deal with children’s 
needs for counselling, won’t do it. 
 
So never mind drug and alcohol addictions and treatment 
needed for that, we don’t even have a situation, it seems, in a 
province where there’s adequate and absolute provision for 
children that need counselling services possibly because of their 
parents being addicted to a drug or alcohol. So I think that I’d 
just like to make the statement that crisis intervention is lacking 
badly within the districts. 
 
And the other thing that’s a bit disconcerting to me is, you 
know, when I’m hearing that social workers are hired for the 
districts and oftentimes they are the ones that can determine 



574 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 1999 

whether they will provide a service or they won’t, and to what 
group of people they will and to whom they won’t. 
 
So how are we going to ensure that the services that people 
need here are happening for people if in fact, you know, social 
workers can determine for themselves once they’re hired who 
they will and they won’t see. 
 
I find that to be really badly lacking as far as direction from 
government on what kind of services must be provided. I don’t 
think it’s fair for a district to be hiring people, social workers, 
that simply say, well, I won’t deal with psychotics or people 
that have long-term problems that need therapeutic care; I’m 
just a counsellor here. I don’t think it’s right for them to say I 
won’t deal with children. 
 
I’m wondering if you can comment on this and if you’re aware 
of the kind of situation that we do have happening. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Again, Mr. Chair, when it comes 
to health care services, the specific responsibility is that of the 
health district. In fact their legislation indicates that they are 
mandated to do a needs assessment of the health needs of the 
people in their districts, and then to respond to that. 
 
As I indicated, we try to work with the health districts to ensure 
that the children for whom we have responsibility and youth for 
whom we have responsibilities are provided the services that 
the health district is responsible for providing. 
 
If there are specific instances of where services are not being 
provided, you know, I would ask the member to bring them to 
our attention and we’ll certainly take that up with the health 
district concerned. 
 
Having said that, we do as a department allocate funds for a 
broad range of residential care and treatment services. For 
example, we contract with Ranch Ehrlo Society to provide for 
up to 45 spaces for treatment services. We have contracted with 
the Prince Albert Grand Council to provide for up to 16 spaces 
in their treatment home. 
 
These treatment homes typically deal with children that have a 
wide range of presenting problems — maybe some health 
related, maybe mental health related, maybe other issues. And 
we contract with those agencies to provide treatment services in 
a residential setting. 
 
But again when it comes strictly to health facilities, it’s the 
responsibility of the health districts, and so I’m ill-positioned to 
answer specific questions about the services being provided by 
health districts. 
 
And again if the member has some specific concern about a 
service that needs to be provided, isn’t being provided by a 
health district, we’d certainly be prepared to look into that for 
the member and get back to her. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I presume 
that we are getting a little bit into a Health discussion here, but 
when you talk about the health districts being responsible to 
meet the needs of their district and that’s done through needs 
assessments and this does include childrens’ needs in those 

districts. The very fact is, Mr. Minister, in the last very short 
while, I have learned that neither Central Plains Health District 
nor Gabriel Springs Health District in Saskatchewan has done a 
needs assessment since 1994. 
 
Now my question to you — and I guess it could be posed to the 
Health minister — is: is there no monitoring by your 
government as to whether or not the health districts’ mandate is 
being kept up? Whether or not in fact there’s an evaluation 
report that is done that your government should inspect, and if 
inspecting it they see that there are some recommendations that 
need to be put forward to spiff it up then maybe . . . and not 
maybe, I believe it’s government’s responsibility to do that. By 
not doing that, and I believe it’s not being done, we don’t have 
any assurance that the needs of children are going to be taken 
care of in those health districts. And, Mr. Minister, I don’t 
expect you to respond to that if you don’t wish. I will be taking 
it up with the Minister of Health. 
 
But I just wanted to make one more comment before I turn the 
questioning over to my colleague. In this House approximately 
a couple of weeks ago, three weeks ago, I issued questions to 
you regarding the workload of . . . the caseload rather of child 
protection social workers in the province. 
 
Now you had indicated to me in your response that there were 
50 child protection workers that were extra that were put out 
there. 
 
I have since found out that most of those, and the money I guess 
designated to that, is going to work with young offenders and 
not necessarily with child protection. In fact I was told that by a 
social worker from this province. 
 
So I need you to be able to stand today and to explain to those 
child protection workers that are so in need of added help just in 
fact where you have designated the money and where, you 
know, whether or not it did go to young offenders. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — I want to thank the member for 
the questions, Chair, because it provides us with an opportunity 
to set the record straight. I think the member has been 
misinformed. 
 
In fact when we undertook to add 50 staff for the child 
protection services, 43 of the 50 staff were immediately 
allocated in the area of child protection. Another seven staff 
have been allocated to other priority items but we have 
undertaken to ensure that all those seven staff will also be 
transferred or allocated to child protection services as of July 1, 
but the other 43 are and have . . . were allocated for child 
protection and went to child protection. 
 
Most of those would be in front-line staff, child protection 
workers. Some went into supervisory because, as you will 
know, the Children’s Advocate also had some concerns about 
the level of supervision in some areas. Some also went 
importantly into resource or helping us to identify further 
resources in the way of foster homes because that was also a 
concern that we had. But again most have gone into front-line 
child protection staff. All of the positions, or the 50 positions 
are going into child protection work. 
 



April 14, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 575 

There have also been other staff that have been added to the 
department in the area of young offenders over and above these 
50, so perhaps the member has been . . . her attention has been 
drawn to those increases in staff and led to believe that there 
was no increases in the area of child protection. 
 
But again the 50 were allocated for that, have in large part gone 
to child protection as I said, with the exception of seven who 
will be there by July 1. But in addition to that, significant other 
staff have been added in the area of young offenders. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. So, Mr. Minister, if I’m 
hearing you correctly you are saying that the child protection 
workers that were allocated — the 50 extra — were actually 
allocated or in the field of child protection, not necessarily in 
institutions like we would have in North Battleford? Is that 
correct . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . All right, I thank you for 
that. 
 
And although I would love to go on here, we always have to be 
mindful of the clock and I would like to allow my colleague to 
present some questions to you. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, and to 
your officials. Mr. Minister, one of your most recent statistical 
reports gives a definition — well actually it doesn’t give a 
definition — of employable, fully employable. There’s some 
terminology here I’d like some answers to. We have a line that 
talks about fully employable employed, fully employable 
unemployed, fully employable training. And then we have a 
number of different numbers: October ’91, June ’98, September 
’98, December ’98. And a question that arises from that — a 
number of questions, actually — but the first question I’d like 
you to respond to is, how does your department define a fully 
employable person for purposes of granting benefits? 
 
(1645) 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, if the member is 
referring to the quarterly statistical report of the department 
where there is a footnote, fully employable — a person capable 
of working 36 hours per week or more, and that is based on 
assessments made by the caseworker at that time. 
 
Mr. Toth: — So what you’re saying, Mr. Minister, is your 
definition of fully employable is someone who has . . . You’re 
talking of the physical ability to work 36 or basically using the 
word 36 where most cases we’re still on 40-hour weeks. But I 
take it you’re just talking about the ability to work, put in a full 
weekly . . . work at a job for a full week. And that’s based on a 
caseworker’s assessment of that person’s physical ability to 
work at that type of job and be able to be employed for eight 
hours a day, five days a week, or seven, or whatever the 
numbers. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Again I would point out to the 
member, Mr. Chair, that this is an assessment that is done by 
the caseworker when a person presents himself for income 
support. We try to determine their physical ability to do — to 
use your words I think — a full-time job. And on that basis 
would judge them to be fully employable. 
 
There may be instances of where a person who is otherwise 

fully employable physically, mentally may not be in a position 
to do that because they have other mental health problems. 
 
There may also be other limiting factors. You may have a 
person who has an obligation, for example, to care for another 
family member which may limit their ability to actually work 
the 36 hours. 
 
But essentially what we’re talking about is someone that 
presents themselves to the caseworker; the caseworker judges 
them to be in a position to work, physically work 36 hours a 
week. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chairman, thank you, Mr. Minister. How 
would a single parent with two children be classified? Would 
they be classified as a fully employable? Or what assessment is 
done in a situation such as that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, when a person presents 
themselves to the department for income support, the fact that 
they are a single parent by itself would not necessarily put them 
into some other kind of category. 
 
Being a single parent doesn’t mean that they are not fully 
employable. Having said that, there may be presenting 
circumstances that are assessed by the caseworker at the time 
which suggest to the caseworker that that person is something 
less than fully employable. And there may be factors such as 
the age of the children; there may be other factors such as the 
special needs of a child, one or the other, that may limit that 
person’s ability to work for the 36 hours. 
 
But simply the categorization of single parent by itself does not 
exclude them from being considered to be fully employable. 
But again we look at each individual case, we look at the 
presenting circumstances and make an assessment based on 
that. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair. Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Minister, another question arises. How many fully employable 
people are currently receiving benefits from the department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, again I’m . . . I would 
refer the member — and I assume that he has this, the quarterly 
statistical report as of December 1998 — as of the end of 
December our figures show that there were 14,351 cases before 
our department of those who we consider to be fully 
employable, which for the interest of the member is 1,178 less 
than December of the previous year. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, the question is how many fully 
employable at this time? Would those numbers not be available 
yet? We’re past the first quarter of 1999. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, at this point, at the end 
of March the figures I have is 16,026. But again, I would point 
out again to the member that typically we have seasonal 
patterns, that during the course of the year there may be an 
increase. We don’t have the comparable figures for this 
category as compared to March of the previous year, but would 
point out that overall social assistance caseloads are down this 
March from the previous March. 
 



576 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 1999 

But I don’t have the breakout for the employable category as 
such, but again would point out that there are seasonal patterns. 
I don’t have the comparison with the previous year, except all 
social assistance caseloads which again are down from the 
March of the previous year. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, are fully employable 
welfare recipients required to carry on a job search while 
receiving benefits? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, in our case planning 
with our clientele, we try to ascertain in any individual case 
what is the best plan that will lead to independence . . . that is to 
say, independence from social services. That may involve that 
person being encouraged to seek employment. That may also 
mean that we encourage that person to look for ways to upgrade 
their education as a means to, in the long-run, furthering their 
employment opportunities. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, so what you’re basically saying 
then is you do ask of recipients, welfare recipients, to carry out 
job search. If that job . . . if that recipient though, however, 
doesn’t have a lot of skills, what does the department . . . You 
talked about encouraging further education. Well how do you 
encourage further education? 
 
Do you give them some assistance to go get education? If they 
don’t have the finances or the wherewithal, then what avenue 
do they pursue to get that education to indeed receive or get the 
job skills that you’re trying to suggest that they need in order to 
find a job in the workplace? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, I would just very 
briefly indicate to the member that there is a joint undertaking 
of Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training and Social 
Services which was commenced in August of 1997, which is 
the provincial training allowance which provides financial 
support for people who need to do a basic upgrading of their 
skills, such as in the area of adult basic education — quick 
skills, short skills programs, of a short duration of less than 12 
weeks. 
 
And we would encourage those that have very limited skills to 
pursue that kind of opportunity and we would also be in a 
position to, following that or if that’s not the appropriate one, to 
provide adequate support in other areas. 
 
Mr. Chair, at this point I would move the committee rise, report 
progress, and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:01 p.m. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 


