





























































Hansard: April 15, 1999


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 577 
 April 15, 1999 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
afternoon I have a petition to present on behalf of people 
concerned about hospital closures and elimination of hospital 
beds. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
abandon any plans to reduce acute care or close any more 
hospitals in the North-East Health District. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition come from 
Nipawin, Prince Albert, Carrot River. I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to bring in today on behalf of Saskatchewan’s 
disenfranchised widows. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to have the Workers’ 
Compensation Board Act amended whereby benefits and 
pensions are reinstated to disenfranchised widows and 
whereby all revoked pensions are reimbursed to them 
retroactively with interest to April 17, 1985. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from the Saskatoon area. I 
so present. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As well to present a 
petition regarding hospital closures. Reading the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
abandon any plans to reduce acute care or close any more 
hospitals in the Parkland Health District and to release the 
district’s three-year strategic plan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the petitioners that have signed this petition 
are from the community of Hafford. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
citizens also concerned about hospital closures. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
abandon any plans to reduce acute care or close any more 
hospitals in the North-East Health District. 
 

Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are all from the 
community of Carrot River. I so present. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This afternoon I 
present petitions requesting that the government immediately 
take action to correct the situation of the dangerous and 
confusing entrance to the city of North Battleford and especially 
to relocate the junction of Highway 40 with the Yellowhead 
Highway. 
 
The petitioners come from Cando, Battleford, Cochin, Mayfair, 
Krydor, Radisson, Sweetgrass First Nation, and North 
Battleford. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present many petitions in regards to the state of our highways. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call on federal and provincial 
governments to dedicate a significantly greater portion of 
the fuel tax revenues toward road maintenance and 
construction so Saskatchewan residents may have a safe 
highway system that meets their needs. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I have hundreds if not some thousands of 
signatures here, all the way from Kindersley, Estevan, Arcola, 
Shaunavon, Regina, Saskatoon, Swift Current, Maple Creek, 
Midale — all throughout the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 
petitions on behalf of citizens that are ashamed and concerned 
about the condition of our highways in this province and want 
the government to do something about it. The prayer reads as 
follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call on federal and provincial 
governments to dedicate a significantly greater portion of 
the fuel tax revenues toward road maintenance and 
construction so Saskatchewan residents may have a safe 
highway system that meets their needs. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, those who’ve signed these petitions come from all 
across this province. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
happy to rise again today on behalf of the people of this 
province to present a petition. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call on federal and provincial 
governments to dedicate a significantly greater portion of 
fuel tax revenues toward road maintenance and 
construction so Saskatchewan residents may have a safe 



578 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1999 

highway system that meets their needs. 
 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions here have been signed by the good 
folks from the communities of Nipawin, Gronlid, and Tisdale. 
 
And I so present. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy this 
morning to present petitions on behalf of the people from the 
village of Golden Prairie and from the RM (rural municipality) 
of Big Stick. I’ll read their prayer for crying for relief from the 
government: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately start work on the rebuilding of our secondary 
highway system to provide for safe driving on what are 
becoming known as pothole roads, to enter into 
negotiations with SARM and SUMA for a long-term plan 
of rural road restitution reflecting future needs, and to 
provide safety for all drivers as the new trucking regulation 
changes safety factors on these roads. 
 
And as in duty bound your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, all of these pretty well come from the Golden 
Prairie community, but there are a couple as well from Maple 
Creek. And I’m happy to present them on their behalf. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the petitions presented at the last 
sitting have been reviewed and found to be in order and are 
hereby received. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, 
SELECT AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
Standing Committee on Crown Corporations 

 
Ms. Lorje: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I present 
today the ninth report of the Standing Committee on Crown 
Corporations which I do now table. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member for Regina 
Coronation Park: 
 

That the ninth report of the Standing Committee on Crown 
Corporations be now concurred in. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 26 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Post-Secondary Education: (1) what 
does the government charge students who request 
university transcripts; secondly, what is the average length 
of time for the department to produce these transcripts; and 
finally, what is the cost incurred to the government to 

produce these transcripts? 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 26 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the members of the cabinet, SERM, Ag, and Finance 
particularly: how many elk and bison buffalo farms are 
there in the province? How many elk and bison are there 
on these farms? And how many species of exotic game 
birds and animals are raised in the capacity . . . in captivity 
rather, in Saskatchewan? What are they? What efforts are 
made by the Saskatchewan government to expand markets 
and what efforts are being pursued to process meat and 
other by-products from these species? How many abattoirs 
are there at present equipped and allowed to process 
specialty meats from these species? And what is the value 
of this industry in dollars and in jobs for Saskatchewan 
each year? 

 
I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice 
that I shall on Monday next move first reading of a Bill, The 
Resumption of Services (Nurses — SUN) Amendment Act, 
1999.  
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce to you and through 
you to all members of the Assembly, 23 grade 4 and grade 5 
students from Mayfair Community School in my constituency 
of Saskatoon Idylwyld. 
 
They are accompanied by their teachers Charlene Scrimshaw 
and Curtis Shepherd, and teacher associate Sharon Cousins. As 
well they are accompanied by parents Mrs. Lois Bond and Mr. 
Del Seckinger. 
 
I would ask all members to give these very special guests a very 
warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like 
to join with my colleague, the member from Idylwyld, in 
welcoming the students and teachers from Mayfair school here 
today. It happens that a very long time ago when I was in grade 
1, I started school at Mayfair school, and my oldest children 
also started their education at Mayfair school. I know it to be a 
very fine school. And I want to join and to . . . to help me 
welcome these fine students and teachers. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today to you and through you to the members of the Assembly, 
I’d like to introduce two people in your gallery. The Public 
Service Commission has a series of tours as you know for 
public servants and the last tour apparently was pretty full, so 
there’s a couple of people who didn’t get to go but are here 
today to enjoy the proceedings. 
 



April 15, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 579 

In your gallery, Mr. Speaker, from Pork Central is Gary 
Belanger and Jennifer Mouly. Pork Central of course is the 
division of the Saskatchewan Agriculture and Food department 
that takes care of the hog industry and have done a fantastic job 
over the last few years in terms of increasing productivity and 
quality in this province. 
 
I’d like all members to . . . have them rise and all members to 
thank them for their job and welcome them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Letter from SUN Representative 
 

Ms. Draude: — I rise today to talk to the members about letters 
I’m sure many of us have received lately from SUN 
(Saskatchewan Union of Nurses) members. Politicians, citizens, 
and nurses are all stressed with the current nurses’ strike. And 
the nurses I’ve been talking to prefer to be looking after their 
patients than walking the picket lines. And they will be as soon 
as the government repeals Bill No. 23. 
 
But I have one letter from Rae Nicholls, local 183, that says: 
 

We are disappointed with the abuse of taxpayers’ money 
by spending it on misleading media ads regarding S.U.N.’s 
negotiations and offers made. We understand there was no 
written proposal given to our Union by (Mr.) Romanow 
when he met with (the) . . . S.U.N. Bargaining 
Representatives. 
 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Now I will remind the hon. 
member of a point that I raised yesterday as a matter of fact, the 
exact same point, that if the item is not a published document, 
then you must avoid the use of proper names and refer to 
members by their position in the House. 
 
Ms. Draude: — I apologize, Mr. Speaker. It was written . . . 
just a fax. So I’ll say: 
 

. . . (that the) proposal given to our Union by . . . (the 
Premier) when he met with (the) . . . S.U.N. Bargaining 
Representatives. We feel this is another example of misuse 
of government power. 
 
We await your support and assistance in this matter. 
 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Tribute to Administrative Assistants and Secretaries 
 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I understand that 
next week is Secretaries’ Week and we’re going to pay tribute 
to our secretaries. I have a special reason though for wanting to 
jump the gun on this tribute to our assistants and our secretaries. 
Early this morning at, in fact I guess, 2:29 a.m. my assistant, 
Cheryl Friday and her husband, Joe, became the proud parents 
of their second son, Dawson Barry Michael. And so if people 
call my office and don’t get an answer today, it’s probably 
because she’s with her new son. 
 

I want to pay tribute to Cheryl and to all secretaries and to all 
assistants, Mr. Speaker. And by the way, both son and daughter 
are doing fine, and as a side note, Cheryl was accompanied by 
two nurses last night and the doctor stayed by her side through 
the entire affair. She pointed out to me that people at this point 
do not need to panic because there is adequate care and there is 
every reason to have confidence in the system to do what needs 
to be done. 
 
Cheryl, like all assistants, has become my right arm, and I want 
Cheryl to know particularly that I never really miss her until 
she’s gone. And this morning was a case in point when I 
discovered of course that a constituent called in and wanted 
some help and I thought right away well I’ll get Cheryl to take 
care of that; but of course Cheryl wasn’t there. 
 
So I was running around like a chicken with my head chopped 
off when I finally discovered that I’ve also got to make some 
faxes and I didn’t know the numbers. So I want to have Cheryl 
and all of the secretaries know that we don’t really miss you 
until you’re gone. And so I miss you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Carrot River Pork Producers 
 
Mr. Renaud: — Mr. Speaker, on Tuesday I was happy to 
represent the Minister of Agriculture at the opening of a 
significant economic venture in the RM of Moose Range in my 
constituency of Carrot River Valley. The people of my 
constituency have long been leaders in agriculture 
diversification and value-added industries, and this opening is 
an excellent addition. 
 
Carrot River Pork Producers officially opened its new modern 
facilities and they are impressive indeed, Mr. Speaker. The 
Carrot River Pork Producers facility will have the capacity of 
8,000 animals from farrow to finish. Mr. Speaker, this is good 
news for the industry, for the province, for local farmers, for 
businesses, and local communities who will provide feed grains 
and other supplies to this project, not to mention the jobs and 
economic activity already created and yet to come. 
 
Carrot River Pork Producers is a creation of the Saskatchewan 
Wheat Pool Heartland Livestock Services, local farmers, and 
the surrounding communities — a truly co-operative effort. And 
the programs in support of Saskatchewan Agriculture and Food 
assisted in this project. 
 
Many individuals should be congratulated, in particular Dan 
Taylor, chairman of the management committee, and all the 
members of the committee who worked so hard to make this 
project a reality. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

NDP Nominating Meeting in North Battleford 
 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This evening the 
Premier is travelling to North Battleford for the NDP (New 
Democratic Party) nominating meeting. I want to wish him well 



580 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1999 

and hope that he enjoys our famous Battlefords’ hospitality. 
 
Of course he can’t expect anything like the 450 people who 
turned out the last time the NDP had a nominating meeting in 
North Battleford, but I’m sure there will at least be a handful of 
diehard supporters there to cheer him on, or cheer him out, as 
the case may be. 
 
I urge the Premier to make sure his driver drives carefully and 
is familiar with our road system. Unfortunately the entrance to 
North Battleford is confusing and dangerous and has been the 
scene of many accidents. 
 
I also urge him not to go too far west and end up in Alberta 
where the Alberta NDP has officially disowned any connection 
or friendship with the Saskatchewan NDP. 
 
The Premier should also bring along his cheque book. You see, 
in the Battlefords we already have the two-tiered medicine he’s 
always talking about. Recently the cost of a basic ambulance 
trip went from $145 to $225. 
 
I close with a wish that the Premier will enjoy his visit. He 
should check out our many historic and scenic attractions. Who 
knows? He may decide North Battleford is a good place to 
spend his pending retirement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

International Special Librarians’ Day 
 

Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Last 
week I wanted to know for my own purposes how many times a 
particular word had been used in the legislature during the first 
two weeks of the session. It struck me the word was being 
overused. 
 
I had two choices. I could have read every word of Hansard 
again, an inviting prospect if ever I was faced with one, or I 
could call in the experts in resource management and retrieval 
at our Legislative Library. The answer came back in one hour 
— 272 times. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today is the International Special Librarians’ Day, 
the one day in the year when we recognize the kind of service 
which I described which we receive year-round. Special 
librarians are those who work in libraries devoted to special 
purposes, such as medical libraries and our Legislative Library. 
 
Of course what makes our Legislative Library and our librarians 
so special is not only do they serve the demanding and perhaps 
sometimes quirky needs of a legislature and its staff, but this 
one serves the public as well. Our library is a remarkable public 
treasury and it deserves to be shared with the public. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the years I’ve been an MLA (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly), valuable information has multiplied 
itself many times over, only to be matched by the ability of the 
librarians here to retrieve it for us. 
 
I know all members will want to join me in expressing our 
admiration and gratitude to Marian Powell and their remarkable 
staff, on this day devoted to them. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Rosetown-Biggar Nomination Meeting 
 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I understand that 
the member from Rosetown-Biggar will be holding his 
nomination meeting this evening. Mr. Speaker, I would like to 
say that it is a great disappointment that I will be unable to 
attend the nomination meeting as I have learned that the 
entrance into the meeting is limited to only NDP cardholders. 
 
But anyway, Mr. Speaker, I would just like to go over the 
minister’s record just for his constituents’ sake. Minister of 
Agriculture — farmers lost GRIP (gross revenue insurance 
program), broke a contract, they remember the member quite 
famously all over this province. Minister of Environment — the 
minister went around the province and dug up all tanks . . . gas 
tanks in rural Saskatchewan and what do we have now? Many 
of the gas tanks . . . service stations are closed at this point in 
rural Saskatchewan. 
 
The minister’s record as Minister of Highways, guess what his 
solution was? Turned all our highways into gravel. That was his 
solution. And now, Mr. Speaker, as Minister of 
Intergovernmental Affairs, the minister went to Montana and 
the government of North Dakota decided to close the borders to 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So I would suggest, just keep the minister at home. So I would 
hope that his constituents remember of the minister fondly 
when they go to his constituency meeting tonight, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Sense-ation ’99 Careers in Action 
 

Mr. Kowalsky: — At this very time, there is a sensational 
event going on at Woodland campus of SIAST (Saskatchewan 
Institute of Applied Science and Technology) in Prince Albert. 
In fact, 4,500 students are attending a career symposium. 
They’re coming to this from all parts of northern Saskatchewan 
and Prince Albert city. 
 
Yesterday the Minister of Post-Secondary Education and I 
visited part of this symposium, which is appropriately named 
Sense-ation ’99 — Experience Careers in Action. And we saw 
that . . . how this symposium would show students a lot about 
career opportunities and would encourage students to consider 
post-secondary education as an excellent way to a good career. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Woodland campus students get jobs. A 1997 
survey showed 94 per cent of respondents were employed; and 
we’re very proud to say that 89 per cent of Aboriginal grads are 
employed. That’s proof that investment in post-secondary 
education works. 
 
I want to congratulate all those involved in the organization of 
this two-day event: from Woodland campus, Larry Fladager and 
Veesha Lato in particular; and from the Interprovincial 
Association on Native Employment (IANE), Frank Brooks and 
Roberta Burns in particular; and all staff and volunteers and 
teachers who brought their students to this event. 
 



April 15, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 581 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Collective Bargaining with Health Sector Unions 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
for the Minister of Health. Well finally some good news amidst 
the NDP’s health care disaster. It appears that both CUPE 
(Canadian Union of Public Employees) and SEIU (Service 
Employees’ International Union) were able to settle their 
contracts when the NDP agreed to go outside the government’s 
mandated 2, 2, and 2 wage cap. 
 
According to sources in your own government, Madam 
Minister, the CUPE deal includes a 13.7 per cent increase in 
salaries and benefits. Sources also indicate SEIU was given a 
similar deal. But, Madam Minister, we still have 8,400 nurses 
on the picket line because the NDP refuses to even talk wages 
with them. In fact, your own back-to-work legislation is 
keeping nurses on the strike line because it precludes any 
opportunity to discuss wages. 
 
Madam Minister, why is the NDP offering CUPE and SEIU an 
increase of as much as 13.7 per cent when the nurses are forced 
by legislation to accept 7 per cent? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, the member may recall 
that before Christmas the government indicated to the public 
that there were going to be three approaches to this round of 
collective bargaining with our health sector employees. 
 
What the member will recall is that the health sector has 
undergone a tremendous reorganization of not only the districts 
but also, Mr. Speaker, of the various unions that now represent 
working people in our health sector. A number of different 
people from different unions have come together under one 
particular union and they’ve come together with different wages 
and working conditions. 
 
We indicated before Christmas three things: (1) that there 
would be the general mandate; (2) that there would be 
provisions made to address the issues that have arisen as a result 
of Dorsey and wage inequities and benefit inequities; and we 
also indicated, Mr. Speaker, that the pay equity framework 
would apply to the health sector. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Three routes 
— threats, legislation, jail and fines was the government’s role, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Madam Minister, it’s time for the Premier to set aside his ego 
and put the health of Saskatchewan people first. We’ve got a 
stalemate and nothing constructive is happening. The NDP even 
refuses to talk to the nurses unless they go back to work. 
 
The nurses are refusing to talk until the NDP gets rid of its 
back-to-work legislation. We are in day eight of a full-blown 
nurses strike and what we have is both sides blaming each 

other. 
 
Madam Minister, nobody cares anymore who is right or wrong. 
It’s time for cooler heads to prevail on both sides. It’s time to 
find a solution. The Saskatchewan Party is proposing a 
compromise that gets negotiations started again. 
 
Madam Minister, in light of the CUPE and SEIU agreement, 
will you consider amending your back-to-work legislation to 
allow for negotiations on wages outside the 7 per cent cap? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, as the people of this 
province will know, the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses has 
received a court order urging them to urge their membership to 
return to the workplace. 
 
Our government has indicated that it is extremely important to 
us that the leadership of SUN encourage their members to 
return to the workplace. Once that occurs, Mr. Speaker, as I 
indicated in my letter to the president of SUN on Sunday, the 
Government of Saskatchewan will ensure that SAHO 
(Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations), which is 
the employer representative, returns to the bargaining table. 
And we will get the kind of collective agreement that addresses 
the issues that nurses deal with not only in the workplace, but 
also, Mr. Speaker, the issue of pay equity, nursing recruitment 
and retention, and wages. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam 
Minister, people know that we’re in the middle of a serious 
health crisis. The health of Saskatchewan families are at risk. 
Health districts are advising seriously ill patients to seek 
medical attention in the United States. And I wonder at whose 
cost. 
 
It’s a very dangerous situation, Madam Minister, that cannot be 
allowed to continue. Both sides must be willing to show some 
flexibility. Both the NDP and the nurses must be willing to 
compromise a little and get this terrible health crisis solved. The 
Saskatchewan Party is asking both sides to take a step back 
from the confrontation. 
 
The stumbling block here is clearly the NDP’s back-to-work 
legislation, and it’s time to compromise. Madam Minister, will 
you consider a compromise if the nurses are also willing to 
compromise? The Saskatchewan Party has given notice of a Bill 
to amend your back-to-work legislation, allowing for 
negotiations outside the 2, 2, and 2 salary cap. Will you support 
and pass this legislation today? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — You will note in the collective 
agreements that have been tentatively agreed to with the Service 
Employees’ International Union and CUPE that the wage 
mandate of 2, 2, 2 plus 1, which applies to all other public 
sector employees, and those issues around Dorsey and pay 
equity have been addressed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have said very clearly that once the nurses 
return to work, we will ensure that nurses not only receive the 



582 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1999 

mandate, Mr. Speaker, but there will be other issues that can be 
addressed through Dorsey, Mr. Speaker, and through pay 
equity. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Cost of Plains Health Centre Closure 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a 
question on another matter to the Minister of Health. 
 
A couple of years ago the Minister of Finance assured us that 
the Plains hospital closure was on budget and on time. On 
budget and on time — he must’ve said it at least 40 times. Of 
course we now know the Plains closure is millions of dollars 
over budget. The NDP has admitted it’s at least $10 million 
over budget; some media reports put the figure as much as $40 
million over. 
 
This morning in Public Accounts, the Saskatchewan Party 
asked for a special investigation by the Provincial Auditor into 
the Plains closure. And as usual the NDP used its majority to 
shoot down the proposal and cover up its mismanagement. 
 
Madam Minister, what are you hiding? Why won’t you allow 
the auditor to do a special investigation into the money that has 
been wasted closing the Plains hospital? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the 
government, an answer here on the basis of process. The auditor 
automatically audits the Regina District Health Board and he 
will continue to do so. In fact, as I gather in his recent audit, he 
said some very favourable things about the Regina District 
Health Board. 
 
So the process is, the auditor will be doing the auditing of the 
health board; he will report to the legislature through the Public 
Accounts Committee; and further the members opposite will 
have a chance during Health estimates to deal with this issue. 
So the process I think, Mr. Speaker, is clear. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again to the 
Minister of Health and some questions that perhaps she can 
answer. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party is asking this Provincial Auditor to 
answer some pretty basic questions. How much is the Plains 
closure over budget; what is the reason for the cost overruns; 
what can be done to prevent the costs from escalating even 
further? 
 
These are responsible questions. A responsible government 
would want to get the answer to these questions, and to take 
steps to fix the problem before any more money is wasted. 
Madam Minister, why are you so intent on hiding your 
mismanagement of the Plains hospital closure? What are you 
hiding? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, once again to address 

the process here. The auditor is an independent person who 
does very thorough audits of the agencies that he covers. And 
he will deal with that sort of question in his report. 
 
But I must say it’s passing strange to have the members 
opposite supporting the auditor and talking about being so clean 
and accountable when I remember what happened in this 
province during the 1980s, where we never even had such 
reports returned to the public. 
 
So my point is, the process is clear, it’s there for all to see, it’s 
transparent, and it’s accountable. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Number of Fully Employable People on Social Assistance 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Social Services. Mr. Minister, 
yesterday in Social Services estimates you indicated that of as 
March 31 of this year there was 16,026 fully employable people 
receiving welfare benefits. According to Social Services 
department records, the number of fully employable people on 
welfare at the end of December 1998 was 14,351. 
 
Mr. Minister, that means in just the past three months the 
number of fully employable on welfare has increased by a 
whopping 12 per cent. Can you explain that, Mr. Minister? Why 
is it that the number of fully employable people on welfare in 
Saskatchewan has exploded by 12 per cent in just the past three 
months? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the 
member for the question because the member obviously didn’t 
read all of the explanation that was provided in estimates 
yesterday. What I explained to the member who is asking the 
question that yes, there was an increase, but this is typical that 
every year because of seasonal variations that we get changes in 
the number of fully employable people to whom we provide 
social assistance. 
 
I also explained however that the total number of people on 
social assistance was down from the same period the previous 
year. But we didn’t have the figures for the fully employable 
category, but that that the total number was down and it 
continues a pattern, Mr. Speaker, of what we have been seeing 
in Saskatchewan. That is to say the number of people on social 
assistance going down, caseloads going down, because of a 
strong economy and because of designs, redesigns of the social 
assistance safety network that we have in this province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Social 
Services, he may not have those numbers, but we do. We have 
the numbers of fully employable people in 1991, and at that 
time, from the records that we have, there were 12,331 fully 
employable people on welfare in Saskatchewan. Those are the 
figures from your department, Mr. Minister. But today, after 
eight years of NDP power, there are 16,026 fully employable 



April 15, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 583 

people have been forced onto the welfare rolls. That’s a 30 per 
cent increase over the NDP’s . . . since the NDP have been in 
government for just eight years — 12 per cent in the last three 
months. 
 
Mr. Minister, you can’t blame the nurses for that. You can’t 
blame the opposition. And you can’t blame anybody but 
yourselves. And the reason is simple. The NDP has the very 
worst job creation record in Canada by a country mile. 
 
Mr. Minister, isn’t that the reason why your department is so 
busy? A full 30 per cent increase in employable welfare cases 
because the NDP has the worst job creation record in all of 
Canada. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, the party opposite, 
the Tory Party’s propensity for playing with figures is well 
known to the people of Saskatchewan when they were in 
government. And again they’re showing now in opposition that 
they too have this propensity for playing with figures, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
What we’ve seen from that party is techniques designed to 
show anything but the truth about what is taking place in social 
assistance in Saskatchewan. What we have been seeing in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, is that as a result of changes, as a 
result of changes in the unemployment insurance program — 
that I think all of the people of Saskatchewan are aware of — 
and changes as a result of federal treatment for social assistance 
for people who live off reserves, we saw a tremendous increase 
in social assistance caseloads in Saskatchewan. 
 
And that increase went from 1991 to ’94 — it did go up. But 
since that time, because of the strength of the Saskatchewan 
economy, caseloads have been going down, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Negotiations With Nurses 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday, I was in 
Maple Creek talking with nurses on the picket line. They told 
me of poor conditions in the workplace. They’re worried they 
may lose their licences over things like not having two nurses 
around when medication is being dispensed because they’re 
forced to work with only one nurse on duty. 
 
They’re fed up, Mr. Speaker, because each time the community 
of Maple Creek gets a doctor, the doctor soon leaves the 
province for better working conditions. 
 
Mr. Premier, you’re jeopardizing the careers of nurses in Maple 
Creek and across this province. Mr. Premier, why don’t you 
repeal Bill 23? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, as I 
understand the recent reports in the press that the physician in 
Maple Creek is leaving Saskatchewan because he does not like 
the taxes that we pay in this province. Mr. Speaker, that is why 
we feel so strongly that in order to get this province continuing 
on its road to fiscal sustainability that we have to be very, very 

careful in terms of how we spend taxpayers’ dollars. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this province spends $2 million a day on interest 
on the public debt. This province as it’s become a little more 
sustainable is now increasing funding to programs that have 
seen reductions in the past in order to deal with that debt, Mr. 
Speaker. And what we’re also trying to do is decrease taxes so 
that physicians like the one referred to from Maple Creek want 
to stay in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday I was on the picket 
line in Swift Current with nurses who told me of the latest effort 
by the NDP government to build on the ill will that they’ve 
created with the nurses and the general public through their 
full-page newspaper advertisements. This latest effort comes 
courtesy of the member for Swift Current, Mr. Speaker, who 
appears to have taken it upon himself to go door to door and 
apologize, Mr. Speaker — apologize for the nurses. 
 
Will the Premier stop these actions by his MLAs and will he 
instead ask them to go door to door and seek forgiveness of 
their government’s actions? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, as the people will know 
by now, our Premier one week ago yesterday had a discussion 
with the leaders of SUN and the employers in order to see 
whether there was a way to address issues that registered nurses 
are faced with in this province, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, when 
SUN made the decision to have a province-wide strike, we 
received calls from districts and letters from districts extremely 
worried about patient safety in the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we cannot afford the kinds of demands that are 
being made on us in this fiscal year given that we have an $8 
million surplus. Mr. Speaker, we want to bargain with SUN. 
We want to return to the bargaining table. 
 
And Mr. Speaker, what we do not want to do, as the Liberals 
have done through their leader, is encourage people to disobey 
the law, Mr. Speaker. We know that the law is an underpinning 
of democracy in this province and in this country. Once nurses 
return to work we will return to the bargaining table. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, I have news for the member for 
Regina Coronation Park. Fact Man is after him. Remember Fact 
Man, the member’s comic book featuring those falsifying fools, 
Miss Information and Fearmonger. Well now apparently, Mr. 
Speaker, the member’s joined their ranks. 
 
Last night, Mr. Speaker, a young Regina nurse had a 
conversation with the member from Regina Coronation Park. 
First he tried to convince her that she made more than the 
MLAs and that after a 40 hour work week she’d find more in 
her pockets than the MLA for Coronation Park would have in 
his. 
 
Apparently the member then tried to use scare tactics with the 
nurse. Mr. Speaker, he claimed that all nurses will have a 10 per 
cent deduction off of their cheques in addition to the fines 



584 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1999 

levied against their unions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he then told the young nurse not to tell anyone 
where she got the information and tell her colleagues that their 
union was misleading them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask the Premier why is he directing . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order, order, order, order. Now 
the . . . Order! Order, order, order. Order. Order. Order! The 
hon. member has been extremely lengthy in his preamble and 
I’ll ask him to go now immediately . . . directly with his 
question to a member of Executive Council regarding duties of 
Executive Council. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, why . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order, order. Now the hon. 
member for Moosomin will not want to be commenting on the 
conduct of the Chair, and I’ll simply ask the hon. member from 
Moosomin to withdraw his remark and apologize to the House. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, I withdraw that remark. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair asked the hon. member to 
withdraw the remark and apologize to the House. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, my apologies. I didn’t exactly hear 
what you were saying but I apologize to the House. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, why is the Premier condoning 
these sorts of actions? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, one of the things that I’ve 
come to learn as a member of this Legislative Assembly, that 
sometimes comments that are made in this Legislative 
Assembly are not an accurate reflection of the facts, Mr. 
Speaker. Before I would at all count on the member’s comment 
as being anything as factual, I would want to have an 
opportunity to check with the members who these allegations 
are being made against, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Nevertheless, it does not take away from the facts of the 
situation in the province. The facts are, Mr. Speaker, that this 
government, the people of this province, are not in a position to 
afford the kinds of requests that are being made in this fiscal 
year. That’s fact number one. 
 
Fact number two: there is a judge’s order that has been issued 
by a judge of the federal court that has indicated that SUN 
should encourage its members to return to the workplace. 
That’s fact two. 
 
Fact three: once people return to the workplace, we will bargain 
the kind of agreement that deals with the kinds of issues that 
registered nurses want to have addressed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday I was visiting the 
nurses’ picket line in Moose Jaw when a nurse told me about a 
meeting of the Moose Jaw Labour Council held the evening 
before. Apparently one of the local Moose Jaw MLAs was 

astounded at the presence of a nurse at the labour council 
meeting. The MLA questioned whether the nurse was entitled 
to be at the meeting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question to the Premier is: if this is part of a 
divide and conquer campaign to separate SUN from other 
workers, Mr. Premier, do you condone such tactics? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, once again 
we have an allegation that is being made and it would be 
incumbent upon me to determine whether in fact the allegation 
is in fact correct. 
 
What I can say to the member is, after having some experience 
in this legislature, that oftentimes things are said that are not 
necessarily a proper reflection of reality. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Farm Aid Package 
 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Agriculture. Mr. Minister, the 
members from Kindersley and Melfort just got back from a big 
auction in Melfort that attracted about 3,000 farmers. Bad news, 
Mr. Minister. All the farmers up there think your ag assistance 
program stinks. 
 
They say the NDP sold them down the river. They say that 
basing the payout on income is just plain stupid. And they say 
the application process is designed to ensure that only the 
people who see any financial benefit are the accountants. 
 
Mr. Minister, how actually is the application process going? 
How many applications have been submitted by Saskatchewan 
farmers and how many have been approved? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, I find this a little . . . 
somewhat lacking in credibility. 
 
In November of 1998 that member’s leader, Mr. Hermanson, 
agreed with our Minister of Finance that Saskatchewan 
shouldn’t be footing this bill. In December . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . It’s in the paper — read it. In December of the 
same year, a month later, a month later he said, well no, 70-30. 
And you know what? By January Mr. Hermanson was saying, 
just put your money in. And now they turn around and say, 
what did you do that for? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think the member, I think the member . . . I think 
the member over there knows we went in under protest for the 
reasons I’ve outlined many times in this House. I think the 
member, I think the member should ask the farmers out there if 
they’re happy with the success rate of the Tory Conservative 
Party who took away $635 million annually from farmers, from 
their policy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Minister, you don’t have to tell us you went in under protest. 



April 15, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 585 

You didn’t want to put a nickel into the program to this day. 
And look what it’s costing our Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
Mr. Minister, I don’t think the questions I asked were that 
complicated. I simply wanted to know how your farm program 
is going. I already know that it won’t work, because you left 
farmers to fend for themselves when the feds were designing it. 
 
Mr. Minister, nobody is surprised about that. You didn’t know 
there was a farm crisis until it was too late and we told you. 
Then one morning right out of the blue you decided the farm 
crisis was over. Believe me, Mr. Minister, farmers had low 
expectations for your ability to negotiate and you didn’t surprise 
them. 
 
Mr. Minister, let’s try it one more time. Please share with the 
farmers of Saskatchewan how your emergency farm program is 
going. How many farmers have applied for assistance at this 
time; what is the average payout, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, let’s first of all talk about 
the credibility. He said when they told us there was a crisis. 
You know, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Speaker, a year 
ago during the Throne Speech, reply to the Throne Speech, 
there wasn’t one word said about an agriculture crisis from that 
group. Not in their reply. 
 
And I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, you go back and count the 
number of questions in the last session about agriculture. I 
could probably count them on both hands. 
 
Mr. Speaker, no doubt they’re a little sensitive. Mr. Speaker, 
anyone in this province would know what I said for months on 
this program . . . on this program. In fact, some people — 
farmers — are calling my office and saying, you know what, 
you were right, maybe we shouldn’t have gone in. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these people . . . if we would have had . . . If they 
hadn’t argued to get rid of the Crow rate and succeeded . . . 
Crow benefit, $320 million would have been in this province 
and we wouldn’t need AIDA (Agricultural Income Disaster 
Assistance). If you hadn’t argued for deregulation, another $110 
million would have been in this province annually and we 
wouldn't need AIDA. And if you hadn’t argued to get rid of 
two-price wheat, we wouldn’t need AIDA. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Question period has 
ended. Order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Conduct of Members in the House 
 

The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. Before proceeding 
on the agenda before the House, the Chair would like just to 
make a brief comment regarding conduct of the members 
during question period today. 
 
During question period today the Chair heard, without being 
able to identify specific sources, insults — personal insults — 
being shouted across the floor by members from both sides. 

And I want all our members to know that it is not permissible to 
contribute to the decorum of conduct of debate expected in this 
House, it does not assist that with personal insults being shouted 
from side to side. 
 
And I would ask for the co-operation of all members to preserve 
the dignity of the debate in this Assembly and to conduct 
yourself accordingly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before orders 
of the day, I ask leave to move first reading of the Bill that I 
gave notice for earlier named The Resumption of Services 
(Nurses-SUN) Amendment Act, 1999. 
 
Leave not granted. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, I ask for the leave of 
the Assembly to go to private Bills to consider items 1 and 4 
and then to revert back to orders of the day. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. The Chair would ask for 
the co-operation of the House. The House Leader is requesting 
leave which can be denied by any member and therefore worthy 
of attention of all members. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

PRIVATE BILLS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 301 — The Credit Union Central 
of Saskatchewan Act, 1999 

 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move Bill No. 301, 
The Credit Union Central of Saskatchewan Act, 1999, be now 
read a second time and referred to the Standing Committee on 
Private Members’ Bills. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills. 
 
The Speaker: — Before proceeding, the Chair wants to advise 
the House that I think I misheard the request of the Government 
House Leader and therefore misrepresented it to the House. I 
said to the House she requested leave for items 1 and 4, but the 
request was intended to be 1 to 4 — items 1, 2, 3, and 4. 
 
So let me ask the question for leave on that question to 
members of the House, to include private Bills, items 2, 3, and 
4. Is leave granted? 
 
Leave granted. 
 

Bill No. 302 — The Group Medical 
Services Act, 1999 

 
Ms. Murray: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move Bill No. 302, 
The Group Medical Services Act, 1999, be now read a second 



586 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1999 

time and referred to the Standing Committee on Private 
Members’ Bills. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills. 
 

Bill No. 303 — The Saskatchewan Foundation 
for the Arts Act 

 
Ms. Lorje: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, The 
Saskatchewan Foundation for the Arts Act, Bill No. 303, 
provides for an endowment fund for the benefit of the arts. This 
Act will establish the Saskatchewan Foundation for the Arts in 
the parameters of its governance and operations. The purpose of 
the foundation is to act as a conduit for financial resources for 
the benefit of the people of Saskatchewan, specifically to 
benefit, support, and to promote the arts, and artists in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
In this capacity the foundation will complement agencies and 
programs already in place, such as the Saskatchewan Arts 
Board, which operate for the benefit and well-being of all 
citizens of our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move Bill 303, The Saskatchewan Foundation 
for the Arts Act, 1999 be now read a second time and referred 
to the Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills. 
 

Bill No. 304 — The Saskatchewan Medical 
Association Act 

 
Ms. Lorje: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, The 
Saskatchewan Medical Association was created in 1967. Since 
that time in the last couple of years they have undertaken a 
detailed review of their organization and structure to make sure 
that their bylaws are current and modern. This Bill will see no 
changes to the structure which has been in place since 1967. 
They have been operating under a parliamentary model with a 
representative assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they are currently incorporated under the 
corporations Act, but this Bill which we are now considering 
will incorporate the Saskatchewan Medical Association as a 
separate entity. There will be no change in the historical way 
the organization is established, structured, or run. It will simply 
now be a separate corporation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move Bill No. 304, The Saskatchewan Medical 
Association Act, 1999 be now read a second time and referred 
to the Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I request leave to move a number of routine estimates 
to the Standing Committee on Estimates. 
 
Leave granted. 

 

MOTIONS 
 

Referral of Estimates to Standing Committee on Estimates 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I move, seconded by the member from Regina 
Victoria: 

 
That the estimates for the Chief Electoral Officer, Vote 34; 
estimates for the Conflict of Interest Commissioner, Vote 
57; estimates for the Information and Privacy 
Commissioner, Vote 55; estimates for the Legislative 
Assembly, Vote 21; estimates for the Ombudsman and the 
Children’s Advocate, Vote 56; the estimates for the 
Provincial Auditor, Vote 28; and Supplementary Estimates, 
Vote 21, be withdrawn from the Committee of Finance and 
referred to the Standing Committee on Estimates. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
(1430) 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 2 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 2 — The Municipal 
Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 1999 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker this 
is another very technical Bill that perhaps can be best addressed 
at the Committee of the Whole. However, I would like to make 
a couple of brief comments. This deals with municipal 
employees’ pensions and it provides retirement benefits to 
municipal workers, school board employees, and some police 
officers and firemen. Currently there are 9,000 active and 
inactive members in the plan and 2,700 members draw benefits. 
So obviously it’s important that we make effective legislation 
since a lot of people depend on the pension plan. 
 
There are a number of technical changes to the plan that are 
being proposed, Mr. Speaker, and I think that these modest 
changes won’t really change the overall effectiveness of the 
plan; and the details we have on those technical details we can 
deal with committee in . . . we can deal with in Committee of 
the Whole. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 19 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 19 — The 
Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment 
Act, 1999 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again, very 



April 15, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 587 

similar to Bill No. 2, it’s a very minute technical changes to a 
pension Bill and that questions in this nature can be properly 
dealt with in the Committee of the Whole. 
 
However, it is again important to mention that these pension 
plans and the Bills responsible for them have a fairly significant 
impact on the people that are affected by them. There are 5,200 
active and inactive members which include SaskPower workers, 
compensation and the Saskatchewan transportation corporation. 
 
A number of these technical amendments that are being 
proposed to make the legislation more effective, we feel we can 
very adequately address in Committee of the Whole. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 15 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Sonntag that Bill No. 15 — The 
University of Regina Amendment Act, 1999 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have 
a few comments to make about Bill No. 15 after having had the 
opportunity to read it and to discuss with people affected. We 
wanted to find out some of the concerns that this Bill had. 
 
Basically what the Bill is doing, Mr. Speaker, is it’s dealing 
with two separate entities. One, the recent new University of 
Saskatchewan Act put into place a number of financing controls 
and short-term borrowing regulations that the University of 
Saskatchewan must follow. And as a result the University of 
Regina has found that it also requires amendments to The 
University of Regina Act to enable it to be able to act on the 
same basis as the University of Saskatchewan. 
 
So we have had an opportunity to look at the borrowing 
requirements, the regulation concerned with the borrowing 
requirements, and that puts in place a process whereby there 
will be guidelines and there will be regulations for the 
University of Regina to be able to borrow on a short-term basis 
— no different than the current legislation that is in place for 
the University of Saskatchewan. So this clearly is a necessary 
item to enable the University of Regina to function as does the 
University of Saskatchewan Act. 
 
The second concern in this Bill, Mr. Speaker, regards the 
interaction between the Wascana Centre Authority and the 
University of Regina, and that’s regarding parking, Mr. Speaker 
— not an exciting topic in that respect and I don’t think a 
controversial topic as well. But what it does do I think, and the 
need for this is addressed in the fact that the University of 
Regina will be given the authority to create its own bylaws, its 
own regulations regarding parking on the University of Regina 
property. 
 
Currently even though that has been delegated by the Wascana 
Centre Authority to the University of Regina, it has become a 
bureaucratic nightmare to say the least as one official has 
indicated. Very difficult for the University of Regina to be 

enacting, you know, the bylaws that have been put in place by 
the Wascana Centre Authority. 
 
So the regulation as, or the — I’m sorry — the legislation, as 
we see it, clarifies that position, and what it will do is it will 
allow the University of Regina to put in place its own bylaws 
that will be also enforced by its own commissionaires and 
parking regulations. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, after having had the opportunity to question 
some people on this, we do find that there will be need for 
clarifications regarding the responsibility of vehicle owners and 
vehicles that are parked by someone who is not the owner. 
There is indeed an attempt, we believe, to clarify it, and there 
will be some questions that we will pose to the minister 
regarding the definition of authorized person versus owner of 
the vehicle. 
 
Those uncertainties are there, Mr. Speaker. But we believe very, 
very, very sincerely that we can do that during Committee of 
the Whole and we would allow the Bill to proceed to 
Committee of the Whole at this time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 8  The Assessment Management Agency 
Amendment Act, 1999 

 
The Chair: — I will ask the minister to introduce her officials, 
please. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — I thank you, Mr. Chair. On my left is 
John Edwards, the acting assistant deputy minister of Municipal 
Affairs, Culture and Housing. And on my right is Keith 
Comstock, who is the acting executive director of the program 
and policy development and review branch. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I’d 
like to welcome the minister’s officials here this afternoon. 
 
Madam Minister, to start off today could you maybe just give 
us a brief overview of what the changes you’ve made here . . . 
what you are trying to accomplish by the changes in the Bill, 
the amendment? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Well, Mr. Chairman, in general, the 
member opposite is likely aware that subsequent to the 1997 
reassessment experience our department convened review 
committees to review the experience in which SAMA 
(Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency) and the 
municipal organizations and everyone who was a stakeholder in 
the process was invited to make comments and suggestions for 
improvements for future cycles of reassessment. 
 
And this Act, or these changes reflect those issues on which 
there was consensus that the issues that are dealt with here 
would improve the experience for the next cycle. 
 



588 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1999 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, before we start today I’d like to just bring to your 
attention . . . A lady had sent a number of concerns that deal 
with the last reassessment and the problems therein. 
 
And I think the minister would agree that we had many, many 
problems that came out of the reassessment, the last one we 
had. And hopefully that they can be . . . the changes that we’re 
making will help address some of these issues. 
 
But I’d just like to go through them, Madam Minister. And 
they’re not all really questions but they’re comments from the 
lady. And some of them are questions, but I think she has got 
some really good points here of how maybe we could change 
some of the things that problems arose from the last time 
around. And some of them are comments but some of them . . . 
and I would ask for input from you on her comments. 
 
She starts off by saying there should be an independent 
watchdog set up to oversee SAMA itself. There has to be 
somewhere for property owners to go with their concerns. This 
independent watchdog must have the authority to do something 
about those concerns. 
 
She goes on to say SAMA has too much authority; they are an 
entity unto themselves. The SAMA agency answers to no one 
but the board of directors. And from my conversations with this 
lady, Madam Minister, her regard for the board itself is not 
high. 
 
And I have had that concern brought to me before. They felt 
that the board itself was not really giving direction to SAMA. 
When concerns came in from taxpayers throughout the 
province, they felt that they were being paid lip service to and 
that the problems that they brought up were not being dealt 
with. 
 
I believe, Madam Minister, I even had the occasion to sit in on 
one of the meetings with the board of directors. And I actually 
got that feeling myself from sitting there that, yes, they were 
listening to the people concerned but they were only waiting 
until they got out of there and nothing was going to be resolved. 
 
And I think there’s a problem when we see that happening, no 
matter who is sitting on these boards, Madam Minister. 
 
I realize that every agency that’s involved with reassessment is 
represented on that board, whether it be government, SARM 
(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities), SUMA 
(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association), the SSTA 
(Saskatchewan School Trustees Association), whoever. But I 
think the feeling out there is that they were not . . . the public, 
the taxpayer concerns were not being represented and really 
being addressed by the board themselves. 
 
And I wonder if you’d care to comment on that, Madam 
Minister. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’ll take 
the points that you raised in reverse, the last one being the 
representations of individuals. And I should assure you that in 
addition to the review process that I mentioned, which included 
the municipal organizations and other organized stakeholders, 

we certainly did take account of many letters that we did 
receive from individuals describing their personal experience 
with the process. 
 
So I think — I’m certain in fact — that those concerns were 
heard and that a number of the changes that are being proposed 
in this Act and in the municipal Acts that also relate to the 
assessment process, those changes and those concerns are 
reflected in the amendments that we’re bringing forward. 
 
(1445) 
 
In terms of your comments about the accountability of the 
Assessment Management Agency, first of all they were created 
by an Act of this legislature, the Act that we’re now considering 
in committee, the amendments thereto. 
 
And we are changing a number of the provisions there, taking 
back into the department for example, certain types of taxation 
policy development that the original Act gave SAMA some 
authority in. And I believe that the Act sets out the parameters 
of their authority and accountability as an independent agency. 
 
The nomination process from members of the board of directors 
is in an open, democratic meeting which is attended and the 
members of which are all the municipalities in the province, 
rural and urban, who elect some of the members to the board. 
 
The other members are three that we appoint, one being the 
Chair, and two being independent members. The other members 
are appointed by the school trustees association, SUMA, the 
urban municipalities association, and the rural municipalities 
association. Then there’s one member being a technical member 
who is a nominee and representative of the assessors 
association. 
 
So I think there certainly is accountability there, a process for 
that. But some of the comments that you’ve made with the 
respect to their authority and parameters are being addressed 
within these amendments. 
 
The very first point that you opened with was in terms of 
another watchdog. And we believe that the appeal process acts 
in that manner in that any individual who feels that the 
assessment is not appropriate can take it to the local board of 
revision. If they’re not . . . And have a hearing there. 
 
And we are, incidentally, changing some of the provisions in 
the legislation by these amendments that provide for the sharing 
of information; and that the deadlines for SAMA to provide 
information to the appellant will be exactly in the same time 
frame ahead of the hearing as the appellant is required to file, 
and some other changes of that nature. 
 
So if the appellant still feels after the local process through the 
board of revision that they are not satisfied, they can take the 
decision of the local board of revision to the Saskatchewan 
Municipal Board which also has parameters of authority set out 
in their Act, The Municipal Board Act. And beyond that the last 
court of resort, I guess, is the Saskatchewan Court of Appeal. 
 
So we really do believe that there is an integrity to the process; 
that there is set out a series of forms for an appellant to be heard 



April 15, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 589 

in an objective way. 
 
So I think that creating another, for instance, ombudsmen or, in 
your words, independent watchdog would be a duplication and 
an expense that perhaps taxpayers would just as soon be 
without. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, I guess . . . and I’ve had more concerns brought to me 
about these issues that we’re talking about right now. 
 
The lady talks about an independent watchdog . . . And I agree 
with you, if everything was working the way it should work, we 
probably wouldn’t need it; it’s another expense we don’t need. 
But I feel that this lady, the point she’s trying to make here by 
asking for an independent watchdog — and I’ve had this 
concern brought me by others — that if the board of directors of 
SAMA were doing the job that many of these people feel they 
should be doing, we wouldn’t need an independent watchdog. 
That would already be being looked after because they would 
be listening to the concerns that come in and they would be 
acting on them. 
 
And I guess, Madam Minister, I’ve had many calls like this, and 
I would think you must have had calls saying that they didn’t 
really feel that SAMA itself as a body was getting any direction 
from the problems caused by the last reassessment. 
 
Madam Minister, the lady goes on to say there has to be full 
public accountability by the SAMA agency and its employees. 
Well we’ve touched on accountability and what she felt should 
be there. But the part about the employees . . . And I’ve had this 
problem brought to me before from a number of different areas 
in the province, and it’s maybe not widespread but it is out 
there, Madam Minister. 
 
And I know as a past reeve and having dealing with the 
assessors themselves, there’s many personalities out there in the 
assessors. I would have to say overall the majority of these 
people that are out there assessing property are very good and 
very easy to deal with. But there are exceptions to the case. 
 
And I guess what this lady is saying, and I would have to agree 
with her to an extent, that the attitude of some of the assessors 
that we have was very . . . was not working well with the people 
that they were working with, whether it was the personality of 
that assessor or whatever or just the attitude of the assessor. 
 
And I think the problem being that once again that taxpayers 
out there felt that when there was a problem with a certain 
assessor because of attitude or the way he dealt with ratepayers, 
taxpayers out there, that no one was there to maybe address the 
issue. I don’t think they felt — and I know that’s happened to 
me in the past as a reeve — that nobody was really there to try 
and fix the problem. 
 
And I guess I would again point to the board of directors. And I 
don’t mean to just keep singling them out, but they are the final 
boss in this situation; they are responsible. 
 
Madam Minister, have you had occasion to have this brought to 
your attention about the attitude of some assessors? And again I 
reiterate, it’s probably a small number but they really are 

noticed when it is brought to our attention. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, I thank the member 
opposite for his questions. I would say that probably being a tax 
assessor is not the most popular job in the world. You can go 
back and read in the Bible about the taxman up in the tree . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Being stoned, yes. 
 
It’s a difficult job that they do have, and of course there are 
bound to be a variety of different kinds of personalities. And in 
this kind of a situation where you’re deciding on the value of a 
property that someone owns, there may not always be 
agreement. There’s room for friction. 
 
But I have — since the assessment . . . the reassessment 
experience in 1997 — I have made it a point to meet regularly 
with the members that we appoint, as government, as 
representatives of the people by order in council to receive their 
assessment — or maybe assessment isn’t a very good word in 
this particular instance but their opinions — to ask them what 
kind of feedback they are getting as individual board members. 
We have made some changes and, as you know, there’s been 
some change in the administration as well; and there’s an acting 
chief executive officer right now and a recruitment process is 
going on for a permanent replacement. 
 
So I think that under very trying circumstances, I think we have 
to remember that not only for ratepayers that own the property 
that was being assessed, but also for the personnel and the 
board members of the agency, this was a brand new experience. 
We had to . . . They were charged with the task of renewing our 
assessment system after 32 years of neglect so there were bound 
to be a few bumps and grinds, I think; and this new legislation 
that provides for . . . or these amendments that provide for a 
four-year cycle instead of a three. Because in that experience, 
three years just wasn’t long enough to get the information, do 
the modelling, and allow everybody appropriate latitude to do 
the best, most conscientious job they would’ve liked to do. 
 
So we’ve changed the, as you know, the cycle to a four-year 
cycle; the first year of that four-year cycle being 2001 instead of 
2000 so we’ll have a bit more time. And by the next 
reassessment, the personnel, the board, the government, the 
ratepayers of the province will all have benefited from the first 
experience. 
 
We really hope . . . our objective would be in the long term that 
assessment would become really a seamless process. And it 
would be going on . . . the way the cities really in effect do it 
now, where they’re doing the pickups and the re-evaluations on 
a constant basis, and so there are never any, you know, huge 
jars. And that eventually the whole thing will become a 
seamless process and we won’t have to make the kind of 
adjustments that we did in 1997. 
 
But I think based on that long 32-year lag that we had to catch 
up for, based on the stresses of the employees who used to be 
government employees, who were in the Department of 
Municipal Government when municipalities told the Local 
Government Finance Commission in the ’80s that they wanted 
to own the system, they didn’t want it to be a government 
function, so those employees had to be moved out of 
government into this independent agency, you know, in a 



590 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1999 

different setting operating under different parameters, and there 
were a great many adjustments to be made. 
 
I think under the circumstances that everyone, the assessors in 
the cities who do their own assessments, the employees at 
SAMA, the board, and even may I say the ratepayers of the 
province, I think everyone did a really commendable job in 
making the changes and adjusting to the changes. 
 
And where there were frictions and difficulties, those are the 
kind of issues that we’re attempting to resolve by these 
amendments. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. And I agree 
with the one-year extension that you’re delaying the next 
reassessment. I think that’s good. Because I think, had we have 
done this after we had brought in all the rules for the last 
reassessment, brought in all the numbers, and let the 
administrators out there — whether it’s urban or rural — 
hypothetically run these numbers through, I think we could 
have avoided a lot of the problems that we saw and went under 
the old system for one more year. 
 
I think if we had stuck with that, a lot of the problems that we 
saw with reassessment we could have avoided. Because in 
many cases the administrators themselves picked out problems 
that I think they saw coming with this. But because of the 
hurry-up and we were bringing it in in one year, we didn’t have 
time to fix the problem before actually the problem hit home. 
 
So I’m glad to see the one-year extension. I think that’s a good 
thing to do. That one year isn’t going to hurt anything and it’ll 
give more time to be ready for the next reassessment. 
 
The one thing I was talking about though, Madam Minister — 
and I saw it in the past as a reeve and I saw it as a taxpayer out 
there — and we’ll go back to the employee for a minute, and I 
don’t want to belabour the issue, but I think it is an important 
issue when personalities come in. But we know mistakes were 
made in the last reassessment and that was not avoidable. That 
had to happen with so much going on out there. 
 
I think I saw the example where assessors actually assessed 
land from the edge of a quarter section of land for whatever 
reason — there might have been crop from corner to corner and 
they didn’t want to go in and do it — but mistakes can be made 
and I don’t think we can blame them for that. But I think it’s the 
way we deal with those mistakes when they’re brought to our 
attention that caused a lot of problems out of it, Madam 
Minister. 
 
The lady goes on to say, Madam Minister, that there should be 
full disclosure of information as to how SAMA arrived at an 
assessment of property. And I wonder if you would comment 
on that, Madam Minister, because I think many felt that how 
they got to the numbers they got to, the taxpayer out there 
would like to have understood that and it might have solved 
some of the problems that we went through before we went into 
the appeal process. And a lot of that information, I know for a 
fact, was not passed on to the taxpayer or the appellant. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In answer 
to that question, we’ll be able to have a fuller discussion if you 

wish, under the committee review of The Urban Municipality 
Act, where section 253 amended adds this section, that: 
 

“(4) At least 10 days before the date set for the appeal 
hearing, the assessor shall file with the secretary of the 
board of revision and serve a copy on all parties to the 
appeal: 
 
(a) a complete assessment field sheet; and 
 
(b) a written explanation of how the assessment was 
determined.” 

 
So we’ve got not only the type of information that must be 
provided to the appellant but also a time frame of 10 days prior 
to the hearing, so that the appellant will have sufficient time to 
make use of that information. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister, I’m glad to 
hear that because that created a lot of problems for appellants 
out there trying to put an appeal together with an understanding 
of how really SAMA came up with the numbers they did. 
 
The onus . . . and she goes on to say here, the onus of proof for 
assessment values has to be on the SAMA agency, not on the 
property owner. The property owner does not have access to the 
resources, the time, or the finances. 
 
And I wonder if you’d comment on that, Madam Minister. 
Have we addressed that in any way? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, I think in the member 
opposite’s previous experience in local government himself, he 
will know that the basis for an appeal . . . in an appeal 
application the appellant has to set out the basis for the appeal. 
There has to be some basis, there has to be some comparison 
with a like property. And so we don’t — we do not plan to 
incorporate what you’re calling the onus of proof on the other 
side of the process. 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — I think maybe we’re going to address this 
as we get down farther in this, Madam Minister, but you talked 
about comparison . . . and I think, and I know, and the 
community involved with my home community of Saltcoats as 
you’re well aware. But I think that was one of the problems is 
that the taxpayers out there that were so upset were not allowed 
to compare to another community of very similar size, same 
distance from Yorkton. And it seemed very unfair because . . . 
Well as you know, I think in some respects we were felt as we 
were a resort community because we have a small lake by our 
community which is very nice, but let me reiterate that this is 
not oceanfront property. And it seemed to be in the first 
assessment that come out . . . I know my dad and mom lived 
along it — and I didn’t know they were that wealthy — and I’m 
really looking for this big inheritance down the road if that 
property stays that high value. 
 
Madam Minister, the SAMA agency must recognize legal 
appraisals done by other institutions. At this point, SAMA only 
recognizes their own appraisals and does not recognize 
appraisals done by accredited institutions. And I guess this is 



April 15, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 591 

where the comparisons come in. 
 
But I wonder, are we addressing that somewhere in this 
amendment, Madam Minister, and what’s your opinion on that? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chair, with respect to the 
oceanfront property, I mean, as lovely a spot as Saltcoats is, I 
know on some hot days in summer when the water levels are 
low, it’s much . . . mighty like a marsh, not a lake. 
 
But I think that we . . . We are attempting to come to grips with 
that issue by making again in the — I’m hoping to not have too 
much crossover here — but in the consideration of the 
municipalities Act in committee, we’ve added a section that 
says that, just to paraphrase it, that assessments must be . . . can 
be comparable within a school division, which changes the 
parameters quite a bit. And I think that addresses what it is — 
the point that you’re raising. 
 
And then on the question of other appraisals, certainly other 
appraisals of property, like professional appraisals sought by 
someone, can be tabled as evidence of the value at a hearing. 
But the problem there is that to protect the integrity of the 
system, the same manuals have to be used province-wide. 
 
So what would happen if someone tabled a professional 
appraisal that they or a financial institution or someone had 
engaged for the subject property, that SAMA would be 
comparing the appraisal methodology that was used with the 
manual to make sure that there’s a level playing field within the 
province. 
 
But certainly those kind of appraisals can be used as evidence in 
an appeal hearing. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Madam Minister, because 
I think it’s imperative that we fix the problems that we had with 
SAMA and you talk about comparative numbers being used 
right across the province and I agree with that. We have to have 
a basis in the whole province, but I think with the problems that 
we saw with SAMA in the last reassessment, I have had and 
you may have had yourself, some urban centres and quite a 
number of RMs for that matter even considering going to their 
own assessor, going back to their own assessor because they 
were very unhappy with the way that SAMA dealt with this 
problem — or the problems were caused by SAMA they felt — 
and I think we would lose that continuity across the province 
whether it be urban or rural if we didn’t have one central 
agency. 
 
Although I think if we go through reassessment again and have 
the same amount of problems, I’m afraid we’re going to see an 
awful lot of RMs and small, especially small urban centres 
considering going together and hiring their own assessors to do 
it for them. 
 
The lady goes on to say, Madam Minister, that the SAMA 
agency employees that perform property and land assessments 
must be fully accredited. In the operations section of SAMA 
there are only four employees out of 102 employees that have 
any accreditation. And I wonder do those numbers — is the 
lady right by using those numbers or are they wrong? 
 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, I’m certainly assuming 
that as members of the professional — the assessment 
profession — that the people who do assessments engaged by 
SAMA are all properly accredited but I could certainly 
undertake to find that out and let you know. 
 
And then on your point that group municipalities or groups of 
municipalities may consider joining together and hiring their 
own assessor, some municipalities or groups of municipalities 
did consider that and rejected that option. Some . . . one group 
that I’m aware of, a fairly large group of municipalities in the 
west side of the province, undertook a study and their 
consultant indicated to them — he was an independent 
consultant — that they would be better off within the provincial 
system. 
 
But it certainly is a option. And it’s a deliberate option provided 
in the legislation that if municipalities wish to do so, they may. 
And of course there are some cities in the province that have 
traditionally done their own and continue to do so. 
 
But I haven’t got any figures for you here, but I would make the 
suggestion to you because ministers from other provinces, 
where they do have a privatized system if you like, spend more 
money auditing all the private systems to make sure that there’s 
equal treatment across the province. They spend more money 
auditing it and supervising it than we spend on running our 
whole agency. So I think that’s something to consider. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Madam Minister, although 
I must . . . I don’t think I have to remind you that SAMA is not 
cheap at this present time. The amount of money that urban and 
rural municipalities are putting in to run SAMA is a fair 
expenditure in their costs and their mill rates every year. 
 
Madam Minister, the lady involved here goes on and she talks 
about the appeal process. And we may have touched on some of 
this but I’d just like to go through it anyway. She says here: 
 

The local boards of revision should have more authority as 
to what they can do. There should be in-depth 
informational workshops established for local boards of 
revision so the individuals sitting on these boards have a 
better understanding as to what their role is and more 
informed understanding as to what rights the local board 
has. 
 
There should be in-depth informational workshops for 
property owners to make them aware of the process of 
procedures of an appeal, so as the property owner is aware 
of their rights during the appeal process, limited though 
those rights are as the appeal process now stands. The 
whole appeal process is a very intimidating process to a 
property owner. That intimidation in itself is a deterrent for 
a property owner to appeal. And if a property owner is 
deterred from appealing for whatever reason, then they are 
being denied their rights. The appeal process must be made 
more user-friendly to the property owner. 
 

And I would have to agree with the lady here, Madam Minister. 
From some of the problems that have arose out of this, and in 
the case . . . some of the cases out there where SAMA 
themselves even had lawyers sitting at the table, it was very 



592 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1999 

intimidating to go through this whole process. 
 
Number one, the information that they wanted to put their 
appeals together wasn’t available, or if it was available came 
after the appeal hearing date, which did them absolutely no 
good. And that caused a big problem. 
 
Having lawyers sitting at the table, Madam Minister, to deal 
with the average citizen out there I think is intimidating in itself 
and, really when you think about it, probably not all that fair 
because the taxpayer’s dollars are paying for the lawyer to 
counteract what the taxpayer is saying. 
 
And I think in this situation, different than our justice system, it 
should be a fair playing field where people feel comfortable 
going in to make an appeal and not have to be a Rhodes Scholar 
to do so. 
 
Could you maybe comment on some of these comments, 
Madam Minister? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, I thank the member 
opposite for his observations. 
 
On the appeal process we did, in the last round, hold 
informational workshops for municipalities, for assessors, and 
we plan to do that again before the next round. And I think 
insofar as the ratepayers, information workshops for ratepayers, 
I believe that to be a responsibility of the municipality. 
 
And you may have had this experience as a reeve — I know I 
certainly did — where we used to hold, when we sent out the 
assessment notices, we would hold information workshops prior 
to the deadline for appeals. And we’d hold them not just during 
the week but in the evenings and on Saturdays so the people 
that were working could come and receive information about 
their assessment — how it was arrived at, how it compared with 
others. 
 
We always held those workshops. At the time they were always 
open so that comparisons could be made with like properties. 
And I’d like to think that we managed to satisfy a large number 
of people who would otherwise have appealed, who made a 
decision once they had an understanding of the process not to 
appeal. 
 
Then I think we are correcting the other issue that you raised 
about information being available in the section that I read you 
from the municipal Acts about each party to the appeal. It was 
one-sided last time, I agree, because there was a deadline by 
which the appellant had to file but the same timelines didn’t 
apply to the Assessment Management Agency. Well we’re 
correcting that in the provision that I read to you. 
 
The other thing that we are doing in this legislation is — and 
there may be some controversy around this, but I feel confident 
that we’re taking the right approach — is we’re barring 
membership on boards of revision to council members on the 
basis that they have a potential conflict of interest. 
 
And I know the counter-argument to that is that a councillor, 
particularly in a small, a very small urban municipality or a 
rural municipality, might have a more intimate knowledge of 

the circumstances of the appellant and so forth. But I think that 
there are, there are some pilot projects where . . . Well I 
shouldn’t call them pilot projects. But when some municipal 
administrators observed the first legislation and started to 
acquaint themselves prior to 1997 with what the new process 
would be like, they felt there was a need to have a little more 
. . . not more complications but professionalism at the local 
board of revision level. 
 
And some municipalities did go together and set up a 
professional, non-council board of revision that sits for more 
than one municipality. And by all accounts that has worked 
very well. So I think on your last intervention I think I’ve 
covered all the points that you made. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, I’d just like to thank the lady that sent this in. She’s 
part of a concerned taxpayers’ group, Debbie Koptie. I’m sure 
you know who the lady is. We may have created more 
questions than we even answered here for them, for those 
people this afternoon. But I hope not. At least they’ve got their 
chance to have their questions asked here today and I think 
that’s what this process should be all about. 
 
Madam Minister, I’d like to go on to some of the questions just 
with the Bill itself from my own point of view, and we may 
border on some of the questions that she’s asked but if you’ll 
bear with me this afternoon we’ll get through this. 
 
The Municipal Board, Madam Minister, has been removed from 
the technical advisory committee to avoid an appearance of 
conflict. Has there been accusations of such conflict in the past? 
Is that the reason for this to happen? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, no we’ve never heard 
from the public or an appellant at all on this issue. But it was 
the integrity of the Municipal Board themselves. They 
identified this issue because they felt uneasy. So we agreed with 
them and that’s why we’re making the change. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I agree with 
you; I think that would be a good thing to happen here. 
 
You also say in the Act that the changes will make SAMA more 
accountable in terms of information and consultation. SAMA 
will now be required to put out forecasts of shifts in 
assessments stemming from rural changes. How detailed will 
these forecasts be and who will get this information when it 
does come out? 
 
(1515) 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, the information that 
you refer to would be submitted to us as a department and we 
would make it public. And the detail that they would have to 
provide would have to be sufficient for us to do the modelling 
that we’re required to do for the analysis of what would happen 
to that bottom number on the right hand corner of the tax notice. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — I may have missed this in your answer but, 
practically, how will this change help the average property 
owner trying to figure out which direction their taxes are going 
to head one way or the other, up or down? 



April 15, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 593 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, you may have noticed 
section 12 amended, section (f) says: 
 

“(f) ensure that the public, municipal councils, boards of 
education and the Government of Saskatchewan are 
adequately informed respecting methods and orders 
relating to property and business assessment in 
Saskatchewan and, in pursuant of that objective, shall 
prepare and make available to the public, municipal 
councils, boards of education and the Government of 
Saskatchewan projections of shifts in assessments that may 
result from: 

 
Changes in the base date, changes in the manual, or other orders 
established, or changes in legislation. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, if I understand right, it will also be mandatory that 
SAMA consult with all affected agencies prior to carrying out 
re-evaluations. Will it be mandated what form these 
consultations will take? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, consultations would 
take place at different levels, and so we wouldn’t want to 
restrict that by . . . that kind of communication by prescribing it 
in the Act, because municipalities of different sizes might want 
to . . . depending on their populations and so on, they might 
want to configure their consultations in a certain way. We 
wouldn’t want to restrict, for instance, the school trustees’ 
association from having consultations with their boards. 
 
So I think we . . . We were never criticized for restricting our 
consultations last time; the only criticism we received is that 
perhaps it wasn’t . . . the cycle was too short and there wasn’t 
enough time to use the deluge of new information that people 
were receiving. So I think we’ve corrected that with the cycle. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, SAMA will no longer have any input into the appeal 
procedures. And we’ve talked a bit on this before. But once 
again to avoid the appearance of conflict of interest, how much 
of a problem has this perception been, in your view, and how 
has it adversely affected the rights of appellants since the last 
reassessment in 1997? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, I really think that that 
is . . . That’s a matter of perception. And the appeal process did 
change somewhat, but I — in the last cycle — but I think that 
the changes that we’re proposing here will improve it, not only 
in perception but in reality. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Madam Minister, you’re going to set 
deadlines, if I understand it right, for getting the information out 
to municipalities in regulations, and you know how I like 
regulations. What do you foresee as the date at which 
information will be out? And as you know, this was a real point 
of contention during the last reassessment. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, we’re still sorting out a 
number of issues with SAMA and with the stakeholder 
organizations. But this time we want to be sure that we have the 
legislation in place that describe the principles well in advance. 
You see, last time we were passing legislation in the spring 

session of 1997, the year of reassessment, that had to be 
retroactive to the first of the year. And that made it very, very 
difficult for councils to acquaint themselves with the tax tools 
and the provisions that would be available to them. They just 
didn’t have time to study it because they were in the middle of 
it as the legislation was being passed. 
 
So this year we want to put as much of the framework in place 
as possible in this session so that everyone that’s concerned 
with using the system or being a client of the system has lots of 
time to consider it. So if we put in the framework now, then we 
can develop the regulations. 
 
Some of the issues are — let me see — the regulations about 
the frequency of assessment, of an actual physical re-inspection. 
And we haven’t got a consensus on that yet because rural 
municipalities obviously will feel different about that than very 
. . . cities, for example, with very complex industrial 
developments and so on. Because if a quarter of land was sandy 
loam ten years ago, it’s probably still sandy loam. You know 
what I mean, unless some cropping practices or natural disaster 
or something has changed it. 
 
So rural municipalities obviously would opt for a much less 
frequent re-inspection than a city with more complex buildings. 
And that’s another issue is that municipalities might want 
improvements to be physically re-inspected much more often 
than land because there’s certainly, you know, with alterations 
and so on, likely to be changes in the value and assessment of 
improvements much more so than land. 
 
So if you put the framework in place, so that municipalities can 
be assured by looking at the legislation that we are going to 
provide for a specific time frame for physical re-inspections, 
then they know that. Then when we reach an agreement with 
the different types of municipalities of the frequency that would 
make . . . that they’d be more comfortable with, because 
obviously they’re paying for the field services that provide the 
more frequent re-inspection. So there’s a balance to be found 
between keeping the assessment up-to-date and paying for it. 
And we need to find the right balance. 
 
So I think it’s appropriate. We try to avoid that whenever 
possible too, but I think that to provide some flexibility, that 
leaving some matters to regulation and not enshrining them in 
the Act where they’re more difficult to change, is a good policy. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, at this time then — I’ll have more questions later — 
but I’d would like to report progress on this Bill at this time. 
 

Bill No. 14 — The Urban Municipality 
Amendment Act, 1999 

 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Madam 
Minister, if I am seeing what the three Bills are — the urban, 
the rural, and the northern Bill. Maybe if we could just start off 
here, if you could explain if there’s really any differences in 
what you’re doing here in any of the three Bills. And if there’s 
not many changes I would probably deal with the urban . . . 
most of the questions would actually come under the urban Bill. 



594 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1999 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, in answer to the 
member’s question on the three municipal Acts — urban, rural, 
and northern — there are no substantive differences between 
them, there might be something slight in wording but the intent 
is the same in all of them. And basically all the amendments 
deal with, and are parallel to, the changes to The Assessment 
Management Agency Act and they’re confined to refining the 
assessment appeal process. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. You’re 
enlarging the requirements for comparability between properties 
which may lie in differing municipalities but are in the same 
school division. Can you give us some idea of how this will 
affect assessments throughout the province? And how many 
property owners will be affected positively by these changes? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, it will likely affect a 
large number of municipalities actually that fall within rural 
school divisions which most municipalities in the province do, 
except for the large urbans, and any municipality that’s whose 
boundaries are not coterminous with a school division. A very 
good example would be your example of the oceanfront 
property at Saltcoats wherein it would be possible — it would 
be mandatory, in fact, under this legislation, that comparisons 
could be made with the assessments in that community and the 
assessments with any other community within that same school 
division. So in that respect, our intent is to provide an 
improvement and more equity. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I’m sure that 
will be an improvement from the concerns I’ve had brought to 
me by a number of taxpayers out there, that they feel that there 
should be some comparison made. 
 
Well some of the changes that are contained in this Act will 
take effect immediately. This change will not take place until 
2001. Was there no practical way this change could have been 
implemented quicker? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, this change will have a 
fairly substantial impact on the way SAMA does their 
assessments. So we had to provide time for that to be 
accomplished. So it wouldn’t be practical to make it effective as 
of the day the legislation is proclaimed because there will be 
physical work that needs to be done to accomplish this. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Madam 
Minister, and to your officials, welcome. The Bill that we’re 
dealing with, we see that there was concerns raised by 
appellants over the last two years. Do you have any figures on 
how many appeals have been launched since the 1997 
reassessment and comparable figures for the two previous years 
to reassessment? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t have the 
figures with me, but it seems to me that it was . . . generally 
speaking the number of appeals was much less than we 
expected. We had made some allowances in the budget of the 
Municipal Board, for example, anticipating that there would be 
a larger number of appeals. 
 
In fact we anticipated a larger number of appeals in 1997, and 
when they didn’t materialize we then thought there might be 

more in 1998 because people were getting more accustomed to 
the system and that they might come forward in 1998. 
 
But that didn’t materialize either. And I was told by SAMA at 
one point — I think this would apply for the year 1997 —that 
the number of appeals were only approximately between 2 and 
3 per cent of the total number of appeals in the province . . . or 
total number of assessments in the province, that only between 
2 and 3 per cent were appealed. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Can you give us 
an idea of what you had actually expected then? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, it couldn’t have 
possibly been anything more than an educated guess after 32 
years. But we just . . . we didn’t have any particular numbers in 
mind. But certainly I think we would have anticipated that 
based on a catch-up of 32 years, that it might be something 
more than 2 or 3 per cent. So we were relieved when it was not. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Minister. You’d indicated 
that in your budgetary process that you had reserved funding for 
the appeal system, and you hadn’t used it. So was that money 
then allocated to a different part of the budget, or is it still there 
waiting in case there is a large number of appeals this year? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — I think it was in 1997 where we made 
a slight increase in the Municipal Board budget. We left that 
amount in for the current year that we’re in — or no, we’re not 
in it any more — that we were in until March 31, the last fiscal 
year. Because we anticipated that as people got more 
accustomed to the system that the appeals might materialize in 
1998. That didn’t happen either. 
 
Now this year I think we’re at a stand-pat amount. The status 
quo is proposed for this year as last year because there have 
been some salary increases and an inflationary increase. It 
wasn’t a large amount but whatever it was, it wasn’t needed for 
a flood of appeals. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. All that 
talk about oceanfront property had an effect on me, Madam 
Minister — I’m back. 
 
Madam Minister, I was just wondering for my own curiosity, 
where did most of the appeals come from — private 
homeowners, or businesses, or industrial properties? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — I wouldn’t have that information at 
hand. Perhaps when we get to the — you might bear this in 
mind — when we get to the estimates on the Saskatchewan 
Assessment Management Agency on the budgetary side, they 
may have . . . they will have the answers to that. But I think 
there was certainly a good cross-section. 
 
But one of the areas that we felt needed improvement and that 
we are providing for in the — we’re now back to The 
Assessment Management Agency Act — but we’re providing 
for appellants such as oil companies, railroads, grain 
companies, people that have a large number of properties 
scattered throughout the province, to go with a minimum 
assessment to go directly to the Saskatchewan Municipal Board 
and not have to launch a separate appeal in every municipality. 



April 15, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 595 

It might amount to hundreds of appeals in some cases where the 
appellant would actually have to have a representative 
physically present and so on. So that’s another streamlining that 
we’ve done. 
 
(1530) 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. You touched 
on the railroads there for a minute and I’m wondering — I 
know their assessment had climbed dramatically — did you get 
appeals on behalf of the railroads for those properties that they 
own? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, I’m not conversant 
with the details of the appeals but I certainly do know that there 
were appeals. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Would you 
agree that even with the changes that we’re making here the 
average person — and I think we’re talking about making it 
easier for the average person out there to go through the appeals 
process — would you agree that, even with these changes, the 
average person is still at a rather severe disadvantage when it 
comes to appeals against SAMA? 
 
Is your department considering any further changes to level the 
playing field more for the appellants fighting SAMA decisions? 
Is there any changes other than what we see here coming later 
on or are these all the changes that there will be? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, we’re certainly open to 
any suggestions that the members opposite or any members of 
the public who are concerned would wish to suggest to us. But I 
do believe that it’s largely a matter of perception. I know that I 
probably wouldn’t be standing in this House today if I didn’t 
start out my career as an appellant at boards of revision fighting 
about my taxes. 
 
And I know it was a very daunting experience the first time to 
come in and the local board of revision consisted of 12 
councillors, you know, all lined up in a row and there I was 
with my assessment and a couple of my neighbours, you know, 
and so on. But by the time they rejected my appeal and I 
appealed it to the Saskatchewan Municipal Board, I began to 
enjoy it after a while. I didn’t always win but I learnt a great 
deal. 
 
And it can be daunting but the other interesting thing is that 
someone else, another party, can appeal on your behalf. And I 
know even . . . You may have done this. I have even done this 
as a councillor, where I saw an assessment, a property that 
belonged to somebody, for instance, that was elderly or 
handicapped in some way or likely wouldn’t carry forward and 
appeal on their own behalf. I could do that. So there are ways 
and there are ways to make it less intimidating. 
 
And then as I mentioned to you the workshop approach is . . . 
we found it to be very productive in the municipality that I was 
on the council of. And it was a very non-threatening, 
user-friendly atmosphere — you know, send an invitation out 
with the assessment notice, give the hours that people will be 
available, and we always had an assessor there. Some members 
of the council would be there; some members of the 

administration; some members of the — at that time it wouldn’t 
have been SAMA yet — but the assessors, would be sitting in 
to answer people’s questions and have coffee and it was . . . 
And we tried to make it easier. 
 
And then if people, having got the information, decided that 
they did want to proceed with the appeal, we’d have our little 
worksheet, what the steps were, what the deadlines are, to assist 
them. We never tried to encourage individual ratepayers, you 
know, private or corporate from making appeals. And we tried 
to make it as user-friendly as possible. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I find it 
interesting that you had said that it’s kind of odd how we end up 
here, some of us, because of maybe for some reasons that we’ve 
been wronged, you were talking about assessments or the 
amount of your taxes. And that’s actually the same reason I 
ended up here but I felt that I was being wronged by your 
government. So it’s very similar. 
 
Madam Minister, you clarified how appellants must serve 
notices of appeals. One thing that hasn’t been addressed is the 
electronic delivery of these notices. Do you think there is 
something that could have been addressed at this time and how 
long do you see before electronic delivery of such notices could 
be implemented? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, that method of 
communicating was considered during the drafting phase of the 
Bill. But there are some concerns yet to be resolved with this 
practice, including the problem of confirming who has actually 
filed a notice, the reliability of electronic filing, and the overall 
need for original documents and signatures to be filed prior to 
the deadline. And if the member opposite has ever surfed the 
Internet and found some of the strange things that people can 
inject into the electronic process, I think we would certainly be 
amenable, once we would be satisfied that electronic delivery 
maintains the total confidentiality and integrity that is required, 
to add that to the legislation. But those are the reasons it wasn’t 
included in this phase. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, you’re disallowing school board members and 
municipal councillors from sitting on local or district boards of 
revision. Can you give me an idea of how common this was? 
Was there lots of them sitting on these boards? And I can 
certainly see how a perception of bias could arise from that 
situation. Was that a real common practice across the province? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, school board members 
and council members sitting on or acting as boards of revision 
was a very common practice. And in my recollection, our whole 
. . . in all the neighbouring municipalities in our area, the 
council itself sat as the board of revision. And so I think in the 
places where, as I mentioned before, these other methods have 
been tried, it’s proven to be a very positive experience. 
 
And I didn’t want to let you get away with something, but my 
colleague across the floor when he said that some of us get 
involved in . . . you know, end up in this House for different 
reasons. And he mentioned his reason, and I mentioned my 
experience on the board of revision. But also as a reeve I was 
getting sick and tired of getting downloaded on by the 



596 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1999 

provincial government, and I was going to get elected and 
change all that, hey? 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. It doesn’t 
work quite that easy, does it? 
 
Madam Minister . . . and our RM I know did the same. We all 
sat as the local board of revision. Now if I understand what 
you’re doing here, it will be all completely independent people 
that will be sitting on here, and I would presume being 
reimbursed by the local municipality — is that the way that will 
work — for the time they sit on this board. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, yes. To my knowledge 
the ones that have been set up now that consist of other than 
councils, is that there’s a board empanelled that’s paid per 
diems for the days they sit, and then there’s usually a permanent 
professional secretariat to the board that takes the notes, writes 
the reports, and so on. And they’re paid either by the 
municipality that engages them, or by the groups of 
municipalities that engage them on a pro rata basis for the time 
they spend acting on behalf of each municipality. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, you’re streamlining the appeal process — and we’ve 
touched on this a bit before — for more complex and industrial 
commercial cases because you say that quite often the expertise 
just does not exist at the local level to deal with these cases. 
 
What is currently done with these matters which currently do 
have to go through the initial stages without this expertise in 
place? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, I guess the answer 
really is that they do the best they can. Part of the problem that 
arises with that is that . . . And I certainly wouldn’t say that the 
rural council I was a part of was really, you know, that 
sophisticated either, especially in some of the complex appeals. 
Like we had chemical plants, huge fertilizer manufacturers, you 
know those kind of things; we didn’t have the expertise. 
 
So the danger is that when the expertise doesn’t reside at the 
local level, that it just sort of gets denied so that the whole 
process can move up to the municipal board, putting an undue 
load on them. 
 
So the more expertise there is at the local level to resolve things 
there, the smoother the whole system runs and the less onus 
moves up to the municipal board at the provincial level. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. And I hope 
I’m understanding what we’re doing here, but once again 
there’s going to be quite a bit of discretion used to decide which 
of these types of cases will go straight to appeal. Will there be 
solid guidelines set down so there’s consistency in these 
judgments? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, that’s a very good 
question. This is one of the issues that, I’m sure to the delight of 
the member opposite, will likely be dealt with in regulation 
because we’re still discussing what the parameters will be. We 
have, certainly, agreement on the principle but not how it 
should be determined. So we’ve been talking about an 

assessment amount, like for instance anything over — one 
figure that’s been thrown around — is anything over $5 million 
could be considered of a level that could go straight to the 
municipal board. 
 
Whether there should be other parameters that should be 
considered in making that determination hasn’t been completely 
agreed upon or decided upon yet, which is why we want to 
leave it and put it in regulations. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, I’m a little unclear about the provisions surrounding 
section 279.3. Can you give us just a little further explanation 
about what is being done here? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, this is a little bit 
complicated. 
 
And in the amendments that were made in 1996, there was a 
provision where the taxing authorities, the school board usually, 
would set the levy or the mill rate necessary to raise the taxes 
on their behalf. And they would inform the municipality, or 
municipalities in the case of a rural school division, of what that 
was. And it permitted the application of mill rate factors to the 
mill rates set by other taxing authorities. And it was a little bit 
too loose. 
 
So we had to make sure that once the mill rate factors are 
applied, that the school division, in the course of those 
adjustments, wouldn’t lose money that they were entitled to or 
gain money. And so this is technical, but it’s meant to clarify 
that provision. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Okay, thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, decisions about whether or not to overlook procedural 
errors made by the appellants will be made, I understand, on a 
case-to-case basis at the sole discretion of the Municipal Board. 
Is my understanding right if that’s what we’re doing? 
 
Madam Minister, then . . . and I’d agree with this, because I 
realize appellants in most cases aren’t familiar with how the 
procedure works and it’s brand new to them in many cases; 
they’ve never done it before. But do you have a concern that 
there may be inconsistencies with these decisions and therefore 
a perception of unfairness by some appellants may be out there. 
Some are . . . you know, I guess mistakes are being overlooked 
in some cases and maybe in some cases they aren’t overlooked. 
 
(1545) 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, I think that there are 
not that many of these instances. But where they are, sometimes 
we are placed, we and others, were placed in a really 
embarrassing position. 
 
I think you might recall one case in Regina that received some 
publicity where close to the end of the appeal period there was a 
document that had a wrong date on it which prevented the 
appellant from going forward with their appeal even though, 
you know, everything else was in place. And actually the 
person was eventually successful in the appeal, reduced the 
amount of taxes, but could not obtain a reduction for that year 
because of this technicality. 



April 15, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 597 

And those are the kind of things that we will trust the discretion 
of the Saskatchewan Municipal Board to decide what is 
substantive. But this is designed to make sure that instances like 
that, that inconvenience to ratepayers and embarrassment to 
municipalities just don’t happen. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I believe that 
is one of the most common sense solutions that we’ve seen 
come into legislation. And you may well know that I often think 
that common sense isn’t used that often when it comes to 
government, and for that matter, the bureaucracy. 
 
Mr. Deputy Chair, I would like to report progress at this time on 
this Bill. 
 

Bill No. 13 — The Rural Municipality 
Amendment Act, 1999 

 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Madam Minister, I would be remiss if I 
didn’t ask this question. I’d asked most of the questions because 
the Bills are so similar. But I think I would be remiss on behalf 
of farmers out there — and maybe I just missed it in this Bill 
and I hope I did — but is there anything in this legislation to 
deal with the inequities of those who own farmland and feel that 
the current system is unfair to do with education tax? Did I just 
happen to miss anything in this Bill where we may have 
removed part of that? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, how astute of the 
member opposite to observe. I think that he’s probably looking 
in the wrong Bill for this. Perhaps when the Minister of 
Education comes forward with Bills there may be some 
reference to that situation. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — I thank you, Madam Minister. I just thought 
maybe somewhere that the 60/40 that used to be in the 
government’s favour is reversed now and the 60 per cent is in 
the municipalities to fund. I thought maybe I’d missed 
something there in the numbers and maybe there was something 
being addressed. 
 
Mr. Deputy Chair, I would at this time then report progress on 
this Bill. 
 

Bill No. 12 — The Northern Municipalities 
Amendment Act, 1999 

 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I just have 
very few questions on this Bill, Madam Minister, because it is 
very similar. But because northern municipalities are somewhat 
unique, I do have a few questions. 
 
In your second reading speech, you indicated there are some 
differences in the Bill than in the other two municipal Acts. 
Perhaps you could just list the differences that don’t exactly 
come to the forefront immediately? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, there are really only 
two and they both relate to, I guess, the uniqueness of the 

North. But they both also relate to the appeal process. 
 
One provision is to make the service on a board of revision for a 
property tax appeal or assessment appeal less onerous. And the 
other one relates to the reassessment of a property and it brings 
the rules for northern property right in line with the rules that 
apply in the South. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — I guess that, Madam Minister, probably 
answers my next question. I was going to ask you: are appeals 
in the North dealt with the same as they are in the South. 
 
Then I guess my question would be: did we find in the last 
reassessment, that in northern Saskatchewan, did we have the 
same number of appeals per population as we would in the 
South? Or was there far less? I guess maybe in the North I 
would feel that there’s probably less appeals. What did we find 
up there? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, I respectfully suggest 
that we could get a more appropriate answer to the frequency 
and number of appeals when we’re considering the budget of 
the Saskatchewan Municipal Board in committee. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. And I’d just 
like to take the opportunity at this time to thank your officials 
this afternoon in dealing with these Bills. And, Mr. Deputy 
Chair, I’d like to report progress on this Bill at this time. 
 
The committee reported progress on Bill No. 8, Bill No. 14, Bill 
No. 13, and Bill No. 12. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Municipal Affairs, Culture and Housing 

Vote 24 
 
The Chair: — I would ask the minister to please introduce her 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. On my left 
is the acting deputy minister of Municipal Affairs, Culture and 
Housing, Brij Mathur. Behind me is Larry Chaykowski, I’m not 
sure of his exact title — executive director — and anyway he 
writes the cheques and looks after the money, and a fine job he 
does too. On my right is Peter Hoffmann, who is the president 
of the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation, and John Edwards, 
who was previously introduced. 
 
Subvote (MG01) 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Welcome 
again, Madam Minister, and to your officials. It’s nice to see 
everyone here waiting with bated breath to see what questions 
we can come up with. Madam Minister, before we get into 
some of the direct questions about the budget, we have a 
number of specific cases we’d like to talk about and ask for 
your help with or some clarifications of some problems. 
 
The first one is in my area and it is a gentleman who talks about 
his own reassessment problem that he’s having difficulty 
dealing with. He has 90 acres of land and his house on the 



598 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1999 

outskirts of town and his land is being classified as being within 
town limits, so he has to hire an assessment . . . the assessment 
is in taxes farmland. With the new assessment he now pays over 
$1,100 in taxes on his property. He has appealed the assessment 
through SAMA unsuccessfully and he tried to get the land 
switched to the RM unsuccessfully. 
 
He says the town says the assessment is SAMA’s doing and 
SAMA says it’s the town’s. And he’s wanting to know where 
he can go from . . . this problem, if he can actually get some 
help and which direction he can head to having his case looked 
at again. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, I’m not sure from your 
question whether this landowner has taken the appeal to the 
provincial level. I mean if he hasn’t received satisfaction at the 
local level, if his appeal has been denied, whether he has 
exhausted the opportunities for appeal, because, first of all, 
before there’s any other intervention he should do that. 
 
And if there’s any other information or assistance that he needs 
he could write a letter to my office or to the municipal advisory 
branch of the department to see if there’s any advice or 
information that could be provided to him. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Minister, I will get some 
further information and perhaps later today or the next time you 
come in we can discuss it if he hasn’t exhausted all the . . . if he 
has exhausted all his appeal procedures. 
 
We also have a specific issue that has been brought to your 
attention by the village of Marquis. It’s an issue that the village 
council has asked about quite a while ago and they want to . . . 
they want us to bring it up. 
 
Without judging the case, we’re just simply going to ask you to 
clarify some of the rules and procedures surrounding the 
decision. 
 
First of all, as you aware, to a great extent the taxation issue that 
has arisen in the village of Marquis and the owner of some new 
agricultural buildings in that community. I’m aware that the 
village council wrote to you about this matter on March 8. Has 
your . . . (inaudible) . . . responded to the council of Marquis 
about their concerns? 
 
(1600) 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite. I do recall this letter, and I think if a reply hasn’t gone 
out it’s certainly in the process of being prepared. But I’d like to 
reserve comments on the letter until I have a chance to review 
the details because I just had it handed to me a few minutes ago. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, I can appreciate that. And 
I’m just wondering if we can maybe get to some — not being 
specific then — just surrounding some of the details with this 
and without asking you to make a judgment. 
 
Just to give you some background there. The problem has to do 
with farm buildings located within the urban boundaries of 
Marquis. And I believe this situation shows a flaw in the Act. I 
don’t think anyone is proposing that farm buildings should be 

opened up for assessment, and certainly I don’t . . . we don’t 
want that either. 
 
I think the experience in Marquis shows some inequalities in 
law on how this rule applies. The problem the Marquis council 
is having is with the interpretation of the urban 
municipalities Act, more specifically section 239.1(4)(d). I’m 
sure you have memorized the Act and I will refresh your 
memory. 
 
I believe that this section says in part that an urban council may 
enter into a fixed assessment agreement with the owner of 
agricultural land in the urban municipality. 
 
Madam Minister, when we read the word “may” we believe it 
means the council has the option of entering into such an 
agreement, but it means they don’t have to do it. And we’re 
wondering if that is your interpretation of it. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, yes, where the word 
“may” is used, I would put the same interpretation on it that 
you’ve just described. 
 
And I’m not sure about this particular case. There is another set 
of situations that has arisen resulting from the methodology 
used by SAMA, where they have deemed parcels of farmland, 
or land which is used solely for agriculture, to be within a 
certain area. For instance, a certain radius of an urban centre is 
deemed to be country residential rather than agriculture. And 
there’s some . . . are some appeals in process on that issue as 
well. 
 
But as far as I’m aware, no determinations have been made yet 
by the Saskatchewan Municipal Board on that. But I’m aware 
that there are some appeals of that nature moving from local 
boards of revision to the Municipal Board, which will be dealt 
with in due course. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Then I’m going 
to ask for your indulgence and I’m going to ask you a number 
of questions that the council has asked us to ask you. And if 
there’s specifics that you can’t talk about at this time, we could 
relay that information to them. 
 
I think you remember that the matter began last September 
when the council received a request under section 239 from a 
ratepayer in the community to exempt the assessment of all 
farm buildings located on that parcel of land. The village 
council denied this request, thinking it had the right to decide 
yes or no. And we’re wondering, did they have this right, and 
could you explain your understanding of this provision? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, with the indulgence of 
the member, I would really prefer, because I do have a reply in 
progress to this letter — it’s under consideration — and I want 
to make sure that before I say anything on the record here, that I 
have the opportunity to review it. 
 
I remember . . . I recall getting the letter. I’ve read it. And I just 
want to make sure that what I say here will be in keeping with 
the response that may already have been mailed. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. Welcome, Madam Minister, and 



April 15, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 599 

to your officials. I have a number of questions that essentially 
come out of my constituency. One is one that’s been ongoing 
for a long time, and that’s the issue of libraries when it came to 
the RM of Rosthern, the town of Rosthern, and the town of 
Hague. And I guess the question is where this is going and why 
it’s become such a convoluted sort of a thing. 
 
I believe the last thing that happened was that there was an . . . 
essentially it was supposed to go to some sort of a court 
situation. And for some bizarre situation, instead of being able 
to go together on that situation, even though they’re all working 
together on that library thing, they were told each had to go 
ahead and go through their process separately. And I guess my 
one question is why should they have to go through the process 
separately, why couldn’t they go through that as a group 
because that’s . . . basically their concern is as a group. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, I think the most that I 
can say about this issue which was brought to my personal 
attention in, I believe 1997, and it had been going on for some 
time before I became aware of it. And then I did meet in 
Saskatoon with representatives of the Rosthern RM, town of 
Rosthern, with Hague. And we were operating then under the 
new library legislation that had just been proclaimed that year 
which attempted to set out a dispute-settling mechanism. 
 
And I regret that this has gone on so long. I’m aware that it is 
inconveniencing those municipalities. I’m aware that there’s 
friction between the two regional libraries that are involved. I 
guess the most I could say is that we’re using a process that 
nobody was accustomed to in the new legislation. We detected 
some flaws in it that we intend to correct. And the whole thing 
could be described as a comedy of errors except it’s not funny 
where it’s affecting those municipalities and those regional 
libraries. 
 
And I think recently there was a document that was technically 
out of place because of a date or something on it. So we are 
trying to work with these people and work this out. They’re in 
the process of setting up an arbitration that we hope will resolve 
the issue fairly shortly. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I agree very 
much with the fact that there were a lot of errors there, and 
definitely in the view of the people there, they didn’t find much 
comedy in it. And as you mention presently there was an 
arbitrator was supposed to be set up to take care of the issue. 
The arbitrator then finds that they’re only dealing with one of 
those jurisdictions instead of all three and so the thing just 
becomes more convoluted. 
 
And you said, it has been a year and a half that this has been in 
the process and it would have been a whole lot simpler if the 
communities would just have been allowed to make the 
decision that they wanted to make and things would be rolling 
on just fine at this particular point. 
 
One further question on that — without going into the details of 
it itself — is without a doubt there’s a lot of legal costs being 
incurred by the municipal bodies with regards to this concern 
and because of all the errors that have taken place, they should 
not be held responsible for those particular costs. Is your 
organization going to be covering those or do they have to 

cover the costs that have been incurred because of all those 
errors that have taken place and seem to continue to take place? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, the answer to the 
member’s question is that all costs of any action need to be 
covered by the respective municipalities or libraries that are 
party to the action. 
 
But I do want to take issue with what I would characterize as 
the member’s oversimplification of just letting municipalities 
do what they want and everything will be fine because in a 
regional library setting — as the member knows — there are a 
number of member municipalities. In that particular case, I’m 
not sure how many but there would be . . . This move from one 
regional library to another of a number of municipalities . . . or 
a group of municipalities would affect the contributions, the 
levies for example to the regional library in both regional 
libraries and affect every municipality that’s covered by those 
two regional libraries — probably about a fifth or a sixth of the 
province at least. 
 
So there has to be a mechanism, when a group of municipalities 
leaves one regional library and joins another, to make up for the 
shortfall in revenue to the library they’ve left and make the 
adjustments in the one they’re moving to. So it is not a simple 
matter and it’s not a matter that affects only those 
municipalities that want to make a move. 
 
It also affects all the other partners. And that’s the reason for 
the notice having to be given to all of the other municipalities 
that are members. And it may seem cumbersome but it has an 
effect on those municipalities and they have a right to know 
what’s being contemplated and be able to calculate what the 
effect might be on them. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Yes, Madam Minister, truly it is 
complicated and it’s worse than that. It’s become very 
convoluted because these municipalities have throughout the 
time tried to follow the directions as they’re set out by your 
department to go ahead and enact this change and it seems that 
at every step that they take there’s some sort of a roadblock put 
in their way. And as you said, those are errors but they’re errors 
that essentially come from your department. I think they have 
basically operated in this area without making any particular 
mistakes. 
 
The other concern that comes on the same issue, is that if some 
of the concerns that these particular municipalities had with the 
particular library they’re with had been addressed, I don’t think 
we would have come to this particular place. But there seems to 
be a certain amount of protectionism that’s been going on with 
regards to that particular library that has created those problems. 
 
But moving on to another issue, and this one is sort of a general 
nature but comes out of what the community of Osler has been 
trying to do for the last probably year or so, and that is save 
their elevator. And I believe they’ve contacted you, Madam 
Minister, to see if there was any aid available, and if I’m right, 
there wasn’t any. 
 
But I guess the question I have, and you may want to answer 
that one specifically, but of a more general nature, is that at 
present we have in Saskatchewan many elevators. They’re 



600 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1999 

coming down at a fairly rapid rate. And I think the concern is 
that if we don’t somewhere stand back and say, I think we need 
to save a few of these for posterity, we’ll all of a sudden find 
ourselves with one or two elevators in an obscure place of the 
province that no one travels, are no really . . . any reasonable 
kind of roads to. And so then how do we take this bit of history 
and show it to other people of other provinces and other 
countries when they come to visit Saskatchewan. 
 
And so to that end I think we need to look at some of the 
elevators located on let’s say No. 1, the Yellowhead, possibly 
11 and 12, and some of those north-south highways to make 
sure that we have a number of those things, those elevators, 
saved for posterity. Because once they’re gone, no one’s going 
to be rebuilding those just to have us look at those. 
 
And I’m wondering if your department has done any 
soul-searching into that area and come up with some plan or 
concept to say that I think yes, we do need to save some 
elevators and this is where we would like to go. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, I know the member 
opposite will be very pleased with the answer to this question 
he has just raised, in that in our heritage branch we initiated 
some months ago a study of the elevators in Saskatchewan. And 
I do have to say that we’ve got extremely good co-operation 
from all of the elevator companies in giving people access to 
their archives. 
 
And the objective, I think . . . I just wrote a letter to the town of 
Osler just within the last couple of days in response to their 
request in outlining this . . . What we’re doing is identifying not 
only the different locations of elevators but the history of them; 
like certain elevator companies used a certain kind of 
construction that’s unique. I think if you wanted to save 
elevators you would want to make sure that none were 
destroyed that, for instance, where maybe the only quality 
example of a certain kind of architecture in the province that 
remains. I mean that one you would want because it’s the only 
example. And there have been some successes, as the member 
from Rosthern would know. There is one elevator that’s been 
saved as a working model in the town of Hepburn, that’s in his 
constituency. 
 
(1615) 
 
Of course we don’t have the money. But I think that once we 
get this study complete, and we’re going at it with all possible 
haste so that we’ve got some benchmarks, so that people can 
make decisions on what sort of, and how many, elevators 
should be saved. I think we should be able to enlist . . . or the 
Heritage Foundation will be able to enlist the aid of perhaps 
some elevator companies and some communities of course that 
have particular interest in this, to save some representative 
examples of that really important architecture in the history of 
our province. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Madam 
Minister, I want to go into a different area now dealing with 
actually RMs and towns and that end of it, but mostly to start 
with from the rural municipal councils’ perspective. At SARM 
convention there was a lobby on to get infrastructure money 
back into the system for municipalities. And I just wonder, 

maybe my first question would be, is there anything in the 
offering that you can see from the federal government in 
helping us here in Saskatchewan get some money into an 
infrastructure program that we so badly need? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I’m sad to 
answer that question. I guess you know we never give up hope 
and we certainly have made representations for a renewal for a 
third stage at least of the federal-provincial infrastructure 
program of which there were two phases. Because it was set up 
in a very efficient way, it required very little administration and 
the municipal organizations had input. And before we let the 
program run out and collapsed that small group of people who 
are accustomed to dealing with it and turn them to other duties, 
we did try to get a renewal but we were unsuccessful so far. 
 
But with the modest amount, but the $10 million for municipal 
infrastructure that we were able to add to the budget this year, 
we hope to keep that process essentially intact so that if we ever 
can persuade the federal government to renew their 
contributions again that there won’t be any delays because we’ll 
have, you know, the whole administrative and review structure 
for applications still in place. 
 
So that’s one of the reasons that we wanted to establish that. So 
there would be a continuing contribution to infrastructure with 
or without the federal government, and hopefully with it. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. Because 
I sympathize with the situation you’re in. And I’m very 
frustrated, and I’m sure you must be, your government must be, 
with our federal government for nothing more than really 
another avenue of downloading on their behalf. 
 
When you see what the federal government puts into, say, for 
an example, Atlantic Canada, and I’m sure you’re well aware of 
this Madam Minister, but I believe over that seven year period I 
believe it was going on — we’re maybe halfway through that 
— their projected money that they were putting into the 
highway systems alone, and I believe it was Newfoundland and 
I could be corrected, but I know there was four 
hundred-and-some million for that province. Prince Edward 
Island, not even counting the bridge, there was over $100 
million or more put into there. 
 
Each Atlantic province had X number of dollars put in there 
that totally shocked me compared to what I saw coming into the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And you may find this odd coming from me, Madam Minister, 
who . . . (inaudible) . . . very critical of the money that your 
government has put into our road system. But I can sympathize 
with what’s happening because of what the federal government 
is not doing. 
 
And I’m very disappointed, as I am sure you are, with our one 
MP (Member of Parliament) that we have in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Goodale. When it comes to things like the farm aid that we’ve 
saw where Mr. Goodale seems to go in a little capsule that’s 
covered over and we don’t hear from him. And when it comes 
to our road system and our infrastructure money, Mr. Goodale 
disappears once again and we don’t see him. 
 



April 15, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 601 

And it’s really disappointing to me as an opposition member. It 
must be even more to you as a minister of an area where you 
definitely need federal dollars to come in and help us out. 
 
The federal government seems to be right there when it comes 
time to charge GST (goods and services tax) or register our 
firearms or whatever it is to take money out of this province. 
They’re very, very slow to be returning some of that money into 
an area such as infrastructure that we need so badly to survive 
out here. I think they treat us like second-rate citizens. 
 
And maybe I would get you to comment on that, Madam 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Well, Mr. Chair, you know there are 
some really positive examples about what can happen when 
levels of government work together. And we’ve got every 
library connected and the municipalities all on the Internet, all 
on the information highway. Those are both programs that were 
brought about as a result of municipal, provincial, and federal 
government co-operation. Same with the very positive results of 
the Canada/Saskatchewan infrastructure works projects that are 
just now winding down because the federal government hasn’t 
renewed it. 
 
Just last Friday, I was in Moose Jaw where the federal Heritage 
Department — and the minister was there — made a significant 
contribution to the completion of the restoration of the 
Claybank Brick Plant near Moose Jaw, which has real historic 
and heritage significance. And this was brought about as a 
result of the co-operation of the federal government, the 
provincial government, the Heritage Foundation, the local 
volunteers in the community that have done a great deal of 
work and continue to. 
 
And so those are the good examples, and we would like to think 
that we would be able to build on those. But instead, on the 
infrastructure particularly, we’ve had the CAIP 
(Canada/Saskatchewan Agri-Infrastructure Program) 
contribution, which is now winding down. And I guess . . . I’m 
sure the Ministers of Highways and Agriculture are making 
representations to try to renew that. 
 
But when the federal government on one hand takes $320 
million a year plus out of the Saskatchewan economy through 
the changes in the Crow, then allows accelerated deregulation 
and abandonment of rail traffic, which puts more stress on our 
road system . . . It is a shame that we’re the only industrialized 
country in the world that doesn’t have a national transportation 
program that’s even-handed across the country. 
 
So I hope in the future . . . and we continue to make those 
representations. And I’m sure that the municipalities of the 
province do that as well through the Federation of Canadian 
Municipalities at the federal level, trying to support the notion 
that with co-operation between the two or three levels of 
government, that we can have positive things happen. And I 
know that the matter is raised at the FCM (Federation of 
Canadian Municipalities) often, that we are the only 
industrialized country in the world without reliable, stable, 
continuing federal contributions to the transportation system, 
which especially in a trading country like ours is so vital. 
 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Madam Minister, we definitely agree on 
that issue, and I would hope that the federal ministers would 
take heed to things like debate that we’re having today in 
Saskatchewan and just for once stand up for Saskatchewan and 
maybe give us a little of our share which should be coming out 
here. 
 
Madam Minister, I believe you’re in the process of coming out 
with a new road classification system and I have only had 
partial information on this. I believe it’s road categorized, 
maybe one to five, etc. Could you maybe just give me a 
breakdown of what you see coming in road reclassification and 
the purpose of that reclassification? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I think this 
might be more appropriately answered by the Minister of 
Highways, but I wouldn’t want to comment on it right now 
because I think we’re very close to reaching an agreement with 
SARM and we’re having those discussions on two levels: one is 
the road reclassification system and the other is the distribution 
formula for the existing revenue sharing and the infrastructure 
— their rural municipality’s share of the $10 million 
infrastructure money. 
 
So I think we’re agreed on all the points but we haven’t 
produced the last paper yet if you like, and so I’d like to reserve 
my comments until I’m sure that what I’m saying represents the 
full agreement of SARM because we have one more short 
negotiation with them to come. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Okay, then I 
understand that you can’t give me the details because it’s not 
fully addressed. But I guess then my question would be: what 
was the purpose of reclassification? What were you hoping to 
do or was this asked for by SARM or where did it originate 
from and where do you hope it will lead us to in the future for 
rural Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I think that this 
is part of a much larger issue that includes the establishment of 
the area transportation councils and the whole notion that with 
scarce resources, and in the light of zero or very small 
contributions from the federal government, that we all would 
have to work together within the province to try to priorize how 
to get the best value out of the limited dollars that we have. 
 
And I think in the past perhaps the method of funding that we 
used by saying if you, the municipality, will build a certain 
standard of road we will pay X per cent, with the notion being 
that the higher the classification of road the more percentage we 
picked up. 
 
I don’t know whether some roads that were built might not have 
been built because they had to be in order to access the money. 
We have changed the approach that we take by making more of 
the money unconditional so that municipalities have more 
flexibility because they may very well want to use the money to 
gravel or maintain or rebuild the roads that they have rather 
than spending it on new construction in many cases. 
 
So we’re trying to give them more flexibility. 
 
But I think . . . In short, that was the . . . the notion of road 



602 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1999 

reclassification was to try and help everybody that’s involved in 
the process in priorizing where the money would go that was 
available. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. And you 
talked about making more money unconditional. And I guess 
right off the top I would agree with that from being a past reeve, 
although I do have concerns about where we’re heading with 
our road system out there in the continuity or the qualities of the 
roads we’re building out there. And I know engineering is one 
of our biggest costs out there and I know this would be one way 
of getting out from under some of that. 
 
But I do have concerns with some of the quality of roads that I 
see being built out there. Whether it’s a three-to-one slope on 
the side of the roads or whatever it is, I don’t think the quality 
on our secondary roads is going to be quite as good as it was 
before, just for the fact that we’re really leaving a lot more up to 
the municipalities themselves. 
 
Now I know most municipalities would say, well what are you 
talking about; we’re asking for this. But I really have some 
concerns there. 
 
Madam Minister, I’d like to just talk about — and I’ve had calls 
from RMs and we see it now with the problems in agriculture 
— but tax arrears. And I see in my home RM today, I checked 
with them, and in the short period of time that I’ve been elected 
to this House, and our tax arrears in our RM were high before, 
but the arrears I believe when I left were 21 per cent. Right now 
at the present time, Madam Minister, they’re up to 28 per cent. 
 
And I believe in many areas of the province we’re seeing the 
same trend going and happening. And I think there’s a big 
problem coming down the road with rural municipalities. 
 
Another thing I think that will add to this is when we see our 
school tax come into that, Madam Minister. I believe your 
government this year put in — and correct me if I’m wrong — 
about $13 million. But if the information we received from the 
trustees association is right, that would be approximately half of 
what they need to survive this year. 
 
What I see happening out there is the education end of the mill 
rate, the school divisions going up and jacking their mill rate up 
at probably the worst time that this could be happening, when 
we already see our tax arrears climbing in this province, on top 
of the farm problems that are out there now. And seeing this 
year, Madam Minister, where we could have the makings of a 
really poor year. Grain prices — there’s a number of things that 
could come into effect to affect that, Madam Minister. 
 
And I just wonder, has your government sat down and talked 
about the repercussions this could have a year from now or two 
years from now? Have you talked about the education tax, how 
we’re going to help alleviate this problem for municipalities, 
taking into consideration, remembering that your government 
used to fund 60 per cent and the municipalities 40 per cent; now 
it’s a complete reverse of that, Madam Minister. Along with the 
other things that I’ve mentioned before already here, with, I 
know my RM as I mentioned has gone, I don’t know how many 
per cent that is over all, but it’s climbed drastically, the tax 
arrears, and I think we’re seeing that happen in many areas. 

Have you discussed that and are you working on something? 
Are you dealing with this problem in any way? Because I don’t 
think this is one we dare let sneak up on us as we did the farm 
crisis of now by not dealing with it ahead of time. 
 
(1630) 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, I’ll leave the questions 
about education to others. But on the issue of arrears of 
municipal taxes, we don’t have the figures for 1998 yet because 
the municipalities are just in the process of having their 
financial statements audited and so on. But it seems to be just 
like the situation in agriculture is, it’s not uniform across the 
province by any means. There are some parts . . . and we 
haven’t done any formal survey of this at all, but when I’m out 
and around and talking to municipalities or groups of 
municipalities, I’ll ask them about the state of tax arrears. 
 
And some of them will report to me in some parts of the 
province that it’s actually better than it was in the early ’80s 
when interest rates were high and when we definitely had a 
crisis. Others will say that . . . I actually haven’t had very many 
tell me that they’re worse, or certainly not that they’re worse 
than they’ve ever been. In fact I’ve had quite a few remark 
when I just casually ask that they’re not, their arrears are not to 
the proportions that they were in the early ’80s. 
 
And it just depends on the cropping practices, the weather. Like 
if you go to northwestern Saskatchewan where they’ve 
sustained four or five years now of drought, for grain farmers 
it’s a serious problem. And throughout the province there are 
pockets where people have been affected by floods or drought 
or frost or something, you know, where there might be a 
problem. But I haven’t had any indication that there’s an overall 
situation of arrears that is alarming, not to this point. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I guess why 
I’m so concerned about this is maybe my experience on council 
before. But I think sometimes we have to look into the future 
and try and be prepared for that. And the AIDA program . . . 
and I know this is not your specific area, but the calls I get, and 
I’m sure the Minister of Agriculture must also get these calls, is 
that there are an awful lot of problems out there I don’t even 
think the federal government isn’t even seeing in Saskatchewan. 
I think the problem is much greater than anybody is letting on 
here. 
 
And some of these calls are becoming to the point, they’re very 
distressing to hear them coming in where farmers can’t finish 
paying last year’s bills off and are starting into another year and 
are just at the point where . . . Actually they don’t even want to 
talk about putting a crop in this year. And you know you tie that 
into tax arrears. I think something has to give. Something won’t 
get paid for. 
 
And I’m afraid next year . . . You know the old saying, we 
haven’t seen nothing yet? Well I think that’s exactly what’s 
going to happen in agriculture unless grain prices turn around 
quickly and I don’t think we see that. 
 
Madam Minister, when you put $10 million into infrastructure 
money for our municipalities this year, how did you come up 
with seven and a half million urban, two million for rural, and a 



April 15, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 603 

half million for northern? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, when it comes to the 
distribution of the $10 million of incremental infrastructure 
money, it’s divided into pools that are pro rata in proportion to 
the population of the type of municipality. Like if it’s northern 
municipalities, have about 3 per cent of the provincial 
population so that relates to about 500,000 of the 10 million. 
Rural municipalities represent about 20 per cent of the 
provincial population, so they would get 20 per cent of the 10 
million, or 2 million. And then the urban municipalities, it’s 
further broken down into cities representing 52 per cent 
population, where they get 5 million; and towns and villages 
have 25 per cent of the population, so they get, you know, that 
proportion. So that’s what it was done. 
 
So in a sense it isn’t truly per capita. But the size of the pool 
that will be available to be applied for, is related to the 
percentage of population of that type of municipality. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. In a way that 
somewhat concerns me because of what I see happening out in 
rural Saskatchewan and talking about our infrastructure and 
roads in rural Saskatchewan, and as you know, the population is 
dropping at a fairly high rate in rural Saskatchewan. If we 
continue to fund according to population — and I know that’s 
the easiest way to go — but what I can see happening is that 
there will be less money for rural roads; every year we’ll just 
keep dropping out there because our population’s dropped. 
 
But yet the infrastructure that we need out there to move all our 
kinds of products in rural Saskatchewan really doesn’t change 
because the amount of farmlands stay the same — everything, 
all our costs out there stay the same except we’re trying to pay 
that with less people. And if we use our grants out there tied to 
the population, I can see our problems actually increasing 
tenfold and a lot quicker. 
 
Madam Minister, a couple of other points I’d like to make right 
now to do with the rural municipalities. Is amalgamation totally 
off now? And because I’m asking this, Madam Minister, is 
because I see your tenure coming to an end here and we’re 
going to have a new Minister of Municipal Government — 
either ours or yours — whoever is re-elected.  
 
But is amalgamation totally off the books? Is that gone? Is that 
a subject that we don’t need to talk about anymore? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I’m not sure 
whoever wanted to talk about it, but it never was me. 
 
And we actually had provided for — I don’t know if this was 
the second or third year — but we had about a hundred 
thousand dollars budgeted for that we called a transition fund. 
And we have always maintained, and it is our position, that any 
amalgamation or reconfiguration of municipalities should be 
entirely a decision of the local people. And that we never had 
and don’t plan to have, you know, any master plan to do this. 
 
But what we did is, we did have some municipalities express an 
interest and say to us, how would we go about this. And so we 
said, okay, we’ll put in a hundred thousand dollar of a budget 
for what we’ll call a transition fund to assist those 

municipalities that might voluntarily apply. 
 
Like say two municipalities were going together, maybe even a 
village was reverting into an RM, and maybe they were going 
to combine their administrations and they needed a computer 
with more capacity or something. So I think the parameters kind 
of were that each participating municipality could get up to 
$7,500 or 50 per cent of some cost that was identified if they 
wanted to. 
 
But the draw, the applications to that, were very limited. And so 
we have ended it. In the proposed budget, the money’s not there 
any more. There’s no point in allowing for it if people aren’t 
interested in it. 
 
I think that as elevators close in some of the small villages and 
they see an erosion of their tax base spread over, you know, a 
very few remaining maybe elderly residents, there will be some 
interesting challenges there for rural municipalities who may 
want to accept the responsibility for, you know, grading the 
roads, doing the administration of tax, keeping the street lights 
on and so forth. 
 
So I think we have a very sensitive and very responsible people 
in rural Saskatchewan that need to and want to be in charge of 
the design of the kind of community that they want to live in. 
And if they come to us with any ideas of how we could assist 
them we’d certainly be open to that but forced amalgamations 
are not on our agenda. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Glad to hear that, Madam Minister, and 
what you talk about is RMs starting to take over smaller 
communities voluntarily. I’ve had that happen in my 
constituency by the way, where I think it was the RM of Calder 
took over the Village of Wroxton voluntarily and it seems to be 
working fine. And that’s good. 
 
Why I bring this up, Madam Minister, is I found it very 
interesting on the weekend I was digging through some files 
that had been given to me when I ran in the last election, and it 
goes back to 1961 when a former member of the constituency 
of Saltcoats, a Jim Snedker, who happened to be Speaker of the 
House even for part of his tenure in here, but I was reading 
some of his speeches and they went back. It’s funny what 
repeats itself in history because in 1961 a number of the 
speeches he gave in this House were debating the county 
system, and I believe it was your government that was in power 
that time, Madam Minister, so this is what brought that back to 
the forefront. 
 
Madam Minister, the one other thing, and as a reeve of an RM 
that I thought was a very useful tool that we had, and you 
removed I believe possibly two years ago and wound it down, 
was the futures program. 
 
Has there any consideration to be bringing the futures program 
back in because I know it was a tool that in our RM that we 
tried to build as much road as we could. It’s totally taken away 
from us and I felt that was one of the best things we had out 
there. We financed it. We borrowed the money and got our 
grant back later. Is there any consideration to bringing the 
futures program back in? 
 



604 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1999 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, first of all, I would 
warn the hon. member not to get . . . wax too eloquent about 
finding some old speeches from Jim Snedker, because he was a 
Liberal. At least to my recollection — and I’ve been around a 
year or two. 
 
To comment on the futures program. The answer to whether 
we’re contemplating bringing that back is: we are not. It was 
available for quite a number of years and it wasn’t accessed by 
the municipalities. And when their funding started to tighten up 
in the late ’80s, municipalities started to avail themselves of this 
provision to do construction ahead of time and receive their 
grants in future years. 
 
But what that really was, was a deferred payment to 
municipalities. I mean it was money that the province owed to 
municipalities. And in our current fiscal situation didn’t seem 
appropriate, and in their current fiscal situation didn’t seem 
appropriate that we should be owing them money on the one 
hand. 
 
On the other hand it didn’t seem appropriate that municipalities 
should be allowed to borrow unlimited into the future, which is 
interpreted as an addition to the . . . you know, it’s a contingent 
liability on the provincial treasury because we owe that money. 
 
And so what we did in lieu of that was to try and make more of 
the funding unconditional. And also there is the provision that 
municipalities might want to defer a construction project in 
favour of allowing another municipality to use that allocation 
— you know, to put together a bigger project. Well that’s still 
there. 
 
And I share your views about . . . I realize that there is a clear 
and present danger when you give unconditional money, that 
standards could erode. Because as you’re aware, when we had 
conditional money the engineering was done, and upon 
completion of the project it would be inspected and it would 
have to meet a certain standard in order to attract a certain 
percentage of matching funding. 
 
So we recognized that there was a risk, but overall I haven’t 
seen or heard any evidence that municipalities are constructing 
major roads of standards to the point where they would be 
deficient or dangerous. If we became aware of that, we would 
have to review the program no doubt. But that’s what we have 
done in lieu of the futures. And hopefully in the future as the 
economy improves and our ability to fund infrastructure in the 
province, or if we get the federal government on board ever to 
make a contribution, we’ll be able to maintain the quality of our 
road network. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, when you talked about Mr. Snedker being a Liberal, 
how quick we forget. I was one. 
 
Madam Minister, still going and talking about the futures 
program though, was there actually a dollar cost for the 
government at the time? I know there was a minimal cost but 
was there a great cost to having a futures program other than an 
accounting procedure? I mean it was money on the books that 
municipalities borrowed and you honoured your share of it as 
time come due, but was there an actual dollar cost for the 

government of the day? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I think at the 
time that we decided to pay the futures out, being our liability 
owing to the provinces was something just over $17 million. 
And while there might not have been a huge cost in cash — 
because we weren’t paying it out any faster than what the 
revenue-sharing pool would have allowed on an annual basis — 
as a bookkeeping entry it certainly was a liability and showed 
up as part of the provincial debt because it was money that we 
owed to municipalities. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And, Madam 
Minister, and to your officials, welcome. I’ve got a number of 
questions I’d like to ask you and I probably am going to be 
skipping all over so I hope I don’t cause you a lot of problems. 
 
My first question is that you talked about a number of smaller 
towns and villages and hamlets that you’re taking into the RMs. 
How many have actually been taken into the RM in the last 
couple of years, last number of years? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, I’m not sure that I 
know the exact numbers. There hasn’t been a huge wave but 
there certainly have been several examples that I can think of. 
And there are a number of arrangements that have been made 
that you wouldn’t recognize in a formal way, but I think the 
member from Saltcoats was mentioning one municipality that’s 
administrating for another. And Kindersley, the town of 
Kindersley administrates for the village of Brock. 
 
And you know there’s quite a few examples all over the 
province where . . . There’s one near Davidson where one rural 
administrator is actually administrating for five municipalities. 
And so there’s quite a lot of that going on of sharing of 
resources and sharing of administrators and offices and so on 
that isn’t necessarily recognized in any formal way as a 
boundary change or, you know, as an amalgamation; but it is 
co-operation. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I have a number 
of questions about SaskFILM. 
 
I notice that there’s I think $1.1 million being spent on 
SaskFILM. Can you give me an idea of how that money is 
spent, what the criteria is, if it’s different film companies or 
production companies, and how they decide if it’s an issue that 
the government is going to cost share on? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, the appropriation 
shown in the budget to SaskFILM is the same as last year. 
 
And that goes to the organization SaskFILM to administrate in 
terms of grants to production companies, usually the small grant 
that SaskFILM . . . And they have an adjudication process with 
criteria where they receive applications and then they make 
appropriations. 
 
And usually SaskFILM’s contribution just is a small part of the 
total production cost. But that amount that they might get might 
help them to leverage a contribution from, say, Telefilm 
Canada, Heritage Canada — other granting agencies. And it 
also . . . that initial seed money also helps companies make 



April 15, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 605 

proposals to the private sector and get private funding to put 
together enough money for a whole project. 
 
And then the other $100,000 that is new is, we are paying 
SaskFILM to administrate the film tax credit that was initiated 
last year. Rather than having personnel within the department 
do it, we’re contracting with SaskFILM because they’re in a 
very good position, having all the technical expertise to 
adjudicate the applications for the film tax credit. But that does 
take personnel, and so we’ve assigned and contracted that 
responsibility to them. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Minister, I was wondering 
if this department had anything to do with last year’s actual tax 
credit. I imagine the monies from that is actually . . . We’d have 
to question the Department of Finance on that but . . . Or am I 
wrong, does this money come through your department? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, the tax credit that 
will be paid out per se would not be within our budget. It’s just 
this portion of — because it’s a Finance issue — and it’s just 
the portion of the administration that’s included in SaskFILM 
that would be represented here. 
 
Ms. Draude: — So do you make the criteria on who will . . . 
SaskFILM makes the criteria or does your department make the 
criteria on who will be eligible for the tax credit, which films 
are eligible? And is there any minimum or maximum amount a 
certain production company can get? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, there is actually 
an Act with regulations that governs this. And it’s actually quite 
complex and there would be quite a few provisions of — 
federal income tax for example — like what is allowed to be 
used. And then we have the parameters of . . . they get a certain 
percentage back if the work is done within an urban centre and 
a larger percentage of tax credit if it’s done away from the 
major cities in an attempt to have some activity out in rural 
Saskatchewan — which has worked fairly well, by the way. 
 
But the rules are quite discreet and SaskFILM knows them; 
they use those guidelines and that Act in their administration. 
 
Ms. Draude: — And, Madam Minister, is there any guidelines 
within this Act to ensure that there isn’t a stacking of grants 
available for SaskFILM? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, there is very 
specific reference to stacking so that there is a well understood 
way of treating, say WEPA (Western Economic Partnership 
Agreement) grants, or you know other grants, from other 
granting institutions and other governments to make sure that 
there’s not stacking. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, you had indicated that this 
program was working very well. Can you give us an idea of 
what the cost is that the SaskFILM industry has managed to 
allocate this year? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, we don’t know yet 
because the member will know I think that we just announced 
this provision in the budget last year. And the way it works is 
once the production is complete, then all the records of the 

activity within that production, the number of employees, 
because that’s partly what it is based on, and all of the costs 
eligible and not eligible — there’s a complete audit done of the 
whole production. And then the tax credit is calculated and it’s 
paid out. 
 
So, like, we’re just at the end of the first production year, so we 
wouldn’t be finished yet paying out on the activity that took 
place in 1998. But I can tell you that the amount of activity that 
took place was even far beyond the film industry’s projections 
where there was almost 50 . . . there was more than doubled the 
level of activity up to almost $50 million. In fact someone told 
me the other day that it may exceed for the year ended March 
31, $50 million. And that’s a huge growth. Because in 1992 I 
believe we were at 1.5 million, and then we went up to 5. And 
there was slow growth until the tax credit when the activity 
doubled. 
 
So we don’t know the cost yet. We will when the audits are in. 
But they won’t be paid out until the fiscal year that we’re now 
in. But one thing for sure is that there’s been a huge payback in 
terms of jobs and activity . . . economic activity. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Minister. You probably 
won’t have any arguments on this side of the House if you want 
somebody to believe that reducing taxes will actually create 
employment. We’ve been saying that quite loudly for the last 
couple of years, and not just targeting certain areas. 
 
Madam Minister, just one last question on this issue. We were 
talking about companies getting different grants, being able to 
apply under this for credits. Can you tell me, can you apply for 
two films? Can a company produce two films in one year and 
get the tax credit? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, the application process 
is project based. So producers of films, proponents that are 
putting forth applications, they would be judged not on who 
they were, but the merit of their project. And so it could be 
possible that one producer would have more than one project 
approved in a cycle. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Then, Madam Minister, it is possible then to 
have film companies have one employee that’s covered by a tax 
credit for the full year then if they have a number of films that 
are accepted under the criteria of SaskFILM? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, no that’s not possible. 
That kind of double-dipping is specifically excluded in the 
legislation. 
 
Ms. Draude: — I told you I had a last question, but maybe this 
will be the last one then. Then in the procedure of the audit, 
then each person is audited instead of the film? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, yes. The regulations 
are very specific on those issues because the intent of this is to 
create jobs, quality jobs, not to reimburse employers for 
employees that are doing more jobs. It’s very specific as to the 
number of employees, the number of hours each employee puts 
in, you know, and the hourly remuneration for each employee 
and what their part was in that specific production. 
 



606 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1999 

Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, I also notice that under the 
cultural tourism facilities, there’s something — oh I guess it’s 
under Culture and Recreation — there’s also a new program 
called cultural industries development. Could you explain that 
to me? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Yes, we had a group of industry 
people over the last couple of years — they actually reported to 
us in the fall — developing some recommendations for our 
cultural industries’ development strategy. And that would be 
cultural industries other than film — like book publishing, like 
sound recording, like the crafts, manufacture, and sale and so 
on. 
 
This $200,000 is expected to be seed money for them to start 
developing a strategy. But it is not . . . it’s only part of our 
contribution. They’ve recommended a five-year strategy, and 
this is just an initial $200 just to get them started. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:58 p.m. 
 
 



 

 


