





























































Hansard: March 18, 1999


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 69 
 March 18, 1999 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
today to present petitions from some 2,500 to 3,000 people of 
the province of Saskatchewan who are concerned about the 
sexual exploitation of children through the child prostitution 
trade. The petition reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to enact 
provincial legislation that would: 
 
Inject a “stay away from” order, restraining anyone who 
interferes with the healing process of victims of child 
prostitution. Anyone (pimps, etc.) who threatens in any 
way the healing while it is taking place is subject to a large 
fine; 
 
Provide police with the authority to search a place where 
they believe a child is being held by pimps or perpetrators 
of this crime for the purpose of engaging in child 
prostitution activities. 

 
The signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from some 
communities or many communities throughout the province. 
They are from Arelee, Saskatchewan, Assiniboia, Barthel, 
Biggar, Cactus Lake, Candle, Carmel, Central Butte, Codette, 
Carlyle, Colonsay, Conquest, Cudworth, Cut Knife, Davidson, 
Delisle, Dodsland, Drake, Eatonia, Englefeld, Estonia, Foam 
Lake, Fulda, Glidden, Goodsoil, Kuroki, Lake Lenore, Landis, 
Lanigan, Laird, Leader, Loon Lake, Luseland, Lucky Lake, 
Macklin, Macrorie, Mantario, Margo, Mayfair, Mendham, 
Muenster, Netherhill, Nipawin, North Battleford, Outlook, 
Paradise Hill, Perdue, Peterson, Pilger, Prelate, Primate, 
Pierceland, Prince Albert, Rosetown, Rosthern, St. Benedict, St. 
Walburg, Saskatoon, Scott, Spalding, Tramping Lake, Tisdale, 
Wadena, Watrous, Wynyard, Wilkie, and North Battleford. 
 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy today to 
present a petition on behalf of folks in the Southwest. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately start work on the rebuilding of our secondary 
highway system to provide for safe driving on what are 
becoming known as pothole roads, to enter into 
negotiations with SARM and SUMA for a long-term plan 
of rural road restoration reflecting future needs, and to 
provide safety for all drivers as new trucking regulation 
changes safety factors on all of these roads. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will humbly pray. 

 

These, Mr. Speaker, come from the community of Robsart and 
Consul, with also signatories from Walsh, Alberta, as well as 
Maple Creek and surrounding communities and they were sent 
by the municipal people over at Robsart and I’m happy to 
present them today. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition on behalf of people who are concerned about the 
terrible state of our highway system in this province. 
 
The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call on federal and provincial 
governments to dedicate a significantly greater portion of 
the fuel tax revenues toward road maintenance and 
construction so Saskatchewan residents may have a safe 
highway system that meets their needs. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Those that have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
communities of Swift Current, Success, and Stewart Valley. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud to rise 
again today to present a petition on behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call on federal and provincial 
governments to dedicate a significantly greater portion of 
fuel tax revenues toward road maintenance and 
construction so that the Saskatchewan residents may have a 
safe highway system that meets their needs. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition has been signed from the good folks 
in Balcarres, Ituna, Lemberg, and Fort Qu’Appelle. 
 
And I so present. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present petitions. 
The prayer of relief for which reads as follows: 
 

Your petitioners humbly pray that Highway 40 and 
Highway 16 intersection be relocated in order to alleviate 
the unsafe congestion at the entrance to the city of North 
Battleford. 

 
Your petitioners come from North Battleford, Allan, and 
Whitkow. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I join with my 
colleagues in bringing forward petitions today. The prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call on federal and provincial 
governments to dedicate a significantly greater portion of 



70 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 1999 

the fuel tax revenues toward road maintenance and 
construction so Saskatchewan residents may have a safe 
highway system that meets their needs. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people that signed the petitions are from 
Regina, Pilot Butte, and Saskatoon. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
my privilege once again to rise on behalf of parents, teachers, 
and concerned citizens who are wanting to have specific 
learning-disabled children receiving more appropriate services 
in Saskatchewan. I’ll read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide essential funding and ensure the delivery of 
scientifically proven, diagnostic assessment and 
programming for children with learning disabilities in 
order that they have access to an education that meets their 
needs and allows them to reach their full potential. 

 
All of the signatures today are from Pelican Narrows. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed. Pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly on the 
following matters: 
 
To cause the government to increase its road construction 
and maintenance budget; 
 
To call upon the provincial and federal government to take 
steps to end world subsidies; 
 
To call upon the provincial government and SaskTel to 
take steps to provide cellular coverage to areas of Willow 
Bunch, Rockglen, and Coronach; 
 
To cause the government to end its unfair tendering 
policies under the Crown Construction Tendering 
Agreement; 
 
To have the Workers’ Compensation Board Act amended 
to reinstate benefits and pensions to disenfranchised 
widows; 
 
To call on the federal and provincial governments to 
dedicate fuel tax revenues toward road maintenance; 
 
To relocate Highway 40 to alleviate congestion at North 
Battleford; and 
 
To cause the government to provide essential funding and 
diagnostic assessment and programming for children with 
learning disabilities. 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 9 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Finance: will the minister provide the 
total cost estimates his department has received in regards 
to the Plains closure, SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of 
Applied Science and Technology) move and conversion, 
and the renovations and upgrading of the Pasqua and 
General Hospitals. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, if I may continue, I also wish to give notice 
that I shall on day no. 9 ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the minister responsible for SPMC (Saskatchewan 
Property Management Corporation): will the minister 
provide the total capital and construction costs and the 
most recent estimates for any part of the Plains closure, 
SIAST conversion and move, and the renovations of the 
Pasqua and General hospitals, that their department is 
responsible for. 
 

Thank you. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day 9 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Municipal Government: how many RMs 
have amalgamated over the past year; how many RMs 
have shown an interest in amalgamation; is there a plan to 
provide incentives to RMs to amalgamate; is there a 
guideline for the number of people living in a rural 
municipality in order for it to be maintained as a rural 
municipality; is there a minimum dollar value for a tax 
base in a rural municipality which they must have in order 
to continue to exist. 
 

I so present. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I would like all 
members to join with me in welcoming His Excellency, 
Roberto Nigido, the ambassador to Canada from Italy who’s 
seated in your gallery. Along with the ambassador, His 
Excellency, is the Consul General of Italy, in Vancouver, Dr. 
Rodolfo Buonavita, who is with us as well today, as well as is 
Dr. Piero Tarantelli, who is also here in the gallery today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the ambassador is visiting Regina today and he is 
meeting with the Lieutenant Governor, with you, Mr. Speaker, I 
understand, the Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs, as well 
as the Minister of Justice and the Attorney General, mayor of 
Regina, and also with a number of companies, including Sask 
Wheat Pool. 
 
And I might add as well, at a wonderful lunch that we had 
earlier today, His Excellency, being a former economic 
development individual in Italy and my being a former minister 
of Economic Development, several arrangements were being 
talked about, about the processing of pasta for export to other 



March 18, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 71 

parts of the world. 
 
So I want all members to join with me and if the members 
would join with me in welcoming His Excellency here to the 
Assembly, and best wishes for your stay in our province. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, on behalf of the official opposition we too would like 
to welcome the entourage from Italy, the ambassador, and all of 
the dignitaries. 
 
We hope that your visit to Saskatchewan is rewarding and that 
indeed not only rewarding for Italy, but also rewarding for 
Saskatchewan and Canada, and we hope that you have a very 
pleasant stay. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Liberal caucus 
would also to like to welcome the delegation from Italy and 
hopefully that they can give us some good news on economic 
development that our ministers here of the Crown might take 
into account and institute in Saskatchewan. So we welcome you 
to the province. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Langford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you I have 33 grade 5 students from Birch Hills, a 
beautiful town of Birch Hills, which now we can see the 
proceedings in the House from home there. And I want to 
welcome them here. 
 
They are accompanied with their teachers, Valerie Turgeon, 
Alan Ruder, and seven chaperones. I will be meeting with them 
at 2 o’clock after question period. So, looking forward to being 
with you and have a safe trip home. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to add my note 
of welcome to the folks from Birch Hills as my cousin’s son 
Kenny Olsen is here and I’d like to wish him a special 
welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Gold Medal Winner at Canada Winter Games 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Nicole Watt of Melfort will certainly remember the 1999 
Canada Winter Games. This 13-year-old figure skater captured 
the gold medal in the ladies singles, pre-novice category. This 
was Nicole’s first visit to the Winter Games, and also a first for 
Saskatchewan in the ladies singles. 
 
Despite Nicole’s rheumatoid arthritis she describes her win as 
“the biggest accomplishment of my career.” She has to take 
medication for her condition but doesn’t let it affect her training 

or obviously her accomplishments. Miss Watt’s coach describes 
her as hard a worker as he has ever trained and her medal was 
very justly won. 
 
This young lady has demonstrated to herself, to her family, her 
coaches, and her community what dedication and commitment 
are all about. 
 
Would the Assembly please join me in congratulating Ms. 
Nicole Watt and wishing her many more years of success in her 
career. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

High Dose Rate Brachytherapy Program 
 
Ms. Murray: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As of today, Mr. 
Speaker, Saskatchewan is the first province in Canada to 
provide a high dose rate brachytherapy (HDRB) program for 
prostate cancer patients. Though the program will operate out of 
the Allan Blair Cancer Centre in Regina, the co-operative 
efforts of the Regina Health District and the Saskatchewan 
Cancer Agency have ensured the program is available to men 
from across our province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Murray: — The HDRB is less invasive than surgery, has 
fewer treatment-related side effects, has equal or better 
outcomes, and when used in combination with beam therapy 
reduces beam therapy by two to three weeks. Up to 50 patients 
in this province will benefit from this procedure annually. 
 
We all know someone who has been struck with cancer — a 
friend, a relative, a co-worker. So we must continue to battle 
this disease which has taken so many people from us. The 
Throne Speech emphasized that our government is determined 
to ensure Saskatchewan residents have access to quality cancer 
treatments and prevention programs. Individually and 
collectively we will continue the fight against cancer. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Women’s Role in Politics 
 

Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure to 
rise in this Assembly to comment on women’s role in politics. 
Yesterday I was amused to listen to the most disenfranchised 
female in the NDP (New Democratic Party) caucus use the 
familiar NDP tactic to attack an individual for political gain. 
 
How many years has this member sat in the legislature waiting 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, order, order, order. 
Order. Now the hon. member will recognize that statements by 
members are not to be debated and I’m sure . . . Order! Order. 
And I’m sure that she’ll want to phrase her remarks in her own 
statement in such a way that she doesn’t engage in debate on 
another member’s statement. 
 



72 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 1999 

Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As one of the female 
members who started the Saskatchewan Party, I know that the 
guiding principle of equality regardless of age, gender or 
culture is not just given lip service. 
 
Mr. Hermanson, our leader, has spoken openly about the 
hundreds of women who would like the choice to stay home 
with their children but instead must go out and work to pay for 
the taxation appetite of this government. 
 
He has also talked about the disdain many women and men 
have for the antics of politics. Most women, including myself, 
do not like conflicts. I prefer to bring about change through 
diplomacy and respect for individuals. Maybe this is something 
that the female members opposite do not know because they 
believe that socialism is better founded than individualism. 
 
The female members of the Saskatchewan Party not only carry 
our banner but we also help decide in what direction to carry it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I should also like to include my former Liberal 
colleagues in this statement, remembering that they started out 
with three females and now have managed to chase them all 
away. 
 
The NDP has used their female ministers as mouthpieces. Mr. 
Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party’s female members not only 
believe in this party’s politics, they believe in the province and 
they believe . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The hon. member’s time has expired. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Z99 Radiothon 
 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, C.C. and Lorie Lindsay are at it 
again on Z99. C.C. and Lorie, in addition to earning their 
livings in Regina, know what generous and caring people their 
listeners are. That’s why each year C.C. and Lorie give to their 
community through Z99’s radiothon. 
 
C.C. and Lorie are giving of themselves and their listeners are 
responding once again. This year is their twelfth annual 
radiothon and it is raising money to buy an oscillatory ventilator 
for the neonatal intensive care unit at Regina General Hospital. 
The oscillatory ventilator is one more piece of advanced 
equipment that will improve health care for babies in southern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
It was my pleasure to modestly help the cause earlier this 
morning by dropping off my donation at the Cornwall Centre 
where C.C. and Lorie are broadcasting live. 
 
What’s the bottom line, Mr. Speaker? Well Z99 is doing its 
part. C.C. and Lorie are doing their part. The Hospitals of 
Regina Foundation need our support to continue improving life 
saving health services, in this case for babies. 
 
I’ve done my part. Please do yours. A special thanks to C.C. 
and Lorie and Z99 and all of the generous people who make 
things happen in Regina. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Job Creation 
 

Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, no one would argue that job 
creation is a problem in Saskatchewan, including the NDP 
government. However this government which prides itself on 
being a friend to workers, is sending a message which is at odds 
with what it has been telling the public. 
 
In the October and November issue of Trade & Commerce 
magazine, an advertisement from SaskTel urges people to set 
up call centres in Saskatchewan because, and I quote, “they 
have among the lowest employee benefit costs in North 
America.” 
 
Well is it any wonder, Mr. Speaker, we have problems 
recruiting nurses and health professionals and other workers 
when the image we’re sending through our Crown corporations 
is — come on up to Alabama north — where with government 
help, workers can get exploited free of charge. 
 
This government prides itself on being a friend of labour but it’s 
no friend of labour when it proudly tells companies that 
workers have the lowest benefits here than anywhere else in 
North America. 
 
This is something we’re used to seeing in southern United 
States where exploited workers are a way of life, but not here in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Clearly this isn’t the case. This 
spring as the unions refuse to support this government with 
either money or workers, perhaps it would do well to heed its 
own advertising by its Crown corporations when it asks itself, 
Mr. Speaker, how did it get so out of touch with workers in this 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Biggar — Home of Champions 
 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Speaker, I want to share with my 
friends in the legislature one more time the good news of 
Biggar, Saskatchewan, the home of champions. Biggar, the 
home of Sandra Schmirler and the home of the world record 
Hanson buck is now the home of the 1999 Saskatchewan girls’ 
curling champions for this year. 
 
This is the first time since 1981 when Sandra Schmirler was the 
champion of Saskatchewan that a girls’ team from Biggar has 
won that championship and I congratulate them. 
 
But additionally I want to congratulate the community of 
Biggar for having put on this competition. A town the size of 
Biggar needs a lot of heart and a lot of energy to host a 
provincial competition. They did it with class; they did it with 
appreciation from across the province; and they did it in a way 
that showed the heart of Saskatchewan to all the rest of their 
guests from across the province as during the snowstorm during 
the competition they put people up for the night who couldn’t 
get to their hotels. 
 
So in conclusion I want to extend congratulations to coach Sean 
Friesen, team members Teejay Surik, Brett Barber, Lesley Ann 



March 18, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 73 

Hallberg, Erin Sherbino, and Jamie Lamont, two grade 10’s and 
three grade 11’s — going to be champions for a long time. 
Congratulations. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Lakeland’s Citizen of the Year 
 

Mr. Langford: — Mr. Speaker, Saturday evening I will be 
attending a dinner in honour of a very special citizen of the 
village of Lakeland in my constituency. Noreen Dochylo is 
Lakeland’s citizen of the year. And just like those chosen before 
her she is an outstanding citizen completely worthy of this 
recognition. 
 
The list of her community events is longer than my arm, even 
longer than the Deputy Speaker’s arm. She is on the Legion 
executive, the Anglican church choir, the senior citizens group, 
the exhibition association, and a volunteer at the local arts and 
crafts show. She does that before lunch, Mr. Speaker. 
 
She was a teacher, a board member, and a mother of seven. This 
is enough for 10 citizens of the year, and I congratulate Noreen 
for 70 years of active, worthwhile living. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

National Social Work Week 
 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The week of 
March 15 to 21 is National Social Work Week. Today I’m 
pleased to acknowledge on behalf of all members the valuable, 
challenging, and often stressful but rewarding contribution 
made by social workers across our province. 
 
Social workers are on the front line performing a precarious 
balancing act between supporting families while protecting 
children; assisting youth in conflict while recognizing the rights 
of the community; providing financial support for families 
while working with them to become self-sufficient. 
 
In my town this week, Mr. Speaker, to celebrate the Social 
Work Week the Prince Albert branch of the Saskatchewan 
Association of Social Workers put on a one-day humour 
workshop. 
 
At first glance this may perhaps be an odd way of marking the 
week but as the more than hundred people who attended the 
presentation by Cathy Fenwick learned from the quote, they 
learned from the quote: “All people have it within themselves to 
find humour and joy in their lives despite of where they work, 
play, or hang their hat.” The association wanted to show in 
light-hearted ways in which people can promote individual 
wellness which is beneficial to workers and clients. 
 
This applies to us as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I salute the workers and staff in communities across the 
province in health districts, Indian child and family service 
agencies, correctional services, community-based agencies, and 
workers in private practice. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Court Ruling regarding Teenage Cancer Patient 
 

Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister of 
Social Services. Do you agree with the decision to deny Tyrell 
Dueck’s right to have his parents present while he receives 
chemotherapy? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I first of all want to 
thank the member for raising this issue in the House. I know 
this is a matter of intense public interest. I want to let the House 
know and the public know why it is that the Department of 
Social Services has acted in the way that it does, and it’s 
because we have an Act of the Legislative Assembly, The Child 
and Family Services Act. And that Act states in part, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

A child is in need of protection where . . . medical, 
surgical, or other recognized remedial care or treatment 
that is considered essential by a duly qualified medical 
practitioner has not been or is not likely to be provided to 
the child; 
 

It is pursuant to this law, our law, that my department has acted. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Protection for Children at Risk 
 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Justice. Mr. Speaker, it must be 
an election year. First the NDP finally realizes that surgical 
waiting lists are a problem. And now after eight years they 
finally admit that the abuse of children through the sex . . . child 
sex trade is a problem. 
 
For three years, Mr. Speaker, I have been urging the 
government to introduce and accept new and meaningful 
legislation to deal with this issue. And for three years they have 
done nothing. Meanwhile, children’s lives have been destroyed, 
many of them in the Premier’s own riding. 
 
According to Egadz, in 1998 there were about 90 children under 
15 years of age enslaved in the sex trade in Saskatoon and an 
additional 230 children between the ages of 15 and 18. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is also a shameful lack of drug and alcohol 
rehab spaces in Saskatchewan for youth. Largely due to the 
NDP decision to close Whitespruce . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order, order. The hon. 
member has been extremely long in her preamble and I’ll ask 
her to go directly to her question now. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, why has it 
taken you so long to act? How many children could have been 
helped if you had acted sooner? 
 



74 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 1999 

Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the 
member for her question. I think that most people in 
Saskatchewan recognize that complex social problems are not 
readily resolved in simple, clear ways as much as we would like 
them to be. 
 
Since this government was elected in 1991, Mr. Speaker, we 
have moved expeditiously, in my view and in the view of many, 
to concentrate our attention on the needs of children in 
Saskatchewan through the implementation of the children’s 
action plan. And lately, this year, we have also made a 
significant contribution to reducing some of the causes of 
poverty in Saskatchewan. In the long run, Mr. Speaker, we feel 
that is the appropriate way to go. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would just like to reply 
to the minister that for many children they have waited much 
too long. 
 
Mr. Minister, if you are really sincere about dealing with this 
issue you have to give Social Services and the police the tools 
they need to make a difference. The Alberta government has 
done that. They are also rescuing children in danger from the 
streets and making spaces available for them in safe houses and 
providing ongoing comprehensive treatment. 
 
Right now there are only three spaces available for children or 
youth in the Calder Centre. Just recently two Saskatchewan 
girls being sexually abused on the streets, who were in great 
danger, begged police and social workers to get them into a safe 
house. There were no spaces available for them in Saskatoon so 
Social Services sent them to the Poundmaker’s Lodge in 
Edmonton at a cost of $60,000 to Saskatchewan Social 
Services. 
 
Mr. Minister, wouldn’t it make more sense to have that 
treatment provided here. How is this new Act going to work 
effectively to help these children if you don’t make provisions 
for space and targeted treatment programs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I’m not able to comment on specific cases as such but 
I do want to indicate that we’ve invested over $9 million a year 
on treatment and therapeutic programs for children and teens in 
areas such as therapeutic foster care, Ranch Ehrlo, and the new 
Saskatoon children’s centre. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I might also say that sometimes there are 
situations which mean that as opposed to being able to safely 
care for children in our province, such as where children are 
being threatened by their pimps, where sometimes in those 
cases, placement outside of the province is the appropriate thing 
to do. 
 
I might point out that the legislation which I’m proposing a first 
reading of today attempts to deal with this in so far as protective 
intervention orders are concerned, and I do hope the member 
will support that Bill when it comes forward. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Ms. Julé: — Mr. Minister, it’s easy to write up a new piece of 
legislation but it’s only going to work if you give police the 
tools they need to assist the children off the streets. Have you 
done that, Mr. Minister? Have you developed policies to give 
police clear direction on how they are supposed to deal with 
these situations? Have you given police the right to step in and 
take children off the street if they are in danger? 
 
The Alberta law has protective intervention provisions for the 
police, allowing them to remove children from dangerous 
situations, put them into a safe house for assessment, and then 
give them the ongoing treatment and help they need. Does your 
Bill do that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Have you given police the tools they need? Have you made 
provisions for ongoing healing treatment? Or is this just more 
empty NDP rhetoric? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, we have taken the 
approach that this is an issue that is of a severe . . . is a severe 
problem in some of our cities. We have attempted to work with 
the various community groups in those cities to ask them to 
discuss with them what they think is the appropriate solution in 
those particular instances. We have followed their advice and 
that advice, at least in terms of legislative tools, will be 
forthcoming in the House later today. 
 
But it’s more than that. It also requires financial resources to be 
able to support those groups, to provide the kinds of outreach 
services that are going to be necessary to help those children. 
We want to help those children, Mr. Speaker, not just for a 
period of three days. We want to help them to get on in a 
productive way with the rest of their lives. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hospital Bed Shortage 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Health. 
 
Madam Minister, yesterday the government released a report 
explaining that Saskatchewan has the longest hospital waiting 
list in Canada because of NDP doing a lousy job of managing 
the health care system. 
 
Madam Minister, your failing health reform process is taking its 
toll on the health of thousands of Saskatchewan people. Regina 
Bull of Meskanaw is one of these people. Regina underwent 
serious surgery at St. Paul’s Hospital in Saskatoon last 
Thursday to remove the centre lobe of her right lung. Her 
doctor told her she would be kept in the hospital for at least a 
week following surgery. But on Tuesday Regina was suddenly 
booted out of her bed and discharged with no discussion and 
without notifying any family members. 
 
Madam Minister, Regina Bull was discharged early after major 
surgery because of a shortage of beds. What is the minister 
doing about the shortage of beds in Saskatoon that resulted in 
this action being taken? 
 



March 18, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 75 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I want to thank this 
member very much for the question. As the member will know 
that under the information and privacy Act it is not possible for 
a minister of Health to comment upon any individual case. To 
do so would be really a violation of the legislation. So I’m not 
able to answer your question directly. 
 
What I can say to the people of this province, Mr. Speaker, is 
that shortly after becoming the Minister of Health in September 
along with the associate minister, we made a commitment to the 
people of this province that we are going to tackle the issue of 
waiting lists and waiting times in the province of Saskatchewan. 
We struck a task team of three well-known physicians in the 
province of Saskatchewan to provide us with a blueprint, Mr. 
Speaker, of how we do that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday that task team reported. That task team 
has made 23 recommendations to the people of this province, to 
the government, and I can assure the members of the legislature 
and the public of Saskatchewan that we are going to implement 
those recommendations in order that we can reduce the waiting 
times of people who are waiting for surgery. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, Regina Bull’s husband Rudy 
had no idea his wife was being discharged from the hospital on 
Tuesday. He was coming into Saskatoon from the family farm 
to visit his wife, not to take her home. But when he got to St. 
Paul’s Hospital he was told his wife had been discharged and 
taken home by a family member. 
 
Rudy spent the next several hours frantically looking around 
Saskatoon to find out where his wife had been taken. But he 
didn’t find her because she hadn’t actually left the hospital. In 
fact she was sitting on a chair at the end of the hallway with her 
suitcase for over five hours, waiting for someone to take notice 
of her. The nurses were so busy they had no time to deal with 
her situation or ask her why she was sitting on a chair outside of 
her room. Madam Minister, is this the kind of health care that 
this government has allowed to happen in Saskatchewan. How 
are you going to explain to Regina what happened to her 
situation, and how are you going to prevent it from happening 
again? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, 
one of the recommendations that the task team makes that I 
think is extremely important is to have a better coordination 
between the big health districts like Saskatoon and Regina 
where major surgeries are performed in this province, and other 
districts that surround the two big centres, because that’s where 
about 40 per cent of the people who come for surgery come 
from. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re going to coordinate our activities in a more 
substantive way, and we believe that that’s going to reduce the 
amount of waiting times that people have in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in addition, we’re going to fund more operating 
room hours. We’re going to fund more surgical equipment. 

We’re going to provide clear information for patients about how 
surgical waiting lists operate. And, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to 
set up a provincial advisory committee to make sure that the 
system is transparent and accountable. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, that people want those people who operate 
the health system to be accountable for their actions, and I think 
that that’s at the end of the day what we’re going to see. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Parental Visitation Rights 
 

Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would again like to 
ask the question to the Minister of Social Services that I asked a 
few minutes previous. I asked him the question if he agreed 
with the decision to deny Tyrell Dueck’s right to have his 
parents present while he received chemotherapy. 
 
This is after the treatment. He gave me the answer about the 
child protection Act and we all agreed. But what we are asking 
you is during this treatment — afterwards does his parents have 
the right to remain with their child while the child receives 
chemotherapy? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, what we are dealing 
with here is a ruling of the court, and I’m somewhat reluctant to 
discuss the appropriateness of the judge’s ruling. 
 
I would say though, that as Minister of Social Services our role 
is to protect the health and well-being of children in 
Saskatchewan. And while we try resolve these issues . . . while 
we try to resolve these issues, Mr. Speaker, through discussions 
with the family to mediate, if you like, sometimes that is not 
possible and under those circumstances we make reference to a 
third party, in this case the courts. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hospital and Diagnostic Waiting Lists 
 

Mr. McLane: — In the barriers to access report that we 
released yesterday, but that the Minister of Health 
commissioned, it says that roughly $24 million is needed in the 
next six months in order to reduce the several-year gap that 
exists between Regina and other more advanced health districts. 
 
Yesterday the minister said she is prepared to commit money to 
the problem. Madam Minister, are you prepared to commit the 
roughly $24 million needed to fix the waiting list problem 
identified in your own report to reduce all waiting lists in 
Regina? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
One of the things I want to make clear to the public, because 
I’m not sure it has been made clear, is that in the barriers to 
access task group report which was a group of people struck 
within the Regina Health District to look at a number of issues 
around surgical waiting times and surgical waiting lists . . . 



76 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 1999 

Now yesterday the Liberals as you know, released the report to 
the public and at the time the Liberals indicated that there 
needed to be another 73 beds in the system. I want to make it 
very clear to the public that the 73 beds that this task group is 
referring to are long-term care beds and long-term care beds for 
senior citizens, long-term care beds for mental health people, 
and also convalescent beds, all of this is about long-term care, 
not acute-care beds, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Yes, Madam Minister, yesterday you did 
produce a report on waiting lists. The problem is that you have 
as yet . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Now the hon. member 
will recognize that the appropriate way to engage in debate in 
the House is directing questions through the Chair and I’ll ask 
him to conduct himself accordingly. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The problem, Mr. 
Speaker, is that the minister is yet to tell the people of 
Saskatchewan the truth about the problem. The only numbers 
that appeared in that report are the page numbers. 
 
Madam Minister, obviously you know how many people are 
suffering on waiting lists. Will you release the numbers today or 
have you something to hide? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the 
member for that question. What I want to say to the people of 
this province is that we are moving to reduce waiting times in 
the province of Saskatchewan. I indicated yesterday, Mr. 
Speaker, that on March 26 — when the Minister of Finance 
releases his provincial budget for 1999-2000 — in that 
provincial budget will be funds available to begin to reduce 
waiting times in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re not talking about it; we’re going to do it, 
Mr. Speaker. We’re going to fix the issue of waiting times in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if the minister won’t 
release the waiting numbers for the whole province then we’ll 
help her a little bit. We’ll start with East Central Health District. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the east central district as of March 1999, 1,877 
are suffering on surgery waiting lists — 1,877 people, Mr. 
Speaker, are languishing on waiting lists in that district. That’s 
a disgrace, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask the minister once again to tell us the number 
of people that are suffering and dying because of long waiting 
lists in this whole province. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, you know we have a lot 
of doom and gloom by the members opposite. We have a lot of 
negativity that are coming from the members opposite. Mr. 
Speaker, what we’re doing is doing something about it. We’re 

not simply identifying the problem and have no solutions, like 
the members opposite which is being reported in the press. We 
are going to do something about it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have indicated that we are going to implement 
those 23 recommendations. We have indicated that on March 
26 when the Minister of Finance provides his budget for the 
next fiscal year, we’re going to have money in that budget to 
begin to address waiting times in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re not getting up and talking about it, Mr. 
Speaker, we’re doing something about it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Mr. Speaker, almost 10 years ago in this 
House, the NDP member for Regina Coronation Park spoke of a 
conversation he had with the minister of Health in the Allan 
Blakeney administration. He noted that the minister had been 
called on the carpet by their premier because the waiting list 
had surpassed the 2,000 mark, something Mr. Blakeney found 
unacceptable. The member explained, and I quote: 
 

The Premier gave him a limited number of months to get 
the situation in hand. To get the waiting list down below 
2,000 or else the premier of the day would simply find a 
new health minister. 
 

Well I know the Premier is running out of choices for new 
health ministers, but in only one health district, the east central, 
Mr. Speaker, we already are almost to that number of 2,000. 
 
Madam Minister, did the Premier give you an ultimatum to fix 
the waiting list or he would boot you out of office? Or, Madam 
Minister, did he just tell you to play politics with peoples’ 
lives? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, in 1997 . . . or 1987, in 
the province of Saskatchewan, about 77,000 operating room 
procedures or surgical procedures were done in this province. 
Some ten years later, over 92,000 surgical procedures done in 
the people of this province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, you know, we spend $1.8 billion a year — 
each year — on health care in the province of . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Now hon. members will 
recognize I’m sure that the Chair is having much difficulty 
being able to hear the Minister of Health provide her response 
to the question. And I’ll ask for the co-operation of all hon. 
members of the House. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As 
I said, ten years ago there were about 77,000 surgical 
procedures in the province of Saskatchewan — ten years later, 
92,000 surgical procedures. I think that’s phenomenal. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, each year in the province 
of Saskatchewan over 4,600,000 visits to a doctor. Each year in 



March 18, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 77 

the province of Saskatchewan over 925,000 visits to specialists. 
Mr. Speaker, 72,000 road ambulance trips. Mr. Speaker, over 
46,000 CAT (computerized axial tomography) scans, over 
5,000 MRIs (magnetic resonance imaging), over 1.4 million lab 
tests. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re spending $1.8 billion a year in the province 
of Saskatchewan, and we’re providing a phenomenal amount of 
services. We can do better and we will do better. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, in 
your report you only dealt with one part of the waiting list 
problem in Regina and Saskatoon. There is also the diagnostic 
waiting list problem which is part and parcel of the wait for 
surgery in this province. 
 
Again, in the East Central Health District there are 277 people 
waiting for diagnostic treatment. These are people who may 
need surgery but they won’t know if they do until they’re 
finished their diagnostic treatment. 
 
Madam Minister, what is your plan to deal with this waiting list 
on diagnostic treatment in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, as you know, presently in 
the province of Saskatchewan we have one operating MRI. The 
Regina Health District has just installed a second MRI and it 
will soon be functioning and ready to start doing testing. Mr. 
Speaker, another MRI is going to be installed in City Hospital 
in Saskatoon. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, we have a new CAT scan in North . . . 
or in P.A. (Prince Albert), which is providing diagnostic tests. 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, the Swift Current and Moose Jaw 
areas are talking about a CAT, a CT scan. Mr. Speaker, I think 
that’s going to assist people in the province in getting more 
testing done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Special Needs Programs for Students 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My questions 
this afternoon will be for the Minister of Education. 
 
In the 1970s I had the privilege of establishing all 
self-contained classrooms for learning disabled children 
through the Saskatoon public Board of Education. And many 
services for children with various special needs in Saskatoon 
were so successful, Mr. Speaker, that groups travelled far and 
wide — in fact from Europe — to learn to duplicate these 
programs. 
 
That’s not happened with the same frequency for a very long 
time in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Minister, my question for you this afternoon is, does your 
department have a means of measuring what programs are in 
fact successfully serving Saskatchewan children with special 
needs? 
 

Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To 
the member from Saskatoon, I want to say to you that there has 
been over the last several years a tremendous investment, as the 
member knows, in special needs programming across the 
province. 
 
And on an annual basis through the school divisions, there is a 
report that’s provided to the department in concert together to 
extrapolate the number of children who might require into the 
future, special needs services in various different parts of the 
province. So it’s an ongoing process that we have today. 
 
The member has indicated, Mr. Speaker, rightfully so, that in 
this province we have probably one of the best special needs 
programs in the province and I must say, in the city of 
Saskatoon, some of the leading special needs programs in our 
province because of the innovative work that’s being done by 
school divisions in that community and by the progressive work 
that’s been done by people who work in the education field and 
other professions to assist in the development of special needs 
programs. 
 
The member knows that within the next six months or eight 
months we’ll have the report of the special needs review 
committee that’s around the province today and we’ll be able to 
address in a broader way some of the needs the Saskatchewan 
students have in the special needs areas. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Mr. Speaker, the minister’s own education 
advisory committee has reported that grants for special needs 
children have not kept pace with the increasing demands. 
Furthermore it reported, and this is a direct quote: “In some 
cases school systems are developing programs to meet the 
funding criteria and not the needs of students.” 
 
Mr. Minister, what are the specific steps that you and your 
department are taking to ensure that some of the province’s 
most vulnerable children are assured of receiving the 
educational programming that they require? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, first I want to say to the 
member opposite that in the last year and a half or two years 
now, the Department of Education has made a concerted effort 
to provide additional resources to the areas of children that are 
of special needs or disabled or need further educational services 
that may be outside of that that can be provided in the regular 
classroom system. 
 
As the member knows, over the last couple of years there’s 
been an increase in the number of community schools that we 
have in this province which I think, Mr. Speaker, addresses 
some of the special needs that children require in this province 
in areas of which teachers can’t provide all of those services on 
their own, and integrated services help provide that. 
 
The member also knows that in the next, as I’ve already said, in 
the next six to seven months in this province we’re going to 
have a report by the special needs committee who are going 
about the province, who are trying to get a better appreciation 
and understanding of the diverse kinds of needs that special 
needs students have in this province. 



78 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 1999 

And as that report makes its way to the Department of 
Education it will make its way to this House. And collectively 
the Department of Education and the stakeholders in the 
province will look to enrich the level of services that we have 
for special needs kids in the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Mr. Speaker, a week from tomorrow is 
budget day and many, many people in the province are going to 
want a tax break. Group after group wants more money from 
the budget for their particular needs. Appropriate financing is 
very significant but in this case it most certainly is only part of 
the answer. 
 
Mr. Minister, it’s very important that this happen. And I ask 
you specifically, have you directed the Department of 
Education to really do its homework regarding special 
education services? And does the department, which it should 
have as an ongoing regular thing to do, does it have a means of 
collecting data showing what programming does and does not 
work in the different areas of exceptionality for the children of 
this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, as you know, within the next 
few days we’re going to have the Minister of Finance in this 
province deliver the budget. And within the budget address 
we’ll identify and highlight the kinds of incentives or initiatives 
that will be available not only for education but for all of the 
departments within government. 
 
And I want to say to the member opposite that through 
consultation that’s ongoing with the stakeholders in education, 
the Department of Education does have an appreciation of the 
kinds of broad needs that are required, not only for children 
who have special needs, but in the areas of technology and the 
areas of additional curriculum enhancement, and the list goes 
on in terms of the kinds of pressures. 
 
The answer to the question as to whether or not we have an 
ongoing tabulation of the number of children who require 
special needs in this provinces is continued to be collected 
through the individual school divisions and school boards, and 
we pay attention to that. And we'll enrich that upon the 
recommendations at the end of the day from the special needs 
committee. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to introduce 
guests at this point. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce 
to you and all of the legislature, Canada’s ambassador to the 
Ukraine, Mr. Derek Fraser, who is in the west gallery, 
accompanied by Irene Janz, the assistant chief protocol officer. 
 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I’m especially pleased to introduce a 
fellow graduate of the University of British Columbia law 
school who has served our country well in many portfolios 
including ambassador to Hungary from 1988 to 1993, and 
ambassador to Greece from 1995 to 1998, and now presently 
the ambassador to the Ukraine. We welcome him here to 
Regina and we know that he’s working with many of our 
officials and also people within the community to help him in 
his job in the Ukraine. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 1 — The Child and Family Services 
Amendment Act, 1999 

 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
1, The Child and Family Services Amendment Act, 1999, be 
now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 206 — The Protection of Children 
Involved in Prostitution Act 

 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I move first 
reading of Bill No. 206, An Act respecting the Protection of 
Children Involved in Prostitution. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Jess, seconded by Ms. Murrell, 
and the proposed amendment thereto moved by Mr. Krawetz. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s a pleasure for me again to rise in the Assembly to give a 
reply to the Speech from the Throne. I think the Throne Speech 
outlined a direction again set out by this government and we 
will be following that, as we have others, to continue the legacy 
of reducing taxes while providing essential services and at the 
same time lowering the enormous debt in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, most of my . . . a lot of my talk today is going to 
be about agriculture. I want to touch on a few subjects like the 
AIDA (Agricultural Insurance Disaster Assistance) program — 
the farm aid program, the new round of safety net discussions 
that are coming forward, and things like the Estey report. 
 
I also will be giving some credit to the opposition today, Mr. 



March 18, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 79 

Speaker. I’m going to give the opposition a lot of credit today 
and I think . . . because they deserve a lot of credit on some 
issues, and I’ll explain that to them in a minute. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know if the folks at home want to do 
some skill-testing questions, but I’ve got a series of skill-testing 
questions here. I’ll give you an example of one short one here, 
so get your pens out. All you’ve got to do is write down the 
answer. And if you decide that you know the answer, you may 
want to contact the person and ask them if this is true. 
 
And the quote is: “I was elected in Melfort-Tisdale as a Liberal 
and I will continue to represent Melfort-Tisdale as a Liberal.” 
Guess who said that? In 1996, April 9 of 1996, that was in the 
Kinistino Post gazette. Maybe folks can figure out . . . I can 
give you the initials — it’s R.G. And that might help you. 
 
So as we go along we’ll have a series of these skill-testing 
questions, Mr. Speaker, and maybe the folks at home can play 
along. And like I say, if they do figure it out, maybe they can 
call him and say, did you say that really, and then maybe ask 
why he changed his mind and walked away from the people — 
walked away from the people who elected them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about the farm program. This is a 
long debate but I’ll shorten it up for purposes of today because I 
know others will want to speak. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, let me go back to last year when we started to 
have co-operation and I thought we started to have co-operation 
from the opposition in terms of farm programming. We had a 
motion from all members of this House that we sent to Ottawa 
saying that we want some farm aid in Saskatchewan. 
 
We had a trip later on with a couple of the opposition members, 
one from each of the parties and myself going to Ottawa, talk to 
the federal minister. And I can see, Mr. Speaker, then that there 
was some . . . I thought there was some hope because the 
federal minister I think was quite impressed that the three 
political parties came along and in unison did two things to 
promote a cause in Saskatchewan and in western Canada and 
indeed all of Canada. 
 
Unfortunately that solidarity slipped aside, and I can tell you 
that over that period of time that slipping aside certainly hurt 
this province. It hurt this province in many ways. For example, 
we had some money in safety nets left over from previous years 
which we finally did convince the federal government to put 
into topping up the NISA (Net Income Stabilization Account) 
program which we announced not too long ago, a couple of 
weeks ago. 
 
(1430) 
 
Basically we had agreement on that last November. But every 
time one of these so-called Saskatchewan farm people 
representatives, Tories and Liberals, stood up on their feet and 
said, just put your money in, Mr. Speaker, that made the Ottawa 
position stronger and the Saskatchewan position weaker, very 
much weaker, to the point — if the members would listen, I’m 
giving you a little history here of what happened — to the point 
where the federal government basically said if you don’t 
participate in this program we’re going to take that money away 

from you. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Not true. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — That is exactly true. And this is the help, 
this is the help that these people put into it. No matter how long 
and hard that we argue, no matter how long and hard that we 
argue, Mr. Speaker, that 3 per cent of the population of this 
country which reside in this province of Saskatchewan cannot, 
and cannot finance 40 per cent of the land base in terms of 
agricultural assistance. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. All hon. members will 
recognize that we have much time ahead of us and the 
opportunity to put remarks on the record. And I encourage all 
hon. members to put their remarks on the record and to cease 
from shouting them across the floor. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Maybe the folks at home can tell me 
another skill-testing question: who was the member for 
Kindersley that was leader of the Progressive Conservative 
Party and then wandered in the middle of the night over to the 
new Saskatchewan Party and betraying his constituents? Maybe 
that’s the next skill-testing question. B.B. are his initials . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . And no wonder he gets upset. No 
wonder he gets upset because I would be a little bit shy about 
that too, a little bit sensitive I guess. Because when you walk 
away from your constituents, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Speaker, just 
let me say something parenthetically here. 
 
The Bill we brought forward, The Respect for Constituents Act 
in this province, why do you think it was brought forward for 
the first time in the history — for the first time in the history of 
this province. We had people cross the floor in legislatures lots 
over the years, one at a time . . . you know, shouldn’t say lots, 
but there’s always a handful of those people who run from their 
convictions. 
 
But the reason we had to bring this in was because people were 
demanding it. Because they said it is obnoxious that someone 
can say to the people who elect them that I represent you on the 
basis of what you elected me on, on my philosophy, then 
holus-bolus turn around and say, now I’m doing something else. 
 
One or two over a period or a handful over a period of years 
crossing the floor can be tolerated. But it’s an insult to the 
people of this province, Mr. Speaker, for 10 members to throw 
away the convictions that they preached to get elected on, and 
walk in the middle of the night over to a party that has one — 
one — ambition in mind only, and that is power. And that is 
power. 
 
I know they get upset when they hear this. And let me go back 
to agriculture, Mr. Speaker. Every time one of those members 
get up . . . and I’ve got some clips here I can show you — I can 
show you. 
 
Here’s the Liberal, Mr. Member from Arm River. He’s got 
some MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) reports that I 
try not to read but read once in a while. On January 27, 1999, 
MLA report in the paper: “Time for NDP government to pony 
up, says the member for Arm River.” 
 



80 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 1999 

February 3, if you were wondering whether Saskatchewan can 
afford farm aid package, here are a few points to ponder. And 
he goes on saying why the government should put their money 
in. 
 
February 10, a week later, time for Premier Roy Romanow 
ponied up, is the quote from the MLA report from the member 
for Arm River. Well not only was he justifying . . . not only was 
he justifying the actions of his Liberal cousins in Ottawa, but he 
was also jeopardizing the position of every Saskatchewan 
person, every Saskatchewan person. 
 
And if you want to go on, Mr. Speaker, the leader . . . the leader 
of the Tory Party, Mr. Hermanson, he too is in the paper saying, 
Saskatchewan government just be quiet and put your 40 per 
cent in. I’ve got the clip here somewhere and I’ll find it sooner 
or later. 
 
And every time they said that, the Liberals and the Tories, every 
time they said that, they put in jeopardy the position of the tax 
base in this province, 40 per cent of the people who get their 
income from agriculture. They were telling the people of 
Saskatchewan . . . they were telling the people of Saskatchewan 
that yes, you can fight the treasuries of the European and the US 
(United States) on your own. That’s what they were saying. 
That’s what they were saying. And I just begin now to give you 
a little bit of credit — giving credit where credit is due. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. Order. Order, 
order. Now I think . . . I think the House has seen a bit of the 
impact on the parliamentary debate when members from both 
sides of the House either on their feet or from their seat engage 
in comments questioning the motives of other hon. members. 
And I think all hon. members will recognize that it doesn’t 
serve debate of this Chamber well to engage in that kind of 
speculation either on the record or off. 
 
And I’ll ask all hon. members to keep the guidelines for good 
quality parliamentary debate — Order! — in mind and to keep 
that in mind when engaging in debate on their feet or engaging 
in comments from their seats. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I know they 
are very sensitive on this point and I’m going to get to the 
reason why. I’ll get to the reason why, but before we do . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order, order, order. Now 
the Chair just made an appeal to all hon. members to avoid 
engaging in reference or inference of character in debate, and I 
think it would serve him well if the minister would just move 
along without commenting on the subject of the Chair’s 
intervention and — Order! — I’ll ask him to do so. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ve just taken 
this time, this little break here, to look up another skill-testing 
question. And further . . . here’s a quote: 
 

As a further sign of my loyalty and that of my caucus 
colleagues, we have each signed a document in which we 
unequivocally deny any intention of joining any other 
party. 

 
That was April 10, 1996 in the Langenburg Four-Town Journal. 

An Hon. Member: — Who said that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Initials are B.B. You might want to find 
out who that is and phone him if he really meant that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move back to the help and the credit that we’re 
going to give the opposition in terms of what they have done for 
the people of this province. I’ve just said that every time they 
stood up and told Saskatchewan government to put their money 
in, they supported Ottawa’s position and not the 3 per cent of 
the taxpayers in this country. 
 
And I’ll tell you what happened to the leader of the Tory Party 
over there, Mr. Hermanson. A little history. We’ve got a little 
quote from November here in the Leader-Post. This was after 
the Minister of Finance . . . his mid-term report. On agriculture 
Mr. Hermanson said the Sask Party . . . I quote: 
 

The Sask Party leader, Elwin Hermanson, agreed with 
Klein that Ottawa, not Saskatchewan, should be providing 
help to cash-strapped farmers. 

 
That was back in November of 1998. Remember I said we had 
the all-party committee. We went — myself and the two critics 
— went to Ottawa. There was a bit of unity. Well then he starts 
to slip though. It comes around to the Leader-Post again in 
December, just a month later. It says here, and I quote: 
 

Sask Party leader Elwin Hermanson is in Ottawa this week 
trying to persuade federal MPs to support his party’s plan 
for a 70-30 split. 

 
Well he slipped one cog. And then as I saw it happening, in 
January, just the third month . . . within three months he’s gone 
full circle. He said, the province should put up its 40 per cent on 
the table, and if that’s what is required, he added. 
 
So that really helped the tax base and the farmers of this 
province, didn’t it? The farmers and the people who earn their 
land from agriculture — 40 per cent of the people in this 
province — that really helped them. So on behalf of those 
people I say thank you, Mr. Hermanson, very much, for saying 
that you can bail yourself out, because that’s exactly what he 
was saying. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is deplorable. And, Mr. Speaker, the Leader 
of the Opposition in the House in last Throne Speech, a year 
ago, didn’t have one word to say about agriculture, not one 
word. Check the record. And then a few months later they’re 
running around saying, well, we could see it was coming, the 
. . . (inaudible) . . . problem coming. Why couldn’t you see the 
problem was coming? 
 
And you know what? I can probably count on two hands and 
maybe a little more that number of agriculture questions last 
year in this House. If they could see that the problem was 
coming, where were the questions? 
 
Now that is not being totally forthright, Mr. Speaker, when you 
say you can see the problem coming and the evidence is to the 
contrary. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to go now to give more credit to these 



March 18, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 81 

people, for the opposition. You know I want to be very, very 
clear that there is a myth being purveyed across this province 
that the Tory Party is the farmers’ friend. I am going to spend 
hours and hours and hours — as long as it takes — to have 
people understand that this is a myth, Mr. Speaker, and I’ll 
prove to you and to the opposition that it is a myth. It won’t 
take me very long because the numbers add up very, very 
quickly. 
 
This myth that they’re on the farmers’ side, and let’s take a look 
at all the issues, the policy issues that have influenced 
Saskatchewan agriculture, that have influenced Saskatchewan 
agriculture over the last number of years. I could go back 
further but I’m going to start in 1988. 
 
In 1988, Mr. Speaker, with the support of the Tories at the time 
— I can remember it well. In fact I can remember the member 
from, not Moosomin . . . but Souris-Cannington, just in 
Bengough about three or four weeks ago, when I brought the 
issue up of two-price wheat, jumping to his feet and saying, oh 
well, eastern Canada got all the benefit of two-price wheat and 
it should be gone anyway. He’s still saying it. 
 
Well here’s point number one. The policy supported, the policy 
supported by this Tory Party here took away two-price wheat in 
1988. And do you know how much it was? Do you know what 
he said — it wasn’t benefiting western Saskatchewan, western 
Canada or other. Do you know the dollar figure on an annual 
basis that it brought to western Canada? Two hundred and fifty 
million dollars that you — that you — took out of the farmers’ 
pocket. 
 
And I want to give you credit for that on behalf of the 
Saskatchewan farmers. Thanks a lot for taking $250 million out 
of western Canada every year, every year — not just once. So 
in 10 years it’s 2.5 billion. Do you think that would have 
helped? 
 
The friends of the farmer? What a myth. What a myth, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
(1445) 
 
And then in 1995 if I heard it once, I heard it a thousand times 
get rid of the Crow. You talk . . . remember in 1982 — keep the 
Crow, let Blakeney go. Well that changed real quick. And to the 
detriment of this province, for 10 years building up the debt. 
The Crow benefit of $320 million advocated . . . they advocated 
the demise of the Crow time after time after time. And you 
know what? They succeeded. 
 
So I want to give you credit for that. On behalf of the producers 
of Saskatchewan, thanks a heap for getting rid of the help and 
get rid of the Crow. Three hundred and twenty million dollars 
each and every year on top of the $250 million that the 
two-price wheat left. Add it up. There’s more to come. 
 
What a myth. Friends. Well I’ll tell you with friends like that, 
the farmers don’t need enemies. But you know what? They run 
around saying that they’re the friends of rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Deregulation — how many times have you heard this group 
over here talk about deregulation? Deregulation is the greatest 

thing. 
 
Well you know what deregulation did in 1995 as well, Mr. 
Speaker? In addition to the loss of the Crow benefit, it allowed 
the gains in railway productivity to no longer be shared with 
producers. Guess how much that cost us, friends of the farmer? 
A hundred and five million dollars annually. 
 
So on behalf of the farmers, I thank you and give you credit for 
taking another $105 million out of the pockets of Saskatchewan 
producers. 
 
And you turn around and say you’re the friend of the farmer. 
What a myth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and it goes on. This is the one that really gets me. 
In 1985 . . . 1995, rather, Mr. Hermanson, the leader of the Tory 
Party was a Reform MP (Member of Parliament) in Ottawa, a 
Reform MP in Ottawa, and in 1995, the Liberals, the Liberals 
reduced the safety net funding to agriculture unilaterally from 
$850 million a year to $600 million a year. That took $80 
million out of Saskatchewan farmers’ pockets — 80 million 
every year. 
 
And do you know what, do you know what the leader of the 
Tory Party said the year later, after they just took, the Liberals 
took $250 million out? This is a press report from The Western 
Producer, June 27, 1996, “Reform press for more agricultural 
cuts.” Two hundred and fifty million a year wasn’t quite enough 
for the Reform Party and Mr. Hermanson and his colleagues. 
 
And it goes on — with a pretty picture, well, with a picture of 
Mr. Hermanson — talking about another $20 million. Now $20 
million isn’t a great lot, but here’s the point: after he sought 
$250 million cut by the Liberals when he was sitting in the 
House, and then the next year goes and says we should cut more 
from agriculture. 
 
Well I’ll give him credit. I’ll give Mr. Hermanson credit for 
supporting that $250 million cut. I’ll tell you, this is the friend 
. . . this is the leader who’s the friend of agriculture? 
 
Mr. Speaker, add them up, add them up. If you add up the 
two-price wheat, just on an annual basis, don’t even accumulate 
it. Those four things add up to Saskatchewan — a loss. If we 
would’ve thought to keep these it could have been in our 
farmers’ pockets. Annually $635 million. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Whoa. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Whoa, he says. 
 
Well I’ll tell you, I can tell you I’m on a crusade. Because I am 
going to convince every farmer in this province that you are a 
myth when you purvey the tune that you are a friend of 
Saskatchewan farmers: $320 million dollars a year for Crow; 
250 . . . well Saskatchewan’s share of two-price wheat, 125 
million; $110 million with freight rates; and $80 million with 
the federal safety net reduction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here’s the point. These people run around 
pretending they’re the friend of rural Saskatchewan. Ask 
yourself the question — you ask yourselves the question — 



82 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 1999 

where would we be today if we had that $635 million in our 
pockets every year, which we could have had had we banded 
together, had we fought for it — maybe we wouldn’t have it all, 
but I’ll guarantee if we would’ve all been same page. 
 
And you know what, we were fighting for that. Every issue. I 
can campaign and went to rallies and talked to farmers and went 
to Ottawa and went to Regina before I was elected, and 
promoted it when I was in government. I was supporting, and 
we were supporting, it as a New Democratic party in 
government, every issue that those people succeeded in taking 
out $635 million a year from the pockets of Saskatchewan 
farmers. 
 
That is hypocrisy. You can’t run around saying you’re the 
friend of rural Saskatchewan. So on behalf of all the people, I 
give you credit. We wouldn’t be, Mr. Speaker, worried about 
the AIDA program today had we had that money on an annual 
basis. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Let me give you another little sidebar 
comment. The Crow benefit alone of $320 million is half of 
that, nearly half . . . over half . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — You’re still on the Crow . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Well we’re still on the Crow, he says. 
 
You’re darn right. You’re darn right. We’re working like mad, 
we’re working like mad to try to fill in that gap of $320 million 
but you can’t do it overnight. But, Mr. Speaker, the 
Government of Canada today has a WTO (World Trade 
Organization) agreement that was signed two years ago. Under 
that agreement we have a certain amount of money that we can 
put towards agriculture and safety nets. 
 
They’re at 20 per cent . . . okay, there he goes again. How much 
did you put towards this? It’s not me my friend. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s not me. I tell the member for Rosetown I just take the 
money from the taxpayers who work hard in this province and 
try to distribute it. And I’ll tell you if he keeps saying just take 
more of that money and put it into your own pockets to try bail 
yourself out, we will never succeed in getting this province 
turned around with that attitude. 
 
If we were to get more money out of Ottawa to fight the 
European/US treasuries as we should then we can use more of 
the tax dollars that we have to supply services, pay down debt, 
and give the taxpayers . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order! Now we don’t need to be 
shouting across the floor, and I’ll ask for all hon. members to 
come to order and allow the hon. member, the minister, to make 
his remarks in an uninterrupted kind of way. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, the opposition doesn’t like 
to hear the truth. The credit that I’m giving them today, the 
credit that I’m giving them today is credit they deserve. It is 
true credit. They deserve the credit for taking away that money 
from Saskatchewan farmers and rural communities. But you 
know what, they went around pretending, the opposition went 
around pretending that it’s nothing to do with them, nothing to 
do with them. Well it’s got a lot to do with them. 

But let me get back to my point about the WTO. Canada is at 20 
per cent over the potential funding under WTO — 20 per cent 
We could have still had the Crow Benefit, a subsidy that the 
Europeans and equivalent subsidies the Europeans and the U.S. 
kept, and we wouldn’t be worried about AIDA. The U.S. are at 
35 per cent of their WTO and the Europeans are at 67 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you see we could talk about . . . I won’t have time 
to talk about WTO policy, but the fact of the matter is WTO is 
important for trade but it’s domestic policy, it’s domestic policy 
that from the Liberals that’s dictating the fact that we don’t 
have what we could have today. 
 
So let’s not confuse . . . and they run and hide behind WTO all 
the time. Let’s not confuse WTO from domestic policy because 
that’s the reasons we have the loss of the Crow. It’s nothing to 
do with WTO. 
 
Mr. Speaker, so the credit that these people receive is simply 
put to them as this is your baby, and I’m going to tell every 
farmer in Saskatchewan that I can that this myth is now going 
to be shattered and broken. 
 
And there’s two more issues they’re on. It hasn’t ended here. 
They’ve only succeeded in four; they’ve only succeeded in 
getting rid of 635 million. Wait, there’s more to come — $275 
million annually that the Wheat Board brings us. What’s the 
policy? Get rid of the Wheat Board. Well I hope I can never 
give you credit for getting rid of the Wheat Board because 
that’s $275 million that we need in our pocket. 
 
And what about the transportation policy? You look at the 
Estey report that the members opposite are so happy about and 
they want to get it in there. You know what the biggest thing in 
that is? — one of the biggest? — is get rid of the cap on 
transportation. 
 
If you look at the transportation in this country compared to the 
U.S. in the areas where there is an unregulated, non-competitive 
environment, the US rate is $20 a tonne higher — $20 a tonne. 
 
Do you know what every $10 a tonne means to this country, 
this western Canada? — $200 million out of our pocket; $200 
million for every 10. So even if it didn’t go the US rate, even if 
it just went up $10 a tonne — $200 million. I’ll tell you I hope I 
can never give them credit for that because again they’d be 
taking money, stealing money from the farmers of this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these people, this opposition who decided that 
they were going to be the saviours in the middle of the night of 
Saskatchewan farmers have put forward policies that have 
destroyed this province in the farm financial community. 
 
And then they went around with their solution. Just put your 
money in, they say — just put your money in; you guys put 
your money in. Mr. Speaker, who are you guys? You guys are 
the people of the province who pay taxes, that’s who you guys 
are. 
 
But somehow they say they just want to split that; they want to 
say government is you guys. But you guys are the people of this 
province who pay taxes. So they’re saying bail yourself out, 



March 18, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 83 

you can do it, when 40 per cent of the people of this province 
draw their income indirectly or directly from agriculture. What 
kind of logic is that? 
 
What kind of policy or platform do we have from the opposition 
in this province today when they wilfully, wilfully take money 
out of farmers’ pockets and haven’t got enough credit for it. But 
they’re going to get credit, you wait and trust me. Trust me — 
every breathing breath — I’ll be giving them credit for taking 
that money away from farmers. 
 
But they won’t quit there — they won’t quit there. They want to 
take more away through the demise of the Canadian Wheat 
Board and through the removal of the cap on transportation so 
that farmers can even be in a worse off position. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, their solution of Saskatchewan people 
bailing themselves out won’t work. And I’m going to plea to 
them now, both the Tories and the Liberals. This issue of farm 
support, Mr. Speaker, has gone beyond politics. As I said at the 
SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) 
meeting, it’s gone beyond politics. 
 
When we first started in this House and we had the all-party 
agreement and we had the trip to Ottawa, I thought we were 
getting somewhere. And I say to the members opposite, they 
can argue with me about all the things they want to in terms of 
this province and the running of this province. But for once in 
your life, put your partisan politics aside to help the producers, 
not steal from them like your other policies have done. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I plea to the members opposite . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I’ve been listening to the hon. 
minister’s remarks and I notice his reference to the use of the 
word steal. And I think the hon. minister will recognize that it’s 
improper to be using that word in debate to refer to the motives 
of other hon. members, and I’ll ask him to withdraw that remark 
and continue his debate. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I withdraw and 
apologize for that remark. I didn’t . . . I knew when I said it, I 
shouldn’t have said it but it slipped out in debate. Thank you. 
 
Now what I’m saying, Mr. Speaker, is that these people — 
these people I’m asking — it’s beyond politics. Because, Mr. 
Speaker, it doesn’t . . . it matters big who rules this province, 
who governs this province. But in terms of the governing body 
— in terms of the governing body sitting on your right side — it 
doesn’t matter who’s here in terms of the dollars and cents that 
come from this tax base. Because while we are growing our 
economy, we still can’t take on the treasuries of the Europeans 
and the US on our own. 
 
And I ask the members opposite: get on the bus. Get on the bus. 
I’ll argue with you about anything, but on this issue it is 
imperative that we band together, not just with political parties, 
but with SARM, with SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association), with the business communities, 
with the elevator companies. 
 
Because it doesn’t matter who’s governing, you simply cannot 
bail yourself out with three per cent of the population tax base 

and over 40 per cent of the land base. It’s not possible. It’s not 
possible. 
 
So I ask the members opposite, if they get up and talk about 
their speech, first of all, acknowledge that they are . . . have 
they been given credit for the policies that have taken many, 
many dollars from Saskatchewan farmers? I’d ask them to come 
clean, Mr. Speaker. Come clean in terms of what your real 
agenda is. What’s your real agenda? 
 
You can’t have it both ways. You can’t have it both ways 
because you can’t say, as they believe, that government should 
have no influence, no money into the agricultural system. In 
fact one of the Sask Party, one of the Sask Party . . . one of the 
Tory’s resolutions, if I can find it, a resolution at one of their 
conventions. Where did I put it? It says that they believe that 
there should be . . . No. Here we go. I’ll read it to you: 
government should never become involved directly in business 
through grants, loans or direct payments. 
 
(1500) 
 
This is the agricultural section. Let me say it again. This is a 
Sask Party resolution. And the rationale for the resolution 
rather, it says, government should never become involved 
directly in business through grants, loans or direct investments. 
 
So now there’s a little bit of a problem here because at the same 
time Mr. Hermanson, the leader of the Tories, was saying . . . 
was flip-flopping from don’t put any money in to put 40 per 
cent in, he has a little resolution package that says they 
shouldn’t put any money into agriculture — shouldn’t put any 
money into agriculture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think there has to be some explanation here. Mr. 
Hermanson has to . . . And his members in this House have to 
get up and explain to this House what they really stand for. 
 
Well I know what they stand for. They stand for eliminating 
$635 million, $635 million from the pockets of the farmers of 
this province. And you run around . . . and they run around 
saying that they’re going to be the saviour for agriculture in 
rural Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, that is a joke. And I will have 
a hoarse voice before I’m finished telling people about that 
story. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, there’s one more issue I want to cover — 
I’ve gone on longer than I thought on this issue — and that is 
the new safety net package that’s coming down. We’re in 
negotiations — and I would ask you: hopefully, you’ve learned 
your lesson — we’re in negotiations, all the provinces are in 
negotiations with a new five-year safety net that’s to be signed 
in the future. I don’t know if it will be signed this year or not — 
it depends on how they go. 
 
But, you know, I’ll explain to you what’s happening. This is 
another thing that’s beyond politics. And I’ll be interested in 
your response. 
 
We have a safety net package now of $600 million comprised 
of 30 per cent risk, which is crop insurance; 70 per cent value of 
product, which is NISA (Net Income Stabilization Account); 
and a small amount of money in what we call companion 



84 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 1999 

programs — 30 per cent risk, 70 per cent value of product. 
Seven provinces at the last federal federal/provincial meeting 
made a presentation to go from risk-based to total value of 
product. That will mean, Mr. Speaker, that 
Saskatchewan-Manitoba in particular where we’re selling our 
grain products at an international price wars where we have 
very, very high risk, whether we would be removing that. And 
we go total to value product. 
 
So if you’re a potato grower in PEI (Prince Edward Island) or if 
you’re a vegetable or a fruit grower in any other part of this 
country where you’re not selling into a trade war and where 
you’re selling domestically and when you’re not, it’s not into 
like I say a trade war environment, the value . . . you want to go 
to, to value your product. 
 
Saskatchewan and Manitoba stood side by side, Liberal or . . . 
Conservative and NDP governments because it’s beyond 
politics. I want you to listen to this and think about your 
response. Stood side by side and made a presentation saying to 
the federal minister, you can’t do this because the net result of 
this would mean a shifting of the fundamental dollars and safety 
nets from the federal government to Saskatchewan-Manitoba: a 
reduction of $70 million for Saskatchewan and $30 million for 
Manitoba. That would mean we . . . if that was implemented. If 
the seven provinces got their way, Mr. Speaker, we would have 
to either cut crop insurance or cut NISA. 
 
So I ask the members opposite, don’t stand up when this comes 
to the issue . . . comes to the fore and say, just put your money 
in. Because it’s the same issue. We don’t have enough money to 
bail ourselves out. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, here’s the hypocrisy of this Liberal 
government in Ottawa — I apologize for saying hypocrisy, I 
know that’s not a nice word — here’s the problem with this 
Liberal government in Ottawa. This country was built, Mr. 
Speaker, so that I can go to any part of this country and I can 
get the same education, the same health care, the same social 
services, the same pensions. By accident, no. By conscience. 
Because there are poor parts of this country and there are rich 
parts of this country. And the people who put this country 
together decided that there was going to be equality in this 
country. And so there is to a large degree. 
 
Let’s use the same principle for supporting agriculture. Let’s 
not let the high population, small agricultural based provinces 
lead the way. Let’s not let them influence that thinking in 
Ottawa where it’s every person for themself. 
 
Let’s have a government in Ottawa with a conscience that can 
say it is not fair for 3 per cent of the population in this country 
to have to provide dollars for 40 per cent of the agricultural 
land. Meaning, in Saskatchewan, under the AIDA program 
alone, $70 per capita goes to the farm program, but if you 
happen to live in Ontario $4 dollars per capita goes to the farm 
program. 
 
We need a conscience in Ottawa. People delivering these 
programs that have the same thought patterns as the people who 
put the social system in this country together. Equality. Access. 
Because if we don’t, my friends in opposition, you can say what 
you like and you can try to make government, and maybe you 

will someday, but it won’t matter. It won’t matter because 
you’ll have the same problem. So when this comes up again, I 
ask you: just say no, Saskatchewan people can no longer . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Now the hon. minister will 
recognize of course that the rules of debate require the debate to 
be directed to the Chair and not directly to members in the 
Chamber, and I’ll ask him to guide himself accordingly. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, I ask through you that all 
members of this House put their politics aside on this issue, 
because it doesn’t matter who’s in power. There’s not enough 
tax revenue in this province, no matter how fast we build it — 
and it is building — for a small tax base to support that large 
agriculture base. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, members opposite have some explaining to 
do. Members on this side of the House are going to continue to 
give them credit for removing the 300 . . . or help remove the 
$635 million annually. Just think. Annually! That’s more than 
the safety net package for western Canada. It’s double the 
Crow. It’s absolutely bizarre to think that somebody would say 
that they were the friend of the Saskatchewan farm rural 
community and at the same time work hard and advocate 
policies that takes money out of their pocket. 
 
I think they’ve got a chance to explain that. There will be an 
election coming, I’m sure, that can explain it because I’m going 
to be asking everyone to have them explain it. And I’m going to 
be giving them credit for it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I implore these members and all members of the 
Assembly to support this Throne Speech; and secondly, to look 
at agriculture and the needs today in agriculture as something 
beyond the political spectrum, as something that is a need to 
build a country with fairness, as the country has been built in 
the past with fairness. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 
to rise today to represent the constituents of the good 
constituency of Cannington in the very southeast corner of the 
province, right on the Manitoba-US border. The constituency of 
Cannington in large part is made up of people involved in both 
agriculture and the energy industry — oil, in other words — 
and small-business people, Mr. Speaker. And they’re very 
concerned about what’s going on in this province, and they’re 
very concerned about what this government is doing, or not 
doing, as the case may be. In most cases, it’s not doing. But in a 
few cases it is what the government is doing, such as removing 
health care from rural Saskatchewan. I listen with a great deal 
of interest to what the Minister of Agriculture had to say. And 
while I want to deal in large part with my critic area, that being 
health, I think there’s a few things that the Minister of 
Agriculture had to say that do need to have some comments 
made on them. 
 
And one thing that I think should be noted, Mr. Speaker, is the 
amount of credit that the minister wants to give us and the 
amount of time that the minister wants to spend debating our 
platform. And I’m pleased to hear that. Because I think it’s 
important, Mr. Speaker, that the people of Saskatchewan know 



March 18, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 85 

that the Saskatchewan Party does indeed have a plan for the 
next election, a plan that is much better founded, Mr. Speaker, 
much better laid out than what the Speech from the Throne was 
that this government presented. 
 
In fact I’m surprised that the number of times ideas and 
thoughts of our platform showed up in the Speech from the 
Throne. And it goes to show, Mr. Speaker, that the platform we 
presented has a lot of validity to it. It was sound and now the 
government wants to extract from that platform to use those 
ideas. We believe those ideas are good for all of the people of 
Saskatchewan. We’re pleased to see that the government 
opposite is recognizing that fact and starting to utilize some of 
those. 
 
One of things that the Minister of Agriculture was talking about 
was the power of the opposition — the power of the opposition 
to influence national affairs, to influence such things as the 
national agricultural programs such as the Crow rate. The 
minister opposite was giving us the credit for having influenced 
the changes to the Crow rate. And, Mr. Speaker, I believe that 
the changes to the Crow rate were a long time in coming. And 
fact is there were opportunities to make those changes a 
significant a number of years before that time, but the 
government members opposite and their allies in the agriculture 
industry opposed those changes. They opposed the idea of a $7 
billion payout on the Crow rate while they were in opposition. 
 
And so what did they settle with? What did they settle for when 
they were in government, when they actually in theory, Mr. 
Speaker, had their hands on the levers of power? What did they 
choose? They chose $1.6 billion — a loss of $5.4 billion. While 
they had their hands on the levers of power, and yet they’re 
saying that we in the opposition were actually in control. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister talks about an annual loss of $635 
million because of the power of the opposition, the 
Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Well I’d like to be able to say that we have that much power, 
Mr. Speaker, but we weren’t in government. Indeed there has 
been even a greater loss in agriculture than $635 million over 
the last few years. 
 
While the minister of Agriculture was the minister, while the 
minister from Intergovernmental Affairs is commenting from 
his seat right now, while he was the minister of Agriculture, 
Agriculture budget in this province went from a billion dollars a 
year in 1991 to less than 300 million this year. That was under 
those ministers of Agriculture and that’s where the real loss in 
actual dollars going into agriculture took place. 
 
It was under the administration of the NDP Agriculture 
ministers — the member from Rosetown; the member from 
Carrot River Valley; the past member who was defeated for his 
inept efforts as the minister of Agriculture, Darrel Cunningham; 
and now the current member from Watrous. That’s where the 
real losses in agriculture took place, Mr. Speaker, under their 
administration. 
 
You know, the Minister of Agriculture talked about the record, 
about the history. And he’s talking . . . he tries to talk about the 
Saskatchewan Party platform, and he does so for good reason, 

Mr. Speaker. Because he doesn’t want to talk about the old 
record, about the record he and his government have developed 
in their eight years. Because that’s all they’re going to get, Mr. 
Speaker, is eight years of government. 
 
In their eight years of government, what happened to the GRIP 
(gross revenue insurance program) program? You know, I 
remember that same Minister of Agriculture when he was the 
opposition Ag critic prior to 1991, running around this province 
saying, I’m going to build you a bigger and better GRIP 
program. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, they certainly changed the GRIP program. 
Because the Premier and his Agriculture ministers went zap, 
you’re gone. And that’s what happened to the GRIP program. 
They cancelled it, cut it. They broke the contracts, Mr. Speaker, 
broke the contracts and sent 300-plus million dollars back to the 
federal government. They took about a hundred and ninety-one 
or a hundred and ninety-four million dollars out of the GRIP 
program back into the provincial coffers to balance the budget 
that year. 
 
There was no money, Mr. Speaker, left in farm programs for 
farmers when they needed it, at times like this when there was 
drought up in the Biggar, Saskatoon area, going across through 
Cut Knife to Lloydminster. 
 
There was no money in farm programs in Saskatchewan when 
the prices dropped through the floor because those members 
killed the farm aid programs, GRIP. 
 
(1515) 
 
When they finally recognized last fall that there was indeed 
something happening in rural Saskatchewan and what was 
happening in agriculture wasn’t good, when that finally 
happened — after we had indeed brought it up for them many 
times in the House during the session, after the Premier had had 
the Premiers’ conference in Saskatoon where he was the 
chairman, where he could have brought up agriculture as an 
issue, where he actually took transportation off the agenda — it 
was only after all that that they finally recognized that there was 
a concern in agriculture, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so the minister recognizes finally that there’s a crisis and 
then the Premier steps out and says, it’s Saskatchewan’s ice 
storm. And about a week or so later, the Minister of Agriculture 
who was just on his feet stands up and says, oh no, crisis is 
over. Price of grain went up 20 cents. Crisis is over. We don’t 
have to put any money in now. It’s all over. Go home. 
 
Well maybe he convinced his colleagues on the government 
benches that the crisis was over but he certainly never 
convinced a single farmer across Saskatchewan. 
 
And so he kept saying, no we’re not going to do it. We’re not 
going to participate in these programs. There is no need for it; 
the crisis is over. We’re not putting any money up. And he 
wasn’t going to. 
 
And it took the opposition to step in, Mr. Speaker, and push 
him, and push him hard, before he would again admit that there 
was a crisis in agriculture in Saskatchewan and that the 



86 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 1999 

government, the Government of Saskatchewan representing the 
majority of farmers, had a responsibility to defend those 
farmers. And it wasn’t until he was pushed by the 
Saskatchewan Party that he screwed up his courage enough to 
go down to Ottawa and say, we’ll participate; we’ll put up the 
money that we have to, to get money back from you. 
 
Which really surprises me, Mr. Speaker, that he would have 
taken that attitude because the Minister of Economic 
Development, while she was the minister of Finance, kept 
saying, oh no, no, we can’t have any more economic 
development in this province because if we do, we won’t get 
our payments from Ottawa, we won’t be on welfare any more. 
And heaven forbid that we shouldn’t be on welfare, Mr. 
Speaker, according to the minister. 
 
The member from Saskatoon Northwest asks if AIDA is a good 
program. Well most of the farmers that I’ve talked to have said 
no, because this government did not get out of Ottawa what was 
needed. 
 
The Premier of this province stood up in the House in I think it 
was 1989 and said the measure of the Premier of this province 
is how much farm aid he can get out of Ottawa. That’s what the 
Premier, the man from Riversdale said. What did he get out of 
Ottawa, Mr. Speaker, what did he get? I think it’s a hundred and 
seventy-four million dollars — a hundred and seventy-four 
million dollars. He almost spent that much on the plane trip 
down to Ottawa in 1991. 
 
That’s what the man from Riversdale got for us because he sent 
people to Ottawa to negotiate that wouldn’t admit earlier that 
there was even a problem. So it’s tough to admit, negotiate from 
a ground floor, that there is no problem here but you need to 
give us some money. When you come to a program, when you 
come to a position and say there is no problem here but you 
need to give me some money anyways, why should the other 
side even negotiate seriously with you? 
 
The member talked of the all-party committee that went to 
Ottawa. And a Liberal MP (Member of Parliament) sitting there 
at the table says to the Minister of Agriculture, how’s the 
economy doing in Saskatchewan? Is it doing well? And the 
minister responds, yes it’s doing very well, in fact we’re 
running a surplus. So the Liberal MP on the committee says, 
well you want us to put a whole bunch of money in because 
we’re running a surplus, but you don’t want to put any money 
in because you’re running a surplus. 
 
I think there are some non-parliamentary terms for that attitude, 
Mr. Speaker, that was exemplified that day by the Minister of 
Agriculture. 
 
So when you go into a negotiations with an attitude with the 
federal government, but we don’t really have a problem with 
you but we’d like you to kick some cash in anyways, you’re not 
going to get a whole lot back out of it. And that’s exactly what 
this Premier and this Minister of Agriculture got — not a lot. 
 
The fact is what they got is a program with a whole bunch of 
strings on it that very few people are going to benefit from. 
Very few people in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, are going to 
benefit from this program. 

The minister talked about my leader, Mr. Hermanson, and 
claiming that he wanted to cut a bunch of money out of an 
agricultural program that the federal government had. And 
indeed he did want to cut some money out of a federal program, 
but it would have hurt, Mr. Speaker, it would have hurt those 
people that the NDP want to keep in place, because what he was 
talking about was cutting $20 million out of the Agriculture 
department bureaucracy. 
 
Cut those people out of the bureaucracy, there’s less money for 
union dues and there’s less money for the NDP coffers, and 
that’s what he was talking about cutting. And I think that’s a 
good idea, Mr. Speaker, that if you have an excess of 
bureaucracy in government, it is worthy of removing that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The minister talks about you guys, you guys meaning the 
people of Saskatchewan. That when you’re talking about paying 
for various programs, when you’re talking about paying for 
things like the farm aid program, that when it’s you guys that 
are paying, it’s every taxpayer. And indeed the minister is right, 
which seems to run counter, Mr. Speaker, though, to the whole 
message, the whole philosophy that the NDP and CCF 
(Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) have put forward on 
other programs. 
 
You know how many people in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 
have heard the term free medicare? Free hospitalization? Free 
medicine? I think probably everybody has but, Mr. Speaker, it’s 
you guys that are paying the bill, the same “you guys” that the 
minister’s been talking about. It’s the taxpayer of 
Saskatchewan. It’s not free to taxpayers for farm aid, and it’s 
not free medicare, Mr. Speaker. It’s paid for by every taxpayer 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
And I’m surprised that the members opposite don’t recognize 
that contradiction in their philosophy. Because I didn’t hear any 
of the members making any comments about that, that if you 
can’t have free farm programs —that they’re paid for by the 
taxpayers — then how can you have free medicare and not paid 
for by the taxpayers when the dollars come out of the same 
Consolidated Fund, Mr. Speaker. So using the minister’s own 
logic we don’t have free farm programs, and we don’t have free 
medicare, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to move on to a few of the other things 
that were in the Speech from the Throne. The government, 
under a heading of jobs and growth, states that together we have 
created 30,000 jobs. Well, Mr. Speaker, I think it comes down 
to measurements here. 
 
Now the government in a lot of their statistics and a lot of the 
things they do, they like to measure from 1991, when they got 
elected, until today. Except, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to 
jobs. They don’t want to measure from 1991 in jobs. Because if 
you measure from the day this government was elected until 
today or the last numbers that we have for last month, they’ve 
only actually created 21,000 jobs, Mr. Speaker — 21,000 jobs. 
And if you don’t believe me, check Statistics Canada. That’s 
where it comes from — Statistics Canada. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there are a number of misinformations in the 
Speech from the Throne, areas where the government has 



March 18, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 87 

glossed over things, tried to present the good side up on these 
issues. And this is one of those where they’re claiming 30,000 
jobs, where in actual fact there was only 21,000 created. 
 
And the fact is, over the period of the last year, in the period of 
the last year there was a loss of 4,100 jobs — 4,100 jobs. Now 
the member from Regina Albert South can claim something 
different. You know, if you want to go back to the month 
before, there was a loss of 4,900 jobs. Always a loss of jobs, 
Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan in the last few months. 
 
Now the argument there by the government is, well oil prices 
are down, grain prices are down; you know, those nasty 
Europeans are being hard on us. But, Mr. Speaker, oil prices 
and grain prices are down in Manitoba and they created 11,000 
jobs. Oil prices and grains prices are down in Alberta and they 
created I think it’s around 54,000 jobs. So why is it that only in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, only in Saskatchewan across 
Canada, was there losses of jobs over the last year? 
 
An Hon. Member: — NDP Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — That’s right. My colleague says NDP 
Saskatchewan. And that is indeed the case, indeed the case, Mr. 
Speaker, and that’s the reason why there has been a consistent 
loss of jobs in the last few months in this province. 
 
The government goes on to say that unemployment is at a 
16-year low — unemployment is at a 16-year low. And it 
probably is, Mr. Speaker, because the employable people in 
Saskatchewan are leaving. Demographically we have the largest 
percentage of population between the age of zero and 15, or 
between 55 and however high they measure, at 100 or 
whatever. 
 
But when it comes to working people, Mr. Speaker, we have a 
very low percentage of our population. And that’s a shame. The 
fact is it’s a crime, Mr. Speaker, that we should be in such 
position. We have good people in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
We have developed many very good people and we can build a 
province, Mr. Speaker. We’ve proved it. We built Alberta. The 
people from Saskatchewan moving to Alberta built that 
province. 
 
They still talk about people from Moose Jaw in Calgary as 
being the Moose Jaw mafia running the oil patch. Those are 
Saskatchewan people, and they would have built that in 
Saskatchewan but for what happened in the 1950s in this 
province under the CCF, the forerunner of the NDP. 
 
The government talks in their Speech from the Throne about 
diversifying the economy, and I note with interest what 
examples they use when they talk about diversifying the 
economy. They talk about Weyerhaeuser up at P.A. They talk 
about the Saskatchewan fertilizer company out here at Belle 
Plaine. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Saferco. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Saferco. All projects that were started 
by the previous government. And when the ministers of 
Economic Development or Finance go down to New York, 
what do they brag about as the great industrial developments? 

Those are a couple of the examples they use, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now try to name a major industrial development in 
Saskatchewan under the tenure of the NDP. I think most people 
would be scratching their heads trying to come up with those 
examples. 
 
(1530) 
 
Mr. Speaker. the government goes on to say, “My government 
brought in a bridge support program at a critical time to assist 
our hog producers.” Well I wonder how many hog producers 
actually got any money out of it. I certainly haven’t heard of 
any yet. 
 
So where is this great program? The $140 million committed to 
assist producers, part of the farm AIDA program — $140 
million. And then it goes on to say, we’ll pay 40 per cent of that 
program. So they’re even trying to take credit, Mr. Speaker, for 
the monies that the federal government is putting in. Because 
they’re certainly doing that in the next sentence — my 
government also announced that $85 million top-up to the 
NISA accounts. Well the top-up did occur, Mr. Speaker, but 
this government only put in 10 million; $75 million of that was 
federal money and yet this government is trying to take credit 
for it. Some more of the misinformation in this particular 
document. 
 
And most of the rest of this document, Mr. Speaker, is really 
not of any value until we come down to health care. It says, 
“My government’s goal is to keep building a strong, sustainable 
health system.” Well I think most of the people in this province 
would change that word “keep” to “start.” They would wish that 
they would build a strong, sustainable health care system. 
 
Because talk to Ms. Bull, what we raised today, and ask her 
what she thinks of our health care system, being rushed out the 
door after surgery on her lung, with no one knowing that she 
was being expelled from the hospital, Mr. Speaker. Those are 
the kind of things that the member from Saskatoon Nutana has 
built for a health care system. Those are the kinds of situations 
that arise on a daily basis in this province, Mr. Speaker, on a 
daily basis. 
 
I wonder if the Health minister or the junior associate minister, 
Mr. Speaker, have ever tried walking to the General Hospital 
after dark? I wonder if they’ve ever tried that. Because a lot of 
nurses have to do that, Mr. Speaker, and they’ve been assaulted 
in doing so. And fact is, now the health district has to put 
security guards on to escort them around the premises. That’s 
the kind of health care system that the NDP have built in this 
city and in this province. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Better than the American system. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well I hear better than the American 
system over there. Well I don’t know about the American 
system across the board, Mr. Speaker, but I’ve had occasion to 
talk with people across in North Dakota. And a good many 
people from Saskatchewan go to North Dakota for their health 
care because they simply can’t get health care service in this 
province. And no one, Mr. Speaker, no one is turned away at 
the door of a hospital in North Dakota. No one is turned away. 



88 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 1999 

Reminds me of the time, Mr. Speaker, when a young lady 
showed up at the door — I think it was St. Paul’s Hospital in 
Saskatoon — at emergency and tried to get in, and the doors 
were locked. So she went to a pay phone and phoned. She went 
to a pay phone and phoned, Mr. Speaker, and the security guard 
came along and told her to move her car. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there are problems in health care in the US, 
but there are certainly lots of problems in health care in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
People in this province, Mr. Speaker, are concerned about their 
health care services. And in the Speech from the Throne it says 
that the government, they are determined that no family should 
go without medical care because they lacked the money to pay 
for it. And their determination lives on in us. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, they’re absolutely right. Money does not 
play a role in getting health care in Saskatchewan. But what we 
have here is simply a lack of health care for a lot of families, 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in Saskatchewan. You know, 
the government likes to brag about universal health care. Well I 
would suggest, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that it’s not universal 
health care we have in this province; it’s universal pain, because 
we all suffer equally in this province when it comes to health 
care. 
 
Many people have heard the stories of patients waiting for 
months and months for surgeries, or months and months for 
cancer treatments. I know of a young woman out east of town 
here who was diagnosed, I believe it was in August, with a 
brain tumour. And it wasn’t until she was blacking out in late 
December with migraine headaches that she finally got in for 
cancer treatments, Mr. Speaker — finally got in. 
 
Or what about the gentleman from Estevan who was trying to 
get into the Allan Blair Clinic for treatments, and when he 
finally got in there to receive his cancer treatments they said, 
you might as well go home; it’s too late. Those are true stories, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, and that’s the health care service we’ve 
had in Saskatchewan, health care service developed by the NDP 
since 1991. And it’s ongoing, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
This program goes on to talk about . . . Again, I mentioned 
earlier to the Speaker that the Speech from the Throne dealt in 
part with the Saskatchewan Party platform. And so you kind of 
recognize certain words in here that the Premier has been using 
in directing towards the Saskatchewan Party program. It says: 
 

Now is not the time to abandon the principles of our health 
system, nor to freeze our investment in . . . people’s health. 

 
Well what’s been happening under this government, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, is not a freeze but a closure of our health care 
system — 52 hospitals across this province have closed as acute 
care services. That is the history of this government, Mr. 
Speaker, closure of facilities. 
 
And what’s their rate of investment in the health care system? 
Their rate of investment is the rate of inflation, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. That’s what their history is. 
 
What we’re proposing to do is do a value-for-money audit. 

Exactly what the Minister of Health just did with the time from 
visiting the surgeon to the time you actually get into surgery, to 
determine where the problems are, and are things being done 
properly. The whole system needs that to be done, not just little 
bits piecemeal here and there but the whole system, Mr. 
Speaker. And that’s what we’re proposing as the Saskatchewan 
Party to be done to health care. 
 
In addition to that we would continue to increase the health care 
budgets by the rate of inflation which is what this government 
has been doing, Mr. Speaker. Only we intend to spend the 
money more wisely to provide front line services, not 
administration, Mr. Speaker, front line services. 
 
The Speech from the Throne goes on to talk about building 
better clinics and health facilities by investing in new, better 
community care like home care, community nutrition programs, 
ambulance services, first responder programs, and other 
initiatives. All very good worthwhile projects, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, all needed in the communities. 
 
But the statement misses out on one critical element, Mr. 
Speaker. Nowhere — nowhere — does it say acute care. 
Nowhere does it say acute care. And that is what the people of 
rural Saskatchewan . . . indeed all of Saskatchewan because it’s 
happened in Regina and it could happen in Saskatoon, we could 
lose our acute care facilities. 
 
So we have to take a very serious look, Mr. Deputy Speaker, at 
exactly what is being proposed by this government when it 
comes to these issues. So I think what we need to look at, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, is what the government is saying. 
 
Well we have heard the associate minister say, eventually we’ll 
see fewer hospitals than we have now. February 22, that was the 
associate minister’s statement. February 26, she went on to say 
— after first on the 22nd having put a torpedo into the NDP’s 
health policy —she went on to say, what a hospital is defined as 
now is something that we are not necessarily going to see in 
rural Saskatchewan. That was the associate minister’s second 
torpedo into Saskatchewan health, Mr. Speaker. Well right after 
that the damage control crews went into work. 
 
That second statement on 26th was said in the morning and the 
damage control crews came out later on that day with some 
information as to try and clarify what the minister was talking 
about, because it certainly did need to be clarified, Mr. Speaker. 
And so they came out with a program that outlined some of the 
things they were talking about called the primary health 
services initiatives. 
 
So the minister is talking and she provided a list here of 
hospitals; these are places, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with acute care 
facilities. These hospitals would be converted, and here are the 
names of the hospitals: Hafford, in the Redberry constituency; 
Hudson Bay in the Carrot River constituency; Beechy and Kyle 
in the Rosetown constituency; senior’s project, the core city 
project in Saskatoon. Now those two places, to the best of my 
knowledge, Mr. Deputy Speaker, don’t have acute care. These 
are in senior’s facilities, Mr. Speaker, along with the Loon Lake 
and Lucky Lake hospitals. 
 
These are going to be converted, Mr. Deputy Speaker, into 



March 18, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 89 

primary health centre services — primary health centre 
services. Now what is a primary health centre . . . health 
services? 
 
Well what it is, what it provides for is assessing, diagnosing, 
treating health problems, including minor surgeries; offering 
health advice; counselling clients regarding health problems, 
treatments, and how to guard against future illness; providing 
advice and education regarding factors which influence health. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don’t hear anything about acute 
care. Not there. There is no acute care here. So to me and the 
people of rural Saskatchewan and the people of urban 
Saskatchewan, a hospital is a place you get acute care. 
 
And when you convert it — when you convert it to a primary 
health services or when you convert it to a health care centre, 
there is no acute care and you no longer have a hospital. 
 
So we have a list here with one, two, three, four, five, six 
hospitals on here that are already being designated as those sites 
. . . Oh here’s some more — I missed these, Mr. Speaker, I 
apologize for that and I apologize to the people of those 
constituencies. Here, we have Eatonia, La Ronge, four 
directions family practice unit, the royal . . . RGH, Regina 
General Hospital, family practice unit, Royal University 
Hospital. North Battleford, Macklin, Unity, Wilkie, Borden — 
those communities are also included in this initiative, Mr. 
Speaker, in moving to primary health services. Primary health 
services as outlined in this briefing doesn’t include acute care. 
 
And I’m going according to what the bureaucrats and the 
minister put out. Nothing about acute care here, Mr. Speaker. 
So those are the government’s plans. That is what this 
government is planning on doing. And yet the minister stands 
up and says no, no. No, we’re not going to close any hospitals. 
 
An Hon. Member: — There are acute care beds in Hafford. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — There are acute care beds, the minister 
hollers across. Yes there are acute care beds in Hafford right 
now. The question is, will there be acute care beds in Hafford 
after the government gets done with their hack-and-slash 
program? That’s the question. So why won’t the minister step 
forward and give us the information? 
 
We’ve asked the government and we have asked the district 
health boards for their three-year strategic studies. Well a few 
of them have supplied it. Most of them say, send us money. 
Tells you how much money the government is giving them 
when they can’t supply another government agency with a 
public record, Mr. Speaker. Some of them have said, sorry we 
can’t give it to you. We have to send it to Regina and they will 
make any changes to it they want to; maybe then we can let you 
have it. And others have simply said, no you can’t have it. 
 
These are public documents, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Why should 
they not be given to the members of this Assembly? But for 
some reason the government members opposite don’t want 
those in our hands. They don’t want those out in the public to 
be seen or to be known because in those plans they would show 
that there is no acute care talked about in what is a primary 
health services and that’s what the NDP’s plan is for health care 

in Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The minister yesterday had her report on the waiting lists. But it 
was very interesting how narrowly focused that report was. It 
focused only on from the surgeon to the surgery and in making 
changes there. And there’s a good number of those changes that 
absolutely have to take place, Mr. Speaker — that absolutely 
have to take place. Such as why are our operating rooms not 
working to the maximum capacity? Why are they being shut 
down every third Friday? 
 
I heard the minister in question period today respond that the 
MRI in Regina will soon be up and running. Well I thought the 
MRI in Regina was supposed to be completed in 1998. This is 
already 1999 and the MRI isn’t working. We have one MRI for 
Saskatchewan. One, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1545) 
 
And I’ve heard derogatory remarks from the members opposite 
about the American system. In North Dakota there are 12 MRIs 
for just over 600,000 people — 12 MRIs. And yet in 
Saskatchewan, and yet in Saskatchewan, we’ve got one for a 
million people, and you can’t get in to see it. The animals, the 
vet college almost has as much time to it on the MRI as people 
do — as people do, Mr. Speaker — because this government 
has mismanaged health care. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I seem to have got the attention of 
the members opposite. And perhaps if they listen they’ll 
actually learn what the people outside of the Ring Road are 
thinking these day, Mr. Speaker, because I strongly suspect that 
the members opposite go from this building, home and back 
again, and try and avoid the public as much as possible. 
 
Because the members of the public are certainly not very happy 
with the members opposite when they have to drive on the 
roads to get to their health care; when they go to their local 
community and find out that their friends and neighbours are 
leaving this province because government has abandoned them. 
 
That’s what’s been happening, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This 
government has been abandoning rural Saskatchewan. It has 
been abandoning Saskatchewan people across the board 
whether they’re in rural or urban constituencies. 
 
Take a look at the roads, Mr. Deputy Speaker, take a look at the 
roads that we have around this province. Drive on Regina 
streets. There’s as many potholes on the major thoroughfares of 
Regina streets as there are on any highway in Saskatchewan 
because this government has abandoned, has abandoned 
highways and infrastructure programs. 
 
The government brags about how much money they actually 
put into highways. You know, $232 million, $232 million. The 
promise two years ago was $2.5 billion over 10 years; 10 years, 
2.5 billion — $250 million a year. It seems pretty logical. But 
they’ve never done it. Not yet they haven’t after two years. 
We’re already running I think it’s about $140 million behind on 
that commitment from this government. And that’s why our 
roads and highways, in town and out of town, are deteriorating 
so badly. 
 



90 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 1999 

When you look at the amount of money, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that actually, actually ends up on the road, on pavement, on 
getting it fixed, we end up with about $60 million, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, $60 million out of a budget of 232 million that 
actually ends up on the road. That’s why these roads continue to 
deteriorate. 
 
The only thing that’s going downhill faster, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, than the road structure in this province is the 
popularity of the government opposite. Their numbers are 
dropping faster than the potholes are filling up in this province, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this document that this government 
proposes as an outline for this session of the legislature, for the 
twenty-third legislature, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is irrelevant to the 
needs of Saskatchewan. The only thing this is, is a blatant 
attempt by the NDP to set themselves up for the upcoming 
election. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re ready for that election and my 
only comment will be that I don’t support this budget and call 
the election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Stanger: — Well, thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is my 
privilege to rise and speak in support of the Speech from the 
Throne. I want to welcome everyone back to this session of the 
legislature, likely to be the last session in the millennium — I 
always have trouble with that word, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I have to say that this Y2K (Year 2000) scare tactics that the 
people have been using doesn’t scare me at all. I grew up in 
rural Saskatchewan without any running water or power. So 
seriously, though, Mr. Deputy Speaker, being on Public 
Accounts and some of the assurances we’ve had from our 
government, Y2K doesn’t scare me. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to thank Mr. Speaker for the work 
that he has been doing. I know he’s not present now but I hope 
that he hears this speech or sees it in the transcript. I want to 
thank him for the work that he’s been doing in promoting 
parliamentary democracy in all the constituencies across the 
province. I have had excellent reports from the teachers in our 
constituency, and I appreciate personally because I think that 
our students have to get a positive view of politicians of all 
political stripes and I myself have given many non-partisan 
presentations to our schools because I feel very strongly that I 
support parliamentary democracy. 
 
I want to thank Mr. Speaker for the work that he has done in 
this area. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Stanger: — I’d like to say welcome back to the Clerk and 
to our Deputy Clerk and the officers of the legislature who do 
so much for us, and welcome to the new pages to the session. 
I’m sure that you’re going to have exciting times with us this 
year. 
 
I want to congratulate my colleagues who moved and seconded 

the Speech from the Throne, the members from Redberry Lake 
and Battleford-Cut Knife. Not only did these two people speak 
from the heart, you also showed this Assembly the advantages 
of living in the great Northwest — something that we, all of us 
in that area, feel very strongly about. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, let me say that I am very proud to be 
Chair of the NDP caucus and my colleagues — great people all 
of them and each of them bringing a great gift here to the 
legislature. 
 
I’m also extremely proud to represent the constituency of 
Lloydminster. This area continues to be one of the most 
diversified, progressive, and innovative areas of the province. I 
want to thank the constituents of Lloydminster for allowing me 
to serve them for this last eight years. It has been a pleasure, 
and I believe strongly there is no higher gift that you can give to 
people than to serve them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Stanger: — I want to join the member from Redberry Lake 
in congratulating the Yellowhead Highway Association for 
winning the tourism award. We are all eagerly awaiting the 
completion of the twinning between Lloydminster and North 
Battleford — the section between Marshall and Maidstone 
proceeding this spring. Too bad the feds have money for 
highways in the east — for example, New Brunswick — but 
none for Saskatchewan. 
 
But we’ve done it . . . we’ve gone alone before. We’ve done it 
before, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and we’ll do it again, though that 
is not my understanding of federalism. The meaning of 
federalism should be to build this country together, no matter 
where you live or what your population is. And I often feel that 
in Manitoba, Alberta, and Saskatchewan, our eastern cousins 
sometimes don’t consider us like they should. And I know my 
counterparts in Alberta and Manitoba feel the same way. 
 
My constituency neighbour is Battleford-Cut Knife, and we are 
suffering from the same conditions: drought, low commodity 
prices, high input and production costs, low oil prices. But as 
the member from Redberry Lake said — and he was quite right 
— because our economy has diversified and because we have 
worked with the people of Saskatchewan to pay down our debt, 
we will be able to ride this downturn out — something that 
wouldn’t have been the case 10 years ago. 
 
I think that . . . again I want to speak on something that really 
concerns me greatly. I am like the Minister of Agriculture. I am 
sick and tired of what is being said in rural Saskatchewan about 
our government, and I want to point the finger exactly where it 
should be pointed. We have recently announced that we will 
participate in the federal agriculture income disaster program. 
This is a $140-million commitment by the people of 
Saskatchewan to our agricultural community. We set the money 
aside to ensure that it was there in case there was a disaster such 
as this. 
 
I would like to discuss today some of the context for 
Saskatchewan’s decision to participate in this federal program. 
I’m sure that you’ve heard our Premier and our Minister of 
Agriculture voice their concerns about the structure of this 



March 18, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 91 

program as soon as it was proposed by the federal government. 
Saskatchewan’s government had very good reasons for our 
concerns. 
 
Historically, support for Canadian agriculture programs have 
been funded in large part by the federal government. When you 
go down the list of farm programs over the years, programs 
which have helped to stabilize and improve farm income, Tory 
and Liberal federal governments have been getting out of the 
business of supporting our family farms. 
 
I am sick and tired, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of listening to people 
say — Liberals and Tories — that they are defenders of farm 
families. That is so easy to say that, but I’d like to present the 
facts here today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Stanger: — In the 1970s we had fully funded price support 
programs under the agricultural stabilization Act which became 
the two-third federal and one-third provincial western grain 
stabilization Act program. In the 1970s crop insurance was a 
federal program with provinces paying for administration only. 
And 20 years ago the Crow rate was shipping . . . for shipping 
our product to port was $4.85 per tonne supported by the 
federal government. 
 
Imagine where we could be today with $4.84 per tonne for our 
rate instead of the 30 to $40 per tonne and we had two-price, we 
had two-price system for wheat. Excuse me, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I get a little overwhelmed because I feel very strongly 
about this. 
 
Over the course of the ’80s and ’90s, the federal governments 
— Tory and Liberal — have shifted the costs of these programs 
unto the provinces or have eliminated them entirely, leaving our 
producers at the mercy of the markets and the elements. This is 
not my understanding on federalism. The Crow Benefit was the 
condition of Confederation as far as I’m concerned. We were 
sold down the creek by the federal Tory Party and the Liberals 
fell in with them. 
 
As far as I’m concerned, I am sick and tired of being blamed 
and have people speaking to me and saying — Tories and 
Liberals alike — that I’m not concerned about farm people. 
 
My ancestors came here from Ukraine in 1906, 90 years ago. 
They were slaves and serfs on the soil. They came because they 
could be free and they could farm here. In three generations, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, are we going to lose the land? Because I 
tell you there’s no place to go now. We have to stay here and 
fight and we have to go out systematically and tell people in 
this province who supports farm families and who doesn’t and 
who speaks untruths out of the other side of their mouth. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Stanger: — They have eliminated the Crow Benefit. We 
fought on the Crow Benefit in 1982; they told us we were old 
fashioned. Guess what? The Crow Benefit is gone and we’re 
going to suffer . . . (inaudible) . . . I’ll talk to you about GRIP 
later. We have deregulated the railways and allowed 
acceleration branch line abandonment. We eliminated two-price 

system for wheat. The federal government has eliminated 
western grain stabilization. They have transferred more and 
more of the cost of crop insurance and NISA to the provinces. 
They’ve gone from taking major responsibility for safety net 
and disaster relief programs to a position of requiring 40 per 
cent of the cost for the provinces. 
 
Why have they done all this, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Well 
successive Tory and Liberal governments have claimed that 
they have entered the wonderful new world for liberalized trade 
agreements. Remember them telling us we’re going to be on a 
level playing field. They lied to the farmers. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are supposedly playing on a level 
playing field. This sounds too good to be true, doesn’t it. That’s 
because it is too good to be true; it’s not true. Far from 
delivering a level playing field, our producers have been left 
undefended in a marketplace distorted by subsidies. 
 
Let me tell you something, Mr. Speaker. I remember in the 
’80s, Mr. Devine standing up and saying he was the defender of 
families; then he systematically undid all the things that we had, 
during the ’70s, legislated to support families. I am sick and 
tired of hearing those folks say they are the defenders of rural 
Saskatchewan and then they support policies that systematically 
unravel everything that supports rural Saskatchewan. 
 
(1600) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Stanger: — Canada provides subsidies amounting to the 
grand total of $15 per tonne. The United States subsidizes each 
tonne of wheat $72. The European community subsidizes each 
tonne of wheat $116. This is a so-called level playing field that 
we are on thanks to the trade agreements that Mulroney and 
Chrétien governments have signed — thank you very much. 
 
And I’m like the Minister of Agriculture. I’m going to mail out 
his speech and mine to every farmer. I am going to tell the story 
because I am sick and tired of people getting half-truths from 
people. 
 
Now don’t get me wrong. We don’t prefer subsidies when I talk 
about the subsidies from the Europeans and the US. Our 
farmers are the most efficient producers of the highest quality 
product in the world. Give us a level playing field and we’ll 
succeed very nicely; we’ll succeed better than other people in 
the world and we won’t whine and cry like the Americans do — 
the big capitalists. Just give them some tough competition and 
they’re whining and crying. But the point I’m making is that 
either the federal government has entered into these trade 
arrangements, make sure that they work or they do something to 
support our producers who are being harmed by international 
subsidies by our competitors. You can’t have it both ways. You 
do either one or the other. 
 
Canada got rid of the Crow benefit and the two-price system of 
wheat and other subsidies; other countries did not. Well we sat 
there. I remember Mr. Mulroney saying, you know we’re going 
to be on a level playing field. Well the Americans didn’t get rid 
of their subsidies. What kind of a level playing field was that? 
Instead what we get is a federal program which will not help 



92 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 1999 

everyone who needs it. And then the Chrétien government 
insists that the provinces hardest hit by low commodity prices 
should pony up 40 per cent of the cost of the program. 
 
As the Premier put it, they’re asking the same people who are 
facing the income draw, who are all Saskatchewan taxpayers, to 
pay for their own disaster program. When it comes to fighting a 
subsidy war the Saskatchewan treasury cannot compete with the 
treasuries in Brussels or in Washington, DC. This is a case 
where the emperor has no clothes. 
 
And I would not talk about mismanaging money. We have just 
gone through 10 deficits in the Devine years where they 
overspent $1 billion every year. And we are still paying . . . we 
are still paying the interest rates. 
 
When I tell my constituents look . . . I talked to a woman today 
and I said look, we would like to help you in this area. This is a 
valid thing that you’re asking for. But the third largest payment 
in our budget is to interest payments on the Tory debt that goes 
every year out of this province. That’s wealth leaving this 
province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
But getting back to the agriculture, as long as we don’t have fair 
trading arrangements, the federal government must step up to 
the plate and stand up for Canadian and Saskatchewan farmers. 
Give one or the other, a level playing field or level subsidies. 
We also had misgivings about the proposed design of this new 
program that we’ve got imposed on us. We’re not sure that the 
federal Department of Agriculture was taking into account the 
serious droughts in part of the northwestern Saskatchewan that I 
represent and the member from Battleford-Cut Knife represents. 
 
I’m sorry, any program that is based on a three-year average 
income would not do much to help people in my part of the 
world. These are the reasons why we are reluctant to sign on to 
the federal — and were reluctant to sign on — to the federal 
disaster program. I’m sorry but 70 per cent of zero is still zero, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, and this is a shame that farmers in the best 
productive area of the province, the northwest, will not get any 
help. 
 
But when it comes clear that our concerns have fallen on deaf 
ears — and they did fall on deaf ears — we decided to sign on 
in order to make sure that some Saskatchewan farmers got 
something, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Let’s be clear about one thing, Mr. Speaker. We are going to 
name the reason why we have had many problems. We lost the 
Crow rate and they said . . . they actually said transportation 
costs would go down. I remember that. And do you know what? 
If the Estey report goes through and the caps are lifted off, what 
are the farmers and the producers going to pay then? They got 
rid of the two-price system for wheat. 
 
You know, the Minister of Agriculture went through all the 
costs of those programs. And to top everything off, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, they are proposing that we get rid of the Wheat Board. 
I want to be clear and I want to go on the record now. I do not 
oppose, neither does any caucus member, the dismemberment 
and the doing away of the Canadian Wheat Board. This would 
be a demise to our farmers. 
 

And I’m sick and tired of people talking about GRIP. It was a 
flawed program to begin with. It was called the gross revenue 
insurance program. What it would mean now is high premiums 
and no payout. It was a flawed program from the very first and 
any thinking people know that. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Now the hon. member from 
Lloydminster has the floor and the rest of the people can’t hear, 
and the Speaker cannot hear the speech. I’m sure the hon. 
members on the opposite side of the House will have their 
opportunity to get into the debate at the proper time. But right 
now the hon. member from Lloydminster has the floor and I 
would ask all hon. members to come to order and listen. 
 
Ms. Stanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
These Tories opposite would have the farmers of Saskatchewan 
believe that they support them. Well let’s look at the facts about 
who has in effect pulled all the supports from the farmers. And 
we are going to tell this time and time again. I’m going to tell 
this story, so does the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
The two-price wheat system gone, the Crow benefit gone, the 
western grain stabilization program gone, deregulation of 
railways, accelerated branch line abandonment — all of these 
actions brought on to us by successive Tory and Liberal 
governments. And what do these people opposite propose? 
They want to put the nail in the coffin of Saskatchewan farmers 
by getting rid of the Canadian Wheat Board. 
 
These people say they support farm families. Well let me tell 
you about what they support. They support larger and larger 
corporate farms and landholdings. My ancestors, like I said, did 
not come to this province 93 years ago to lose their land and 
become serfs on the soil again. 
 
There is no place to go, folks. The lines have been drawn 
clearly in the sand. It’s time to fight, and to fight for what we 
believe in. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Stanger: — I’m also sick and tired, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
of the Tory opposition talking about the advantage in living in 
Alberta. Let me tell you something. I went to a meeting in a 
town in my constituency, Lashburn. They’re planning to build a 
new sports complex. They’ve asked me my humble opinion, 
and I’ve been going to the meetings and trying to help them out. 
 
On this committee, it was interesting to note there were three 
young couples. All had moved from the Alberta side and onto 
Lashburn. They tell me it is so much cheaper to live in 
Saskatchewan than in Alberta. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Stanger: — This is a personal testimonial. This was not a 
political meeting. People had asked me to come there to give 
my opinion on how they could get organized, but when they 
said it, I just said yes. 
 
And you know, people, this is another message that I get. 
Saskatchewan is not Alberta. It will never be Alberta no matter 
who is the government here. Because guess what? It’s a vast 



March 18, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 93 

province, 750 miles long, 350 miles across. It has a sparse 
population of a million people scattered all over. 
 
We want to provide the services for all of these people, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. We have a huge infrastructure in roads, in 
education, in health; a huge infrastructure in power, in 
telephones, in energy. We’ll always have a vast province. 
 
We are not Alberta with a majority of our population in two 
cities. We are not Manitoba which is only one-third virtually 
populated. We are Saskatchewan — a wonderful province 
stretching 750 miles. We’ll always need a bigger infrastructure 
than either one of those two provinces. 
 
And as long as I and my ancestors have a breath — and my 
granddaughter just won an oratory contest in Regina — as long 
as my family still has a breath, we will support and promote the 
Saskatchewan Way, the way our ancestors built this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Stanger: — Now to go on about the Saskatchewan Way. I 
have a great deal of people that I have met in Alberta and have 
become friends with because my son-in-law happens to come 
from Alberta. By the way, I’ll digress for a minute and tell you 
he comes from a Tory family. He now holds, and they live in 
Saskatchewan, a member . . . he is a member of the New 
Democratic Party. And his father, who is a neurosurgeon, tells 
me that if he lived in Saskatchewan he’d be voting for the 
Premier that we have here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Stanger: — But anyway my friends from Alberta tell me 
. . . And they send me clips often from the Calgary Herald 
because this is where my in-laws live. Last clip I got . . . and I 
was surprised to see that the member from Regina South had it. 
The Calgary Herald said on Monday, a report from the doctors 
there says a quarter of a million Albertans have now been 
without health care, health care coverage. One quarter of a 
million! One quarter of a million people have not paid their 
health premiums, are without coverage. 
 
Can you imagine that, Mr. Deputy Speaker? In that vast, 
wealthy province with two . . . their major population in two 
large cities, able to . . . much easier to deliver their services, and 
they have a quarter of a million people that don’t have health 
care because they haven’t paid their premiums. 
 
This is the Alberta advantage. Advantage in what way? Can you 
tell me? I’ve given you three examples. Couples who are 
moving to our side. If you earn 50 to 60,000, it’s by far cheaper 
to live in Saskatchewan. I can tell you that right now. Family 
who have now become card-carrying New Democrats because 
they see what we’re doing. The papers in Alberta. So don’t give 
me the Alberta advantage. 
 
Now having said all this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Alberta is a 
wonderful place too. We are neighbours, we co-operate, our 
premiers co-operate. I am not running down the Alberta system. 
I am just sick and tired of saying everything is perfect in 
Alberta, because it isn’t perfect in Alberta, and I am a testimony 
to that. 

Now I think I’d like to speak to The Respect for Constituents 
Act. If we could, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we would make this Act 
retroactive to do for the members of the Tory Party what the 
Wizard of Oz did for the cowardly lion — give him some 
courage. And while we’re at it, also what he did for the 
scarecrow. You remember what he did for the scarecrow — 
gave him some brains. Forget the heart. 
 
(1615) 
 
But all joking aside, Mr. Speaker, the reason for this Bill is the 
same as for any other Bill. When there is an inequity, a 
problem, a distortion that can be fixed with legislation, a 
responsible government comes up with a Bill to restore order or 
balance the inequity. It’s this simple. 
 
We have Bills that ensure orderly, environmentally sound 
burials. And during this session we will have a Bill to enforce 
responsible representation, or as Tommy Douglas would have 
said, and I heard him say it many times — elect a black cat, stay 
a black cat. 
 
The reason for this Bill is simple. In any Canadian election . . . 
Just listen to this, Mr. Deputy Speaker; this makes eminent 
sense, and I know my constituents support this. In any Canadian 
election, about 20 to 30 per cent of the people vote for the party 
of their choice . . . they vote for the party. People like me voted 
CCF or NDP forever. I’m one of these 20 to 30 per cent. 
 
Then there are about 50 to 70 per cent who vote for a party 
because they like their leader. That is very evident by the polls 
that are taken. That’s the reason we always have been in good 
shape, Mr. Speaker; we’ve had good leaders. 
 
Well, about 10 to 20 per cent of the voters, vote based on their 
preference for the local candidate. These percentages are very 
approximate but I believe them to be relatively accurate. As an 
aside, I should say that although they seem to slight the 
individual candidate — because a lot of candidates will think 
well surely I’m worth more than 10 to 20 per cent — it’s worth 
pointing out that most individuals . . . it’s good to find out that 
most individual races are won by less than 10 per cent. So we 
individual candidates make a big difference. We make a big 
difference. 
 
So if I’m right here, this means that representatives who leave 
the party that elected them to join another are betraying — 
betraying between 70 and 90 per cent of the people who elected 
them. The people in my constituency want this Act; they see it 
as responsible government. 
 
And lastly, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to turn to an article I read in 
the Prince Albert Herald, on March the 6th. And I’m going to 
quote from it. This is not something I made up. This is not a 
report from my paper or from anything I wrote. This is a report 
from a writer, Barb Gustafson, from the Prince Albert Herald, 
and this is what she wrote: 
 

Saskatchewan Party Leader Elwin Hermanson came to 
town last week, undoubtedly looking for votes. He may 
have won some, but he definitely lost some others. 
 
During his chat with the Chamber of Commerce executive, 



94 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 1999 

he was asked about candidate nominations and the prospect 
of women running for the Sask. Party. His reply? Words to 
the effect that it’s difficult to get women involved in 
politics, since “their concerns with the home” and “they 
don’t like dealing with conflict.” 
 
Some of the women . . . heard his remarks dealt with their 
immediate conflict — between wanting to wring his red 
neck and the knowledge that such an action would be 
illegal — by walking out of the meeting. 
 
The words are surprising only in their honest expression. 

 
I’m going to repeat this again, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 
 

The words are surprising only in their honest expression. 
 

There is little doubt about what the Sask. Party sees as 
women’s proper role; you just don’t hear it articulated that 
clearly very often. 

 
And that is what the writer said. 
 
Well I want to tell Mr. Hermanson something and the people in 
my constituency, and the people in Saskatchewan. I want to tell 
them that my family has always come first with me. I am a 
mother, a grandmother, an aunt, a niece, a godmother, a teacher 
but I am also a politician, because I believe that it is incumbent 
on every person to leave this world a better place than how I 
found it . . . or they found it. 
 
My greatest accomplishment has been in raising two wonderful 
daughters, Dawn and Duane. I mean Dawn and Denise. Sorry, 
Duane, you’re my son-in-law, not my daughter. My two most 
wonderful daughters, Dawn and Denise, two intelligent, 
well-educated, responsible women, and taxpayers, they have 
married two wonderful men, Duane and Scott. 
 
Now I have four wonderful grandchildren, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And guess what? And guess what? And guess what, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker? I have the two wonderful daughters, two wonderful 
sons-in-law, four wonderful grandchildren, and guess what? 
None of that has prevented me from being on the credit union 
board, the Maidstone town council, the NDP executive of my 
constituency, the university senate, and now a MLA. 
 
I do not see a conflict between my role in all of these and all the 
agencies I have represented and now the people of 
Lloydminster. 
 
In fact I had a constituent the other day say to me, and it 
warmed my heart, a young woman of 37, 38, she said you 
know, Vi, what I appreciate — I don’t agree with everything 
your government has done — what I appreciate is having a 
representative like you who has children of my age, who has 
children, grandchildren of my age, and also has a lengthy work 
experience as you have had and a lengthy time out in the world. 
She said, I may be 35 years old, but she said I appreciate having 
you as a representative and I would like you to run again. 
 
And I said, I am. My nomination is April 14. I know that you’re 
not a party member but we’d be glad to have you come. 
 

So let me say, Mr. Hermanson, my family has always come 
first. They’ll always come first — but you know what? The 
people of this province mean a lot to me. The people from my 
constituency mean a lot to me and surprisingly enough even the 
58 members in this legislature I am proud of no matter what 
party they represent because this is democracy in action. 
 
Thank you very much. I support the Speech from the Throne. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Whitmore: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am very pleased 
to stand up today and reply to the Speech from the Throne. Mr. 
Speaker, I think it continues on the many Throne Speeches that 
have been presented by this government since I became an 
MLA in 1991. I think it follows the question of vision and 
where we want this province to go in terms of the 21st century, 
which has always been the step-by-step approach that has been 
used by the Throne Speech by this government, also in the 
budget by this government and in the policies and programs that 
have been put forward by this government since 1991. 
 
I first want to thank my colleague, Mr. Deputy Speaker, who 
moved the Throne Speech the other day, the member from 
Redberry Lake, a friend of mine, a very dear friend of mine. I 
think he was very honoured to do the Throne Speech. 
 
I also want to thank the member from Battleford-Cut Knife for 
seconding the Throne Speech. I think her words are very 
eloquent in terms of outlining what she thought was important 
in terms of the Throne Speech and why it is important to her. 
And it is one about vision — it is one about vision, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and those visions come in different areas. 
 
And I want to touch on three of those areas today, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. The one area being agriculture and Ag and Food. The 
other one deals with the question of education. And the other 
one deals with health care, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The question of agriculture, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I know full 
well what the impact has been in this province to producers, be 
it on the case of lower commodity prices or be it on the case of 
drought. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I can say personally that I have 
experienced the example of drought this year that has taken 
west central Saskatchewan. Without question I know what that 
impact is to producers. 
 
Our agricultural community, Mr. Deputy Speaker, has changed 
dramatically in the last 10 years — dramatically. Producers in 
this province have rose to the challenge of the changes that are 
taking place in agriculture. They have invested in agriculture in 
terms of new technology and seeing it where it can take them in 
terms of cutting costs, improving production, and being there in 
the 21st century. 
 
Producers have taken in new technology when it has come to 
new crops. Producers out there have taken a very strong role in 
terms of mapping out what takes place in the marketplace, Mr. 
Speaker. They have taken a role, a very important role, of trying 
to map out those things that they want to grow. 
 
But with all the expertise, with all those things that are on their 
side, I don’t think you can find an ag economist anywhere in 



March 18, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 95 

North America or in the world that can show the downturn that 
took place in the farming community in terms of income this 
year. I don’t think you can find anybody who can say that the 
Asian flu was going to take place and the economies of Asia 
would collapse. I don’t think you would find anybody anywhere 
who would talk about the currency crisis that took place in 
Asia, the currency prices that have taken place in Latin 
America, and for that matter in Russia. 
 
And these are all good customers of what Canadian producers 
and western Canadian producers and Saskatchewan producers 
produce: the lentil crop that goes into the eastern European 
market and in the European market; the pea crop that goes into 
the feed market and into the human consumption into Europe; 
the area of elk production, the question of elk velvet going into 
Asia; the question of other crops and the question of canary 
seed in terms of the impact that it has had there in terms of 
going in to the US market; the durum market and things like 
this. 
 
This has not been the fault of producers. This has not been the 
fault of producers. Producers are not out there saying it’s some, 
you know, this or that. They are saying these problems have 
come from outside Canada and we need help to deal with those 
kind of things. But producers need to be given credit for what 
they’re doing out there in agriculture, what they’re doing to 
change the face of agriculture. 
 
I speak too representing the riding of Saskatoon Northwest 
which has in it one of the major manufacturers in western 
Canada in terms of direct seeding technology — Flexi-Coil. 
Flexi-Coil is the first example of what happens when producers 
don’t spend money. Their production has fell back. They fully 
recognize, talking to the people at Flexi-Coil, why it has taken 
place. 
 
And as we go through this crisis in agriculture, as we go 
through this economic downturn in agriculture, I think it’s short 
term. I think there’s better days ahead in the area of agriculture, 
particularly in those crops that I’ve talked about the producers 
have gone into, and new crops that are coming forward: be it in 
the area of borage which is . . . Bioriginal produced out of 
Saskatoon; be it in the area of as I say bison production, in the 
area of Saskatchewan particularly in the northwestern part of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
There are opportunities out there for producers to take 
advantage of. There are opportunities out there that producers 
aren’t afraid to take advantage of. 
 
But do you know what we hear from the opposition, from the 
other side? Gloom and doom. It’s always gloom and doom. I 
don’t know how the members opposite can go out there and talk 
to producers. I go out there and talk to producers. I go out and 
talk to those people that are selling farm machinery. I go out 
and talk to those people that are manufacturing farm machinery. 
They tell me there are better times ahead. They say in the long 
term, we’re in it for the long term. They’re in it for the long 
term. And I think that has to be an important piece when we 
talk about ag and food. 
 
The other area I want to deal with that is mentioned in the 
Throne Speech, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the area of education. 

This is a very significant part in terms of what takes place in our 
province in terms of education. 
 
The Throne Speech talked about the number of children that are 
in school every day in the area of K to 12. And this government 
has provided a firm commitment to those areas of K to 12 and 
continues to do that. But at the same time education is changing 
out there. 
 
(1630) 
 
In the city of Saskatoon we have a number of community-based 
schools in Saskatoon which are meeting the needs of the 
different students that we have in our community. They are 
changing the structure by which they teach these kids, but these 
kids are grabbing hold to what’s going on in the educational 
community. They’re staying in school. They’re being a part of 
it. And at the same time, Mr. Speaker, the community is being a 
part of the school system. These are the changes that are taking 
place in Saskatoon. 
 
There was made mention today in terms of special ed in 
question period, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In question period a high 
school in my riding, Marion Graham, can be very proud of the 
special education program they are conducting. It allows these 
kids to integrate with the school system and provide them a 
level of education to meet their needs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s becoming very difficult to shout over the 
opposition who don’t want to hear good news. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I want to hear it. 
 
Mr. Whitmore: — And I’m glad to hear that the member of the 
third party would like to hear good news for a change. I get 
tired of hearing bad news. 
 
Within the role of K to 12, as I talked about the changes that are 
taking place in education, we are embarking within the Throne 
Speech to establish a task force where we sit down and say, 
where does education need to be in terms of its roles and 
responsibilities for the 21st century. Talking about those kind of 
changes that will give us a good education system for those kids 
from K to 12. 
 
There are other areas that we need to discuss too that will be 
outside the task force, but those discussions take place with the 
Saskatchewan trustees association and STF (Saskatchewan 
Teachers’ Federation) and parents, in the area of governance 
and in the area of tax reform. But those things we are building 
on. We’re building on those things in terms of education to 
provide the best education program that we can for our children 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
But the education process doesn’t stop here. And the Throne 
Speech clearly outlines that too. We have to look at what kids 
want to do, and what young adults want to do when they reach 
grade 12 — what course they want to do for their life. We see 
the activity that is taking place now in the regional colleges, the 
activity in terms of the colleges that I’ve met in terms of 
training people to meet the needs of their communities. 
 
I remember talking to the Carlton Trail group in terms of 



96 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 1999 

talking about their successes in meeting the needs of 
manufacturers out there in the Humboldt area. Within that, they 
also praised the government in their initiatives in terms of 
providing student assistance which has opened the door to many 
students in those communities to take the kind of courses they 
want to take without the kind of financial burden that’s out 
there. 
 
The next step also within the regional college sector becomes 
the area of SIAST colleges. Again we’ve seen some big 
changes in the SIAST colleges in terms of how they’re trying to 
meet the needs of their people out there, be it by coordinating 
activities between the colleges now in terms of how we can 
supply these kind of programs throughout Saskatchewan and 
also enter into agreements with other colleges outside the 
province by which we can provide those services too to those 
individuals. 
 
These are good working relationships that are taking place. We 
can be proud of these kind of programs and to the commitment 
that has been taking place in the province. Our training 
programs are being praised by the students that are using them. 
Our training programs are being praised by the business 
community that want to see them. And our training programs 
are providing success for those meaningful jobs that are out 
there in our economy — and I say to the opposition: those 
meaningful jobs that exist out there in our economy. 
 
The other area that’s important to me particularly is the area of 
post-secondary education, being that of the university 
campuses. We can be very proud of their tradition, the honour, 
and the high standard of excellence the University of 
Saskatchewan and the University of Regina provide to this 
province. 
 
We have students. We can look at the history of those two 
universities and their alma maters in terms of the alumni people 
that have attended those universities. These are people we can 
be proud of not just in Saskatchewan, nor just in Canada, not 
just in North America, but around the world in terms of what 
they have offered to the people of the world in terms of those 
two universities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Whitmore: — And we continue a commitment to those 
universities in terms of what’s going on. We try and deal with 
those critical mass problems that they have. We try to work 
with them very closely in terms of how we can help them out to 
deal with the changes that are taking place at the university 
system. 
 
They’re not easy. There are high demands in terms of what’s 
going on in terms of the university system. But we are trying to 
work in a co-operative spirit of what’s going on. There are 
examples of that in terms of the Harold MacKay report that 
came down on the universities, of how they could work 
together. The DesRosiers report which is another example of 
where we can come together to work together as universities, at 
the same time recognizing that each of those campuses and 
those universities have their own function and their own 
importance in the scheme of things. 
 

And those things have grown to provide very important 
segments to our economy. And I have to talk about here in the 
area of Saskatoon which I’m most acquainted with, and that 
being the area of ag-biotech, ag-biotechnology, which has been 
a growth directly related to the research that took place at the 
University of Saskatchewan. That growth is directly related to 
the basic research that took place there not just in the area of the 
university, but also too in the ag research station that exists 
there; those in concert have built a very good system. 
 
The Crop Development Centre there is the foremost in the 
world in terms of the products, in terms of the varieties that 
they’ve brought forward for producers in this province and 
around western Canada to meet the needs out there of their 
customers in terms of what’s going on in western Canada and to 
meet those needs. But within that, in terms of Innovation Place, 
we see other dynamics taking on that provide other benefits to 
other industries out there. And these are important growth 
sectors that are going on. 
 
Other areas that take place at the University of Saskatchewan is 
the area of medical research — something that we don’t pay 
enough attention to or talk about enough in terms of the medical 
research that takes place there. We know it’s modest. We know 
that they face some problems in terms of competing with the 
larger universities and other research centres, particularly in 
eastern Canada. 
 
But they are working to create a niche for themselves in terms 
of how they can provide those kind of services for the people of 
Canada and for the people of North America. These kind of 
benefits exist from within and we need to build on those kind of 
things that are taking place at the University of Saskatchewan. 
 
We are committing ourselves to the changes that are taking 
place there and some of the capital requirements that are needed 
at the University of Saskatchewan. And we will try and deal 
with those as best we can within the other restraints or financial 
pull-and-tugs that exist. But it’s important too that we make 
those kind of commitments to those university campuses 
because they are the heart and soul of the learning in this 
province. And we have to do that — it’s an important segment 
of the economy. 
 
So these are things that we have to deal with in terms of the 
education aspect. And we are working towards that to do those 
kind of things. 
 
In the other area, Mr. Speaker, I don’t . . . I want to deal in the 
area of health care, Mr. Speaker, in the positive direction this 
Throne Speech talks about in terms of where health care is 
going in this province. And I am tired of hearing the scare 
tactics from the opposition. I am tired of hearing them scare 
people. 
 
Let us move on as the people of this province are building a 
good system. And we are meeting those strains and stresses out 
there as best we can in terms of the changes that are taking 
place. We see, in terms of trying to meet the question of the 
O.R.s (operating rooms), in terms of waiting lists as the report 
that came down today — or yesterday — and the commitment 
the Health minister has made. 
 



March 18, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 97 

But at the same time, we started an earlier commitment in terms 
of dealing with the question of the shortage of nurses by the 
commitment of hiring 200 nurses last year in June. This is a 
start of doing these kinds of things to build on the health care 
system. These are the positive steps. 
 
We will now see the second MRI in Saskatchewan, in Regina, 
being operated, where the province of Saskatchewan will pay 
the operating costs to operate that MRI. We will see later this 
year, Mr. Speaker, the third MRI in Saskatchewan. And this 
will deal with those questions in terms of the waiting lists in 
terms of diagnostics. 
 
The fourth one that the people talk about doesn’t deal with the 
question of people health. It deals with the question . . . the one 
that we . . . they made reference to the one at the veterinary 
college at the University of Saskatchewan. The western 
veterinary college will have a MRI for veterinary purposes 
only. But that will be the fourth one in terms of animal 
diagnostics that will exist in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are the positive things that are going on out 
there. There are changes. There are changes that are difficult to 
deal with. But as you talk to communities out there that face the 
change, that have made changes to meet the services of the 
people of the province, they are happy with them. 
 
I talk about the community of Beechy and I talk about the 
community of Kyle that have been highlighted in national 
magazines that talk about the success stories. Yes. And you 
know this is an interesting thing. Beechy is the hometown of the 
leader of the Sask Tory Party. Yes, and he doesn’t like this. 
 
I’m going to drift off my speech for a minute, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I don’t think anybody has the honour in this House . . . 
I had the honour in this House of being the only member that 
has ran against the leader of the Sask Tory Party, when he was 
not leader of that, when he was . . . And I’ve also had the 
opportunity to run against now the present Leader of the Liberal 
Party. I don’t think the members opposite know that. Well the 
member for Kindersley does. He remembers the debate that 
took place. 
 
1988 — 1988 federal election, federal election. I was running 
for the New Democratic Party, which was a riding that 
represented, I think, one-third of west central Saskatchewan. 
Also in the race was a Mr. Bill McKnight, who was 
representing the Conservative Party at the time, and a Mr. 
Elwin Hermanson, who was running for the Reform Party. 
There was also a Liberal, but maybe the member from 
Kindersley could remember her name. 
 
The outcome, the outcome, I have to tell you the outcome, Mr. 
Speaker — I’m very proud of this — is that we cut the margin 
in terms of how the minister — or at that time was the minister 
of Agriculture, Mr. Bill McKnight — previously had won by 
13,000 votes. We cut that margin down by 10,000 and he only 
won by three. Our vote increased, and I have to say that it was 
much, much larger than the member . . . or the gentleman who 
was running for the Reform Party at the time. I’m very proud of 
that; very proud of that, that I came in a very strong second. 
 
Then in 1995 I had the opportunity to run against, at that time, 

the Liberal candidate who is the . . . just the past president of 
the Saskatchewan Medical Association. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Who’s that? 
 
Mr. Whitmore: — Dr. Jim Melenchuk. And I’m very proud to 
say that at that race I didn’t come in second, I came in first. So 
it sounds that my political career is going the right way. My 
political career is going up, not down. And I’m very happy 
about that. I’m very proud of that. 
 
So I await with bated breath to see who the opposition parties 
will put up this time to run against me. I would be very pleased 
to see what . . . who they wish to put forward because last time I 
was told I was the giant killer. Mr. Speaker, they now have to 
kill the giant. They now have to kill the giant. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1645) 
 
Mr. Whitmore: — I do digress. I do digress. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite make reference to my size. 
And I want to assure you, Mr. Speaker, as always the case as I 
start on the campaign trail, I will be fit and trim when it comes 
to election day. Because I am, as I am right now, working hard 
to succeed as the MLA for Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
I now want to move into the area of taxes, Mr. Speaker. Taxes 
is a very important issue to my constituents, to the people of 
Saskatoon, and to the people of the province. Our people, in 
terms of the people that have supported this government, have 
understood the difficult decisions that we've had to make as a 
government, and we thank them for that. 
 
But as good times come, and budgets become balanced, we now 
want to share in terms of that success with the people of 
Saskatchewan. And since we have balanced the budget we have 
gone out there with fair affordable tax cuts — the income tax 
cuts, PST (provincial sales tax) cuts — which I have to digress 
again off my speech. 
 
I have to talk about a meeting that took place in Langenburg, 
Saskatchewan and I may be corrected by the member from 
Saltcoats where the Leader of the Liberal Party at that time — it 
was just after this government had reduced the PST by 2 per 
cent — and the Leader of the Liberal Party, which is Dr. Jim 
Melenchuk, said at that meeting that a cut in the provincial sales 
tax was a political issue not an economic issue. It only had 
political impact, not economic impact. 
 
The member from Saltcoats says he couldn’t believe it either. I 
want to tell you something about where Langenburg is. 
Langenburg is very close to the Manitoba border. The tax 
regime in Manitoba at that time and until their — I have not 
kept up with their recent budget — their tax regime was that of 
7 per cent applied to a lot more different items. 
 
And I remember being in Langenburg before 1995 where the 
people were saying lower the tax to 7 per cent and we’re 
competitive because we’re not taxed. We’re not taxing so many 
items. We can beat the people of Manitoba. And the Leader of 



98 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 1999 

the Liberal Party had the gall to stand up to these group of 
people and tell them this didn’t have economic impact in their 
community. I can’t believe that the doctor said this. I can’t 
believe the doctor said it. The doctor knows best. The doctor 
knows best. 
 
And then he talks about the question of tax cuts and makes the 
comment that the people of Saskatchewan don’t want tax cuts. 
Now I ask the members of the official opposition if they don’t 
think that the people of Saskatchewan don’t want tax cuts. 
What’s their answer? Do the people of Saskatchewan want tax 
cuts in the official opposition? Yes or no? Yes or no? Do you 
want tax cuts? 
 
Do the people from the government party want tax cuts? Is that 
what the people of Saskatchewan have said? But the dear doctor 
says they don‘t want tax cuts. And don’t worry about the debt 
either. Forget the debt. Don’t worry about the debt. It’ll take 
care of itself. We’re just going to go spend. We’re just going to 
go spend. 
 
Well I don’t know where he’s going to spend, Mr. Speaker, but 
I’m afraid he’s going to spend this province out of existence. 
There has to be a rational approach by which you do things in 
this province. And I don’t think your rationality has any place 
in leading a party in this province, a party that has changed 
from official opposition to the rump opposition. And the other 
question becomes this is not a person who is capable of leading 
the province of Saskatchewan to be Premier because this would 
be an insult to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
In the area of tax cuts I have to talk about the proposal that was 
outlined by the Saskatchewan Party, the Sask Tory Party. 
 
The Speaker: — Now, order. Order. I think all hon. members 
will recognize how much more valuable it is to have the 
comments put on the record when you’re on your feet. They 
don’t have to be shouted across the floor at each other. Allow 
the hon. member for Saskatoon Northwest to continue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Whitmore: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My throat was 
getting a little sore from shouting over them so it’s nice that it’s 
quiet in here again. I’m going to talk about the tax cuts that 
were proposed by the Sask Tory Party. 
 
The question of dealing with the proposals that they have 
outlined and the dollars that it would cost this province — it 
just doesn’t add up. The money isn’t there to do the kind of 
things they want to want to do. It is a question of a balanced 
approach by which they do it. 
 
You know, the interesting thing . . . the Sask Tory Party talks 
about Alberta and the initiative Alberta has taken place in the 
area — decoupling income tax, provincial income tax from 
federal income tax. And I think this is an opportunity for all 
provinces to look at that because provinces have been fighting 
for that. And they have proposed in their budget a flat tax 
regime. Whether it has merit or not, I can’t say, because I’ve 
not had the opportunity to look at it closely. But I think we have 
to look at all options when looking at tax reform. 
 

But at the same time when they have proposed that tax reform, 
their Minister of Finance, Stockwell Day, has said we will do it 
slowly and carefully; full implementation may take place in 
year 2002 based on the revenues that take place within the 
province of Alberta. They take a very sensible approach to 
what’s going on, recognizing they have to be careful. 
 
We take the same approach here in how we deal with things. A 
balanced approach in terms of the tax relief that we can provide 
. . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — We can afford. 
 
Mr. Whitmore: — . . . we can afford. The question of also 
dealing with programs that are needed in this province, and 
meeting some of those programs that come up as a surprise. 
And AIDA being one of those surprises, the agricultural income 
program — a surprise to everybody, Mr. Speaker, the terms of 
the AIDA program. But other members today have spoken very 
eloquently on the AIDA program. 
 
But we have to deal with those financial situations. We have to 
deal with the question of forest fires that take place, our 
commitment to health care workers in terms of creating equality 
out there. Those kinds of pressures too that we have to respect 
and deal with in a very balanced way. 
 
And at the other side of the spectrum is paying the debt. And I 
give credit to the Alberta government who have been able to 
take advantage of opportunities in terms of oil revenue, where 
they with oil revenue have been able to pay their debt down 
very quickly. 
 
And I give them credit for that. Because they are sitting on one 
of the largest oil reserves in the world and that geographic 
location has provided them with a lot of opportunities to do the 
things they want to do. 
 
And I give them credit in terms of how they’ve use that best for 
the people of Alberta. I certainly wished we had that kind of oil 
reserve sitting underneath this province because it would 
provide us great success also, I think, that would match Alberta. 
But we don’t have that kind of resource base that they have in 
terms of the oil sector. 
 
So we must deal with the commodities that we do have in terms 
of being uranium production, being the heavy oil production, 
which is a larger reserve for us, but is more costly to get out of 
the ground. We have to deal with these kinds of things. 
 
Potash is also mentioned. Coal was also mentioned. These are 
the resources . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Gold. 
 
Mr. Whitmore: — Gold. These are the resources that we take 
advantage of and try and deal with in terms of the issues and the 
problems and the economic necessities that exist out there in the 
province. So these are the kinds of balances. 
 
As the member has said, we also have to deal with the debt. As 
I made reference, Alberta’s had those kinds of success. We 
haven’t been quite so successful but we have gone a long ways 



March 18, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 99 

in paying the mortgage down. 
 
And when I talk to the people in my riding on the doorstep, who 
fully understand what it means to pay the mortgage, they tell 
me, do what you can for me but pay the mortgage down. Pay 
the mortgage down. Because if you don’t pay that mortgage, it 
will never go away. So you’ve got to pay that mortgage down in 
order to succeed in doing the things we want to do in the 
province. 
 
And we’ve come a long ways from 1991. And we will continue 
to go farther, Mr. Speaker. So these are the successes that we 
are building on within the communities that are out there, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Yes, I digressed in terms of the spending. The official 
opposition talks about a grand total of spending $2 billion. I 
want to know where it’s coming from. Show me the money. 
Show me the money! I’ve seen the numbers that they’ve took 
before. I see where they came from. I would ask them to go 
revisit their numbers. I would go ask them because I tell you the 
most embarrassing thing you can do in an election is use 
whiteout. 
 
So if you want to correct things now, I give them advice to 
change it now so they don’t have to white it out during the 
campaign. I hope they would take my advice and revisit their 
numbers and deal with the question of reality in terms of what 
this province can afford, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is interesting when I talk about the question of 
being fair, while I talk about what the people of Saskatchewan 
want and the kind of direction they want, the official opposition 
just goes crazy. They just go crazy because they don’t want to 
hear the truth. They don’t want to hear the truth. 
 
We have had a good working relationship with those 
communities out there that drive this province in terms of the 
business community, a good working relationship with the 
municipal governments out there, a good working relationship 
with the area of education I spoke of earlier, and a good 
working relationship with the people in the health care industry. 
 
These are the things that we need to build on, we will continue 
to build on, and it is the kind of vision we need for the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
So I’m very proud, Mr. Speaker, as the time is drawing near, 
that I am very proud that I will be voting for this Throne 
Speech. I’m very proud of the vision that it offers and the 
direction that it continues to offer to the people. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I wish to adjourn the debate, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 
 



 

 


