





























































Hansard: May 04, 1999


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1037 
 May 4, 1999 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Labour 
Vote 20 

 
The Deputy Chair: — Before I call the first subvote, I invite 
the Minister of Labour to introduce her officials. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Tonight joining 
me is Sandra Morgan, the deputy minister of Labour. And 
behind me, John Boyd, director of planning and policy branch; 
Sharon Little, director of budget and operations; Graham 
Mitchell, executive director, labour services division; and Dr. 
Fayek Kelada, the occupational health and safety division. 
 
Subvote (LA01) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome to the 
minister and her officials. Madam Minister, the other day we 
dealt with the CCTA (Crown Construction Tendering 
Agreement), and we were just trying to get a feel as to where 
we were regarding the Crown Construction Tendering 
Agreement, whether or not it’s something that’s going to 
eventually fall by the wayside, and certainly in your tenure. 
 
An area I want to deal with today is a little bit regarding strikes. 
And just in the past, oh, less than six months we’ve actually had 
two pieces of legislation that have ordered individuals back to 
work, and most notably the Power workers and the nurses in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And it would seem to me, Madam Minister, that I’m not exactly 
sure what message you’re sending. I guess the message — 
we’re kind of wondering — is your government coming to the 
point of basically beginning to realize that there are certain 
services that would be considered essential? I believe that was 
some of the comments that were made. Certainly the debate on 
the legislation regarding the Power Corporation and the nurses. 
 
And what I’d like to know is what your view is when it comes 
to collective bargaining and when it comes to workers such as 
the nurses and Power workers. Are you in a position where 
maybe you’re beginning to take a close look at determining, as 
some other jurisdictions I understand are now beginning to look 
at the fact that certain professions would be considered 
essential. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well I’ll start maybe by stating that the 
principle is to achieve the highest level of collective bargaining 
that you can achieve without compromising the public good. 
And so certainly when it comes to an area of services that 
people would consider critical either to health and safety, then 
you’re into an area where you are weighing public good against 
the principles of free collective bargaining. 
 
But I would say that we only had five work stoppages due to 
strikes and lockouts in Saskatchewan in 1998, and this is the 
fourth lowest number of stoppages since 1970. And so probably 
about 97 per cent of agreements are settled without recourse to 

any — what would you call — more extreme measures. And 
it’s only been in the instance of areas that you could call 
affecting the public good where this kind of debate really heats 
up. And I would tend to agree with you that what we’ve seen 
here is perhaps we need a new type of tool in this situation. And 
what that tool should look like would be a matter of discussion 
amongst the parties, but I think it’s fair to say that perhaps we 
don’t have the correct tool for these type of circumstances. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, thank you. Madam Minister, I guess 
that is the concern right now. And certainly in the most recent 
disputes that we’ve had, especially when we look at SaskPower 
workers were threatening, so were the nurses threatening . . . 
And then the Premier spent so-called at 11 hours and yet the 
information we have, the union wasn’t necessarily sitting with 
the Premier for 11 hours in discussion. And then the nurses then 
opted the . . . or indicated that they were going to go on strike 
and the government already had its legislation prepared. 
 
And I guess one would say, well you’d be the last person we’d 
expect to hear talking in support of unions. I think, Madam 
Minister, certainly when we look at unions and individual 
workers across the province, I think what most people are 
looking for is fairness as well as being mindful of some of the 
safety features that you talk about. 
 
Certainly at the time of year that the Power workers were 
possibly looking at strike action in the middle of winter and if 
you had a major power outage that creates a problem. The 
nurses as well to walk out for an extended period of time, that 
creates a problem. But I think as you indicated earlier, Madam 
Minister, maybe we need to review where we are and a better 
understanding between management and unions and 
government in regards to some of these situations rather than 
creating the animosities that we certainly see in the workplace. 
And that’s one of the areas of concern that I think needs to be 
addressed. 
 
The most notably this weekend, just chatting with some of the 
individuals in local hospitals, one of the issues they raised with 
me is . . . one person said well we’d be almost better if the 
nurses were back on strike, they’re just being plain ornery right 
now . . . (inaudible) . . . this individual talking is a member of 
one of the other unions. 
 
So it’s . . . what has happened is we do have a lot of animosities 
that are showing up in the workplace and that certainly, I would 
think, has to have an effect on the workplace and on health and 
safety as well. So I agree with you that we need to certainly 
look at that. 
 
One other area I’d like to raise a couple questions is regards to 
Workers’ Compensation Board. One of the chief complaints 
that comes into our offices — and I know my office — is the 
fact of the appeals process and how long they take. And what 
I’m wondering, Madam Minister, is since you’ve become 
Minister of Labour, have you done anything to address some of 
the concerns that have been part of workers’ compensation for a 
number of years, and what have you done in regards to these 
types of complaints that continue to come to the forefront time 
and time again? 
 



1038 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1999 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well the workers’ compensation 
system is an interesting one because whereas there is a high 
level of satisfaction, for those who aren’t satisfied, they are 
quite often deeply unsatisfied. So you have a situation where a 
large percentage of the people who deal with the corporation are 
satisfied with the services that they get. 
 
Now I think it’s not unlike other insurance types of programs 
like SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) or whatever, 
where people have a certain view of what their entitlement is, 
and then the Workers’ Compensation Board has their rules that 
they operate by. 
 
What is my goal as minister is to make sure that the people 
using the WCB (Workers’ Compensation Board) system get as 
quick a response as possible given the capacity of the workload. 
And again you’re always trading off between how quickly you 
can respond and how much resources are dedicated to staffing 
and those kinds of things, because again the services provided 
are fully funded out of the workers’ comp fund, and that then 
becomes an expense to the employers to pay those costs out of 
the funds. So you try to get that balance between the cost of 
providing the service and getting that responsiveness that you 
want within the system. 
 
So the Workers’ Comp Board has done a lot of work on trying 
to speed up their processes, doing some early return-to-work 
programs to try to speed up the time it takes for people to get 
their assessments and either go back to work or get the 
treatment that they need. So they’re constantly working on 
improving that. Every five years there’s a board of review that 
meets to go over all the improvements all the various 
stakeholders think could happen in the program, and each time 
that happens, there’s a series of changes that take place to try to 
improve the program. And I would have to say that they’ve 
made huge advances in dealing with the great unfunded liability 
that they had, as well as dealing with a number of changes that 
both workers and employers wanted to see in the program. 
 
But I think there’s probably still some room for improvement 
on the customer service front, and again we continue to meet 
with the Workers’ Compensation Board to see what their ideas 
are for how they can deal with that issue. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Madam Minister, when it comes to 
workers’ comp and some of the concerns that are raised, if I 
think I hear one thing more than any other, or one concern or 
issue, it’s the fact that certainly the people that come into my 
office, and I’m not sure possibly even into your office, just feel 
that they really haven’t been heard. They feel that they’re 
treated very impersonally, a feeling of well you’re just putting 
us on, that it isn’t a problem. 
 
Some of the concerns arise from the fact that people are forced 
into it. You talked about exercise and training at getting back to 
work quickly, and the fact that they have nagging health 
problems that either their physician or even a specialist 
indicates is there or has arisen as a result of that workplace 
incident, and there just are a number of frustrations. 
 
And one of the areas of real frustration is the appeal process. 
There doesn’t seem to be a mechanism, Madam Minister, where 
people feel that when they’ve been turned down they just don’t 

seem to have that avenue of really being able to sit down with 
somebody who can understand what they’re going through and 
help them overcome some of the complications and the 
problems. 
 
They’re basically feeling that they’re being treated as if we 
don’t really listen to the concerns or follow-up and we put it off, 
that eventually that person or individual will quit complaining 
and will go someplace else. And that’s an area of major concern 
that I think needs to be addressed. And I think, Madam 
Minister, there needs to be a better avenue of communication 
and understanding, personnel who have better communications 
skills with individuals. So I would certainly encourage your 
department to review this and to look into and see if we can 
come up with something with the Workers’ Compensation 
Board. I know addressing some of these concerns with Mr. 
Cameron in Public Accounts was an issue that he acknowledged 
as well, that that was an area that they needed to work with a 
little more carefully. 
 
Madam Minister, what is the average caseload right now for a 
workers’ compensation worker and is that number coming 
down? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — During 1998 a total of 1,607 injured 
workers were assessed at 29 secondary and 11 tertiary 
assessment centres. So that would be the number that actually 
received assessments through the WCB (Workers’ 
Compensation Board) program. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Madam Minister, as well we get a number of 
people who, as a result of the feelings of not really being heard 
at Workers’ Comp, ended up going to the workers’ advocate 
office. And while they appreciate the help the office does 
supply, they also find that they face very lengthy waits simply 
because of the caseload of the workers’ advocate office and 
what it has taken on. 
 
Madam Minister, would you have any idea of what that 
caseload is right now? And I noted by the budget you’ve given 
a small increase in that budget but I’m not sure whether or not it 
will even begin to address the caseloads and the backlog that is 
there. So I guess the question is: what would the caseload be 
that the workers’ advocate office has to date and how far will 
your increase in the workers’ advocate office funding increase 
go to addressing some of the caseload that that office is facing? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The backlog right now is 300 and the 
advocates are handling about 50 cases per advocate. And with 
the additional resources they hope to clear up that whole 
backlog by the end of this year. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Deputy Chair, thank you. Madam Minister, 
so what you’re saying is the resources or the additional funding 
you have put into the workers’ advocate office you feel will 
address the shortfall and the backlog that is currently in the 
office, is that correct? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — We’re hopeful of that. There’s a new 
manager there and that’s their intention. And other advocacy 
agencies that the government has have tried a variety of 
different methods to speed up dealing with backlogs and some 
of these have been quite successful. So again they’re going to 



May 4, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 1039 

try within this area and I guess all I can promise to do, and I 
certainly hope to be able to fulfill this promise, is to report to 
you again next year. Although I may have to report to someone 
other than you. 
 
(1915) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Madam Minister, 
maybe the roles will be reversed, we’ll find out when . . . after 
the results of a provincial election which we anticipate very 
shortly. Most likely you’re probably doing the same thing. 
 
Madam Minister, a question that was raised by Canadian 
Federation of Independent Businesses to the director or actually 
Mr. Cameron, Chairperson of the Workers’ Compensation 
Board, regarding funding. Mr. Cameron’s letter indicates, and 
I’m reading paragraph 2: 
 

As you know the Workers’ Compensation Board is 
directed by legislation to provide funding for the OH&S 
and workers’ advocate office. The legislation however 
does not provide any accountability for these expenditures 
to the Workers’ Compensation Board. 

 
Madam Minister, I’m wondering how much funding comes 
from the WCB to these two offices? And why would they not 
be given or provided any evidence of how the monies are being 
spent or the accountability factor that Mr. Cameron talks about 
not being there in the legislation. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — If I’m understanding your question 
correctly, it would be that the monies are vired from the WCB 
over into the Treasury Board process and then they’re 
accountable within the regular budget estimate and Treasury 
Board process that we’re in as we speak. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Okay. So what you’re saying is WCB sends the 
money to Treasury Board, Treasury Board then funds these two 
services through general revenue pool, and you have a report 
from OH&S (occupational health and safety) and workers’ 
advocate regarding the expenditures in their offices. And that’s 
how the accountability factor would come to the fore? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes, and we send an invoice to the 
WCB for those services. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Minister, 
in your votes I see that you only have one new staff person from 
last year to this year. And could you tell me where that staff 
person is. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes, we’ve added one occupational 
health and safety officer. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — So when we take a look at each of the 
subvotes, can you tell me in each subvote what percentage 
increase in salaries that you’ve allowed? Just guessing, it looks 
like it’s roughly 10 per cent in most but could you give me a 
breakdown on each one? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — With increases, I was checking to be 
sure. I thought it was the case that they’re in keeping with the 
2,2, and 2 plus 1 scenario that all other government workers 

received. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — As I asked you, Madam Minister, could 
you tell me in each subvote what the percentage is because 
when I take a look at, say labour standards, I look at salaries. It 
went from 1.329 million to 1.410. I see a lot of these. To me it 
looks like you’ve increased it far beyond that. 
 
So in each subvote, can you give me the percentage increase to 
those salaries, if in fact you don’t have new employees? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I think what the confusion is, is there’s 
other dollars that are within that salary figure because it 
includes overtime, annual holiday, public holidays, termination, 
layoff, leaves of absence including maternity, paternity, 
bereavement, and equal pay provisions. 
 
So without some fairly detailed calculation, the basic salary 
adjustment would be the 2, 2, and 2 plus 1. But then as 
individual circumstances, like leave of absence, layoff, 
termination, leaves, etc., it would create a different 
circumstance. And of course, in the public service this year, 
there was the equal pay adjustment which affected both men 
and women within the public service, and that would be 
variable from department to department depending on the job 
evaluation process. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — So from department to department, do you 
have . . . are any of these departments actually receiving in a 
total package well in excess of the 2, 2, 2? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Within the current round of bargaining 
and the mandate that is so popularly referred to, it was 2, 2, and 
2 plus 1 plus pay equity, and that applied to everybody within 
executive government and the Crowns who chose to participate 
in it, which most did. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Madam Minister, the Conservative 
member from Moosomin had asked some questions in regards 
to essential services, and your response I found to be quite 
interesting. In fact you were agreeing with him in saying that 
there has to be some new type of tool. Can you give us a 
definition as to what type of tool you have in mind? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well in other jurisdictions they have 
different ways of handling it, and one of the ways that it is 
sometime handled is . . . disputes over whether something’s 
essential or not is referred, for example, to a tribunal who then 
meets with the parties and makes a decision about that, so it’s 
not the government that’s actually making the decision in those 
cases; it’s a tribunal. 
 
And there are other models that exist in other places, everything 
from having it laid right out in legislation that dictates it from a 
predetermined legislative perspective to a more open 
framework of a tribunal where they make the decision on a 
case-by-case basis. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — So which are you looking at as a 
government? You must be promoting one. You’re referring to 
one. Is it binding arbitration? What exactly is it? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — At the moment we’re not looking at 



1040 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1999 

anything, but as we go into a situation of this particular dispute 
being settled, I think in the future people will be asking 
themselves — and I think that includes people in the labour 
movement and ourselves — is there a better way to do this. And 
that discussion may then develop. At the moment there’s 
nothing active going on on that front. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well are you considering any type of 
essential services legislation? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — We don’t plan to do what the Liberals 
did when they were in government, which was Bill 2 in which 
they settled a Power dispute, and two hospital disputes, a 
nursing home dispute, electrical contractors, and well two 
IBEW (International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers) 
disputes, actually. So we didn’t think that was the right 
approach either so we likely wouldn’t be using the Liberal 
model either. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Chair, Madam Minister, if you could 
get back to answering the questions instead of thinking you’re 
very funny politically. I’m asking you, because you, Madam 
Minister, agreed — you sat in here and it’s on Hansard — you 
agreed with the Conservative, the Tory member over here, 
saying that there has to be a new tool looked at when he was 
talking about essential services. 
 
Now I’m going to ask you again. Are you considering any 
essential services legislation? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I think I answered that. I said there’s a 
range of things you could do and until the labour movement and 
ourselves get through this current situation, we are not yet 
actively discussing it but I suspect the topic will come up. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well if you suspect that it will come up, 
then your government has already been considering essential 
services legislation and some tool to in fact deal with it. So this 
tribunal or binding arbitration which you were opposed to last 
fall, are any of those being considered at present? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I will repeat once again, for the record, 
that nothing is at the moment being considered, either actively 
or inactively. I am merely suggesting that there must be a better 
way to deal with these issues. But I will emphasize that there is 
not a government that’s ever been elected in the province of 
Saskatchewan who has not had to use legislation to solve some 
of these problems. So obviously, it’s a long-standing issue, and 
if we were the ones who solved it, I think we could consider 
that a very big achievement. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well I don’t know that you’ve solved 
anything. Now further, and I have to assume you were agreeing 
with the comments from the Conservative member, the Tory 
from Moosomin, when he was talking about the strikes. He’s 
referring to them as the strikes. Well the way the public and 
ourselves looked at this last fall with the SaskPower workers is 
that, in fact, your government locked them out. So let’s talk 
about lockouts for a moment. Can you tell us . . . because 
listening to . . . you were able to tell . . . go back in history on 
some labour disputes. Can you tell us how many times public 
sector workers have been locked out and then with legislation 
forced back to work? 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I can’t answer that question. All I can 
answer is the question that under Liberal governments this 
happened on four occasions. Under Conservative governments, 
it happened on four occasions. And under NDP (New 
Democratic Party) governments, it happened about the same 
amount. So there we are. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well, if you know how many, can you 
give us the instances, the circumstances surrounding these. You 
must have them at your hand, fingertips. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The kind of analysis you’re talking 
about, somebody would have to go through the list, and I don’t 
know that it says in each case what the particular circumstance 
was. No, it doesn’t even in the IBEW one, so that answer 
couldn’t be provided without a fair bit of research into each one 
of these. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — So you in fact don’t know if you’re talking 
about lockouts or strikes. You don’t know what you’re talking 
about? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well the fact of the matter is the issue 
isn’t whether there were strikes or lockouts. The issue is 
whether it took legislation to resolve them, I presume is your 
main point. And the main point is that in the history of the 
province it has required legislation on one, two, three, four, 
five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten, eleven, twelve, thirteen, 
fourteen occasions to resolve disputes in the public sector. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Madam Minister, the document that 
you’re quoting from — and you went through them, you 
weren’t guessing — would you table that now? 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order, order. Order. Order. Order. I 
simply wish to remind all hon. members, ministers quote 
regularly from their notes and there is no requirement in 
Department of Finance estimates for you to share or table, but 
there is no rule saying you cannot either. It’s simply up to the 
minister. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — So in other words, Madam Minister, 
you’re prepared to agree with the Tories that something has to 
be done about essential services. You’re looking at tribunals, 
binding arbitration. You’re quoting from notes that you’re not 
prepared to table in the House today. In fact, I don’t think 
you’re prepared to do much in the way of coming forward with 
the facts are you? 
 
Now I also heard the Tories talk about . . . and I find this rather 
ironic that on one hand, they’re voting with the Liberals and 
saying, we don’t agree with back-to-work legislation as it was 
used against the nurses. And today they stand up and say, well 
you know, we’re getting all our friends and buds calling in and 
saying, well you know, really, maybe they should be on strike 
because they’re sure ornery since they come back. 
 
Madam Minister, do you think the nurses yourself are being a 
little ornery and hard to deal with since you’ve forced them 
back? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — It would certainly not be my place to 
make an opinion on that. What nurses do or don’t do is not a 



May 4, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 1041 

matter for my opinion. Whether they participate in the 
collective bargaining process is something that our department 
tries to help facilitate. But it’s certainly not up to me to offer 
opinions on their motives. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — You probably aren’t as comfortable 
supporting the Tories then later this evening and if they get 
back up with more questions, I take it. 
 
Madam Minister . . . Mr. Chair, it’s getting a little loud in here, 
if we could just get a few of them to calm down a little. Madam 
Minister, if you could . . . Mr. Chair, please. Can you bring 
them a little bit to order, Mr. Chair? 
 
Madam Minister, can you . . . Mr. Chair, come on. We can’t 
even hardly talk in here with this heckling and carrying on. 
Madam Minister, would you be able to . . . 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order. Order. Order. I ask for the 
co-operation of members on both sides to allow the hon. 
member for Wood River to continue with the estimates in the 
Department of Labour. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. We’re just going to 
change gears here for a little bit and deal with some things that 
happened I guess with The Labour Standards Act. Can you tell 
us when those changes were first brought about? There were 
some amendments passed regarding The Labour Standards Act, 
and I just don’t recall how far ago it was. Was it six, seven 
years, or would you be able to tell me when it was? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The Act was passed in ’94, and the 
regulations proclaimed in ’95. 
 
(1930) 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Madam Minister, were there certain 
sections that weren’t proclaimed in ’95? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Everything except additional hours. 
Everything except additional hours in lay-off and recall. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Madam Minister, could you repeat that 
because it’s so loud . . . 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order. Order. Order! Order. Now I 
again ask committee members’ co-operation. It is difficult to 
hear both the questions being put and the answers given. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Everything except most available 
hours, lay-off, and recall. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — What sections were they, Madam 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Section 72. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Were they all under section 72? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The answer is yes. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Madam Minister, what about section 13. 
Was there a section there not proclaimed? 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Okay, I’ve got it broken down into the 
3 different actual sections. Section 13(4) was the additional 
hours; section 43, the layoff and recall; and 72 was a provision 
regarding whether the Act or collective agreements took 
precedence. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Madam Minister, I’m glad that you are 
able to have people help you recall some of these things that 
you didn’t proclaim as I’m sure they must have been very 
important to you at the time. They should have been. Now can 
you tell what those amendments were aiming to achieve in 
section 13? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The whole purpose of section 13 — 
and this would be something that would it be very good actually 
if employers would take it upon themselves to do this — but the 
whole purpose behind that section is that if additional hours 
become available in a workplace, that those hours would be 
assigned to the employee with seniority so that they would have 
a choice of building up their hours and moving towards as much 
full-time employment as possible. And really that is . . . the 
purpose of that is to try to keep hours from being split into too 
many small components and try to get enough hours together 
for someone to have a sufficient number of hours of work to 
make a living. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Madam Minister, can you tell me was 
there anyone in, you know, from the workforce or from any 
organization that was opposed to your government proclaiming 
13(4)? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes, all of the business organizations 
were strongly opposed. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Can you tell us why then you brought this 
in, in the original Act and just never proclaimed it? Did you not 
canvas the business community to find out in fact . . . you 
know, were they not going to donate to your New Democratic 
campaigns if in fact you proclaimed it? Or what was the 
reasoning? Surely you also had talked to some of the workforce 
at the time, and they must have felt that it was very important. 
Your government must have felt it was important to bring it in. 
But to not proclaim it, it looks like you were perhaps moving in 
well ahead of yourself and not sure what you’re doing. 
 
Otherwise why would you then just not proclaim it? And come 
in here tonight and say well the business community said we 
shouldn’t do it. Is that who calls the shots now for your 
government? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well I know issues like are hard to 
grapple with when the member finds it hard to grapple with the 
task of governing. But sometimes you lay out an objective, 
sometimes you lay out an objective hoping that the parties will 
be able to reach agreement. And certainly the objective would 
be to have people have the maximum number of hours of work 
that they can achieve. And we’ve made overtures, even after 
that section was there, to have the parties come together and 
reach a consensus around proclamation of the regulations. And 
until regulations are proclaimed, there is still the ability to 
adjust them, to reach compromise, and to reach consensus. And 
everybody was hopeful that that would be possible, but in the 
end it wasn’t. 



1042 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1999 

Mr. McPherson: — Madam Minister, you know obviously 
from your point of view the business community had some very 
good reasons. You must’ve accepted those reasons why you 
chose not to proclaim section (13)4. Can you give us the list of 
reasons for not doing so? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — There wasn’t a commission on 
part-time work that there was representatives of both business 
and labour. And again we were hopeful that they would find a 
resolution to this. 
 
And the problem for the business community, quite frankly, is 
that given restaurant, given tourist industry, given the ability to 
lay people off as the impact of the most additional hours was 
felt, predicting layoffs and whatnot. 
 
And given the intensity of the feelings on this subject, even 
though we think it’s an important provision and we think it’s an 
important principle, and we’re pleased that there has been an 
increase in full-time work in the province, there’s no question 
that your hope is to reach some kind of a reasonable 
compromise on these things when there’s very intense feelings 
on both sides of the discussion. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Madam Minister, how many part-time 
workers are there in the province in total and as a percentage of 
the workforce? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — It’s 96,000, about 18 per cent of the 
workforce. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Madam Minister, is that figure increasing 
in the last few years? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Part-time decreased from 98,000 in 
1996 to 96,000 in 1998. And full-time increased from 363,000 
in 1996 to 383,000 in ’98. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Madam Minister, can you give me some 
examples of some of the business concerns with 13(4) — some 
real-life examples — so we can fully understand your thoughts 
on this? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Part of it I think is that they believe it’s 
an intrusion on their management ability to phone the people 
they need to come in. It requires more administrative procedure 
because you have to phone in the order of seniority and you 
have to document that you’ve done that in order to show 
compliance with the rules so it increases the administrative load 
in a business where people are quite often busy trying to — like 
restaurants — busy trying to do what they’re doing and they’re 
not necessarily seeking more administrative tasks. 
 
It does reduce their flexibility as far as how work is allocated 
and who work is allocated to. And one could say that they 
would feel too that they would then go to having fewer 
employees as they amalgamated those hours. But I think it was 
largely administrative and management authority that were the 
two main reasons why the business community opposed this. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — But as the government, and as the 
government has said many times when you’re doing things 
throughout this province that isn’t falling in favour with the 

people as sometimes governing means hard choices. And I take 
a look, 18 per cent of the workforce, 96,000 people are being 
affected by this. And so you’re saying that perhaps a little 
management problem is more important than in fact having 
people have quality jobs and trying to move to full-time work. 
 
So I guess it’s really a case of priorities, Madam Minister. Is it 
your priority to deal with these 96,000 rather than some 
administrative tasks? Madam Minister, I ran a business for a 
number of years; I had, you know, employees; it wasn’t no big 
task to know who had the most seniority and who should be 
called in. 
 
But in your case, in your case you felt it was more important to 
look at some of these management problems than to deal with 
96,000 people? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well the other issue always in labour 
legislation is ability to enforce. And you want to make laws that 
are reasonably enforceable. And so the other difficulty you get 
into here is that you then have to decide how much bureaucracy 
you’re prepared to put in place to enforce it. Because otherwise 
it’s your good employers who take a hit and your bad 
employers who just continue to do whatever they did before 
without the ability to have a significant enforcement process 
there. 
 
The other comment I would make, again, is that we certainly 
haven’t given up on the thought that it’s possible to have a 
discussion again with people about this issue. But we’re going 
to have to find a different approach to it because it is not our 
goal to add more red tape to all the businesses out there 
struggling to make a go of it and trying to contribute to the 
economic growth in the province. It’s our goal to work with 
them, to work with the employees, to create the best 
environment that we can. So I’m sure that you have some quick 
and easy solution to this, and if you do, I wish you would share 
it with us because that would be most helpful. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Madam Minister, can you tell me out of 
those 96,000 part-time workers, what would be some average 
wages and perhaps let us know how many of those people 
would be at the poverty line level and/or below it? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — One figure that you might find 
interesting is that about 60 per cent of the people who work 
part-time wish to. Now of the people whose wages would be, I 
think, the ones you are referring to, there’s about 15 to 20,000 
out of that 96,000 who make minimum wage. The rest would be 
in other brackets above that. 
 
(1945) 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Can you give us some example . . . Of that 
remaining 40,000 part-time workers, can you tell us how many 
would . . . 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order. We’re having some obvious 
problems with the microphones and so on. I’m going to suggest 
we try and carry on. We’re going to try and deal with the 
technical problem while we go, but . . . Order, order. Order. If 
it’s agreeable with the minister and the member from Wood 
River, we will carry on with the understanding that I’ll interrupt 



May 4, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 1043 

when the feedback bothers. Is that agreed? Okay. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Of the 40,000 that 
are still on part-time that do want to have a better life, how 
many would you say are below the poverty line? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I don’t think I could give you a quick 
estimate on that because on top of minimum wage, depending 
on their circumstance and whether they qualify for the income 
supplement and supplementary health benefits, they may have 
additional income supplements as well. So it’s difficult to say. 
 
If they’re a single, minimum wage, working person, that would 
be the only group you could readily, clearly identify. But once 
you get into families and whatnot, with the child benefit, with 
the income supplement, and whatnot there’s a whole variety of 
other things then kick in. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Madam Minister, you had made mention 
that in fact this legislation . . . one of the problems was the 
enforcement. And I would have to ask you, with all the time 
and effort and money that governments spend on bringing in 
legislation and amendments to, did you not give it any 
consideration as to the enforcement of this? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes we did and it was considered that 
that would be a considerable amount of enforcement. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — So why then did you bring it in? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Again, if there had been less 
controversy and more consensus, you might have had a higher 
expectation that there would be more voluntary compliance 
amongst employers. But with the degree of negative reaction 
there was to it, you then are more into an enforcement situation. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Don’t you think as government perhaps 
you should have had that consensus before you brought 
legislation in? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Sometimes bringing legislation in is a 
motivator to parties to resolve their differences and figure it out 
so that they get on with it. It gives a bit of a nudge to the 
process. In this particular instance, it hasn’t been successful so 
far. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Were you nudged along in any direction 
by the 100,000 part-time workers, or did they want you to move 
forward on this? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I would have to say that in the absence 
of this legislation, we’ve dealt with some of those issues 
through the child benefit, through the income supplement, 
through the supplementary health benefits, and as well through 
raising the minimum wage three times since we were elected in 
’91. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Madam Minister, there was also a section 
43 that you had talked about, and can you give us an idea what 
that section was all about? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The purpose of that particular provision 
was to clearly differentiate between layoff requirement notice 

and termination requirement notice to try to deal with the 
problem of companies that lay people off in order to avoid 
paying some of the notice requirements. And quite often they’re 
not sure if they’re going to have to terminate because they may 
be waiting to see if they get a contract or they may be waiting to 
see if some business develops. And in the interim there’s then a 
problem of issuing rolling layoff notices in order to be 
constantly dealing with the problem of the required amount of 
layoff time and pay required for a termination notice. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — So this blanket layoff notice that . . . do 
you have a list of how many businesses might be engaged in 
such practice? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — It would be a small number but the 
industry that it hits the most is manufacturing because they 
can’t predict their orders always and they can’t predict what 
their production cycle is going to be. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Madam Minister, then do you think it’s a 
fair way to do business where you’re giving out these rolling 
layoff notices to avoid other things that they should be doing in 
a better business environment later? Is it fair in your eyes? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — It certainly would be our preference to 
have employers give employees the maximum amount of 
predictability that they could and also to give them what they’re 
entitled to. I think there is, in some fairness, some real 
circumstances where employers aren’t sure where the upturns 
and downturns are going to be in their contracts and in their 
business cycle, and I think they sometimes get into this kind of 
activity as a bit of protection for themselves. 
 
But certainly it would be our preference that the employer 
follow the intent of the law and give proper notice and proper 
pay. And there have been some cases where this has been 
adjudicated in order to resolve it. But it will be an issue that we 
would certainly look at at the point when this Act is reopened 
again. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Madam Minister, are you aware that some 
workers that have as much as 30 years experience with the same 
employer get less of a notice of layoff or payment in lieu of 
notice than a person hired for only a few months at, say, a 
fast-food restaurant because of this break-in-service policy 
presently in place? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The rule is that if it’s uninterrupted 
service, the maximum period is an eight-week notice. Now if 
layoff exceeds 14 days, then the clock starts again. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Madam Minister, you made mention that 
in fact there’s only a few employers that are into the practice of 
the blanketing layoff notices. Did you not have another means 
to provide some relief or some latitude to these few employers 
rather than affect so many of the working people. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well again, we said it affects a small 
number of employers, largely in manufacturing, so it doesn’t 
have a big impact on other people. It is largely concentrated in a 
particular sector and it is the very nature of their business that 
they have this kind of situation. Now again it is a situation that 
needs to be dealt with and I’ve met with parties on both sides of 



1044 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1999 

this discussion to see again if we can attempt to get a resolution 
to this, but right at the moment it remains unresolved. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — When did you last meet with the parties 
and which parties are you talking about? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — It comes up at my meetings both with 
the SFL (Saskatchewan Federation of Labour) and with the 
steelworkers, but also it comes up at the chamber meetings that 
I attend and the chamber labour committee as well. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Now you single out the steelworkers. Can 
you give an example as to who and why it is affecting the 
steelworkers? Why would you single them out? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well one of the plants that does 
experience this problem is IPSCO because again they’re 
waiting for contracts quite often. Sometimes they get them, 
sometimes they don’t. So it’s certainly one of the plants where 
this is an issue. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Madam Minister, are you saying because 
of IPSCO you’re not proclaiming this Act. You’re prepared to 
bring it in, bring it in, and I have to assume you did your 
homework at the day when you brought the Act in. You passed 
it. But because of . . . Is it one company that you’re singling out 
that you’re not going to proclaim it for that reason? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well I would have to say to the 
member opposite that I’m starting to doubt the sincerity of your 
questions here as far as actually resolving this problem goes. 
I’ve mentioned that this is a problem for others in the 
manufacturing sector. It’s a real problem for the employees as 
well. And we’d like to find a way to not hamper business 
activity and not encourage plants to relocate to the States, while 
at the same time meeting the needs of employees. And we will 
continue working on this to find a solution. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well, Madam Minister, don’t talk about 
sincerity here. You’re the one that raised IPSCO’s name. I’m 
surprised you did that. But you talked about having this 
reopened. You’re bringing both sides back to the table. Can you 
tell us some timetable until you have some result? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well as a famous premier once said, 
you have to jaw, jaw, jaw ’til you get a resolution to these 
things. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — While you’re jawing can you give us a 
timetable as to when you think this will be resolved? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I don’t have a magic ball but we will 
continue to work diligently on it. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Madam Minister, have you looked at other 
avenues to address this particular problem if it’s just a small 
segment? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I think any tax expert would tell you, 
and any labour lawyer would tell you on the other side of the 
picture, that as many rules as there are, there are many ways to 
get around them. So there is no easy, perfect way to create 
administratively watertight compartments to deal with these 

kinds of issues. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Madam Minister, you raised another 
section, section 72. Can you tell us what that section was 
intended to do? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The purpose of that section is to clearly 
delineate the Acts, the various labour Acts. And this particular 
Act takes precedence over collective agreements and this is an 
issue that was recently tested in the courts. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Madam Minister, can you give us a better 
definition of what the section is going to do? And hopefully 
you’ll be loud enough so we can hear over the heckling. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Again, the principle is that the Act 
takes precedence over a collective agreement so that people 
would not have the ability to bargain away their rights under 
provincial laws. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Can you tell us why this here Act was not 
proclaimed? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — In this particular instance this item has 
been affirmed in the courts as existing so there’s not a particular 
need to proclaim this. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Is section 72 one of the sections that in 
fact in your meetings with the interested groups that they raise 
and ask that something be done? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I think there was some concern about 
how the court case would turn out but now that it has turned out 
the way it has, no, I don’t think that this is a concern. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Madam Minister, also with . . . I guess 
there was something called the northern exemption. I believe 
that’s dealt with in regulations, but can you explain that 
northern exemption? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — It’s not in a way unlike some of the 
things that have been exempted on the farm because of farm 
circumstances. And in the North where employees are flying 
into shifts, and once they’re there, basically they are at the 
workplace and they don’t have the option really to go home and 
back and forth. There was a provision given to be able to have a 
different application of overtime rules in that situation. And as 
the mining developments evolve there, again this is one that 
will come under scrutiny again. But at the moment the northern 
exemption remains in place. 
 
(2000) 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Can you tell us where this line is for the 
northern exemption? I think it’s somewhere around Meadow 
Lake, but can you define that better? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — North of township 62. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — And so, you know, we look at what’s 
really happened in the North in the last few years I think. Roads 
are getting a lot better. Airports, you know, airstrips are coming 
in up there. So are you still today faced with the same problems 



May 4, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 1045 

as you were in the past as far as this overtime? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — As different parts of the province and 
different parts of the economy industrialize, there will be a 
question of changing labour needs and changing labour law 
needs, and you probably have an opinion yourself on the 
application of labour standards to hog barns in the agricultural 
sector, sir. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well I don’t think the question was on hog 
barns and you’ll have to follow closer with me on this, Madam 
Minister. But can you tell us now, does section 72 deal with 
only people that perhaps live south of — what did you say — 
62? Or does it include everyone in the province? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — What we’re discussing is, that’s not 
part of section 72. It’s strictly referred to as a northern 
exemption and it’s an exemption from the hours and overtime 
. . . hours of work and overtime provisions of the Act. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — But I’m just asking you if certain peoples 
are exempt, who are they? Are they the people that you’re 
driving into the mining camps, or flying in? Or are we also 
talking about the northerners who are working in those camps 
as well, that live up there? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — It would apply to everybody north of 
that township 62 line, except for Uranium City, Creighton, and 
La Ronge. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Madam Minister, then can you tell me 
whether Aboriginal groups have been calling for the repeal of 
this northern exemption? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — That is one of the difficulties in 
changing this law is that, no, they haven’t. 
 
An Hon. Member: — They haven’t? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — No, absolutely not. This has been a 
request emanating from the South. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Can you tell me if any other provinces 
have similar legislation such as this northern exemption? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — No, just here. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — And the legislation, I guess, sets it out 
where there’s no limits on hours of work in the northern third of 
the province and no requirement to pay overtime for those 
hours worked up there at all, right? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I just thought I should clarify that this 
is trappers, outfitters, the tourism industry, and so it involves a 
lot of people in seasonal tourism businesses where it’s really a 
different situation, I think, than exists in other places. They 
have a very short season in a lot of these businesses here. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — But it also includes people in the uranium 
industry and other mining industry and forestry as well, does it 
not? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes, but they have collective 

agreements; they’re covered by collective agreements. This 
covers people who aren’t covered by collective agreements. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Madam Minister, can you tell us why . . . 
you know, and I’ve seen these postcards that were sent out from 
the Pay Equity Coalition. Now we have I think it’s eight 
jurisdictions in Canada that have already passed pay equity 
legislation, but Saskatchewan isn’t one of them. Can you 
explain why we haven’t in this province moved with 
legislation? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Again, it would be our hope to achieve 
the fullest extent of what we can through good public policy as 
opposed to legislation. But I do want to correct a misperception. 
There’s only two provinces that have legislated pay equity in 
the private sector, and that’s Ontario and Quebec. Everybody 
else has it in the public sector. Now we’ve already implemented 
pay equity in executive government and the Crowns; it has now 
been negotiated within all the health sector. So what we have 
left in the public sector is municipalities, universities, and the 
NGO (non-governmental organization) sector where there 
would be linkages to the public sector. 
 
And what the pay equity coalition is really most interested in is 
legislation on the private sector. And what government decided 
to do was to make a commitment to address pay equity in the 
public sector first, and we’ve got 24,000 out of 26,000 public 
sector employees in the executive and in the Crowns covered 
now. This recent agreement with the health care people will 
cover about another 12,500 employees under pay equity 
agreements, and we will have gone a substantial way. I think 
after that there’s maybe only about another 5,000 public sector 
employees in the province that would need to be covered. And I 
think we would have to, to be fair, discuss this with 
municipalities because there’s a big dollar figure attached to 
this. 
 
And you may know about the case that Safeway has in front of 
the Human Rights Commission and certainly there is a 
provision within our Human Rights Code for people to take a 
complaint to the commission to deal with their employer — a 
complaints driven process for pay equity within the private 
sector. And that’s the process that the private sector employees 
at Safeway are now going through, through the Human Rights 
Commission. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Madam Minister, if there’s only a few 
thousand left to have pay equity, why haven’t you brought it in 
in legislation to cover the public sector then? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Because we don’t fund the whole 
public sector. So when we do this, we are imposing a cost on 
organizations like SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association), SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities), and all the member bodies. If we were able to 
pay for all of that and say, here’s the money, do it, and we’ll 
fund you forever. However, they’ve said things like education 
taxes and other things are their priority within their 
expenditures. When you’re talking about 12,000 employees, 
you’re talking about a permanent bump in payroll of about 100 
million per year permanently to the base. And with an $8 
million surplus, we don’t feel we’re in the position yet to make 
that kind of a commitment. 



1046 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1999 

Mr. McPherson: — But if we were to look at what . . . I don’t 
know, I guess, is defined as that extended public sector . . . 
while your municipal governments . . . I mean they’re really 
raising their funds by local tax base. And there’s so little money 
coming from your government, especially your government, 
that I don’t know that people would look at municipalities as 
extended public sector. But if you’re looking at transition 
houses and group homes where their funding is coming directly 
from the provincial government, do you not agree that perhaps 
you should have included them? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Again, what we’ve done in our policy, 
and we’ve been quite open with the people concerned about this 
issue is to enter into a stage process: the first stage being the 
executive government and the Crowns, the second stage being 
the health sector. There won’t be quite the same issue for 
teachers because their pay is based on a different model, 
although there might be some workers in that sector. 
 
Discussions are currently underway in the universities, so 
largely it is municipalities and the NGOs . . . and I would agree 
with you that if you talked in terms of need the NGO sector is 
probably the highest need sector. They’re also probably the 
most underpaid sector. But most of them are paid from about 
five different sources: federal government, provincial 
government, municipal government, things like United Way, 
and then private fundraising. So when you make a commitment 
to that I think the other partners — you’d also have to discuss it 
with them because they would have to increase their funding in 
order to pay their contribution towards the wage costs. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Madam Minister, can you define executive 
government? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — That’s all of the government that isn’t 
the Crowns. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — By and large you’re talking about better 
paid people in government, right? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — No, what we’re talking about is pay 
equity. And that’s dealing with historical wage discrimination 
based on issues of gender. Now one of the advantages of our 
pay equity system is that it is gender-neutral. And one of the 
reasons why we went to a gender-neutral model was that it was 
a long time since government jobs had been reclassified. And 
due to the changes that have taken place in government over the 
past several years, people have picked up new duties, changed 
duties, there’s been quite a bit of change I think in the public 
service. So this process not only dealt with pay equity issues but 
it dealt with internal equity issues too so that people doing the 
same kinds of jobs in government were paid comparable rates 
of pay. 
 
And that’s why we . . . our program’s a little more expensive 
actually than it is in other places with pay equity, but we feel 
it’s a better process and it includes both male and females in the 
process because it includes both pay equity and internal equity. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Madam Minister, I wish you were so 
articulate on the questions that I asked and not on the ones I 
didn’t ask. The question I asked was: in executive government 
are we talking about more the better paying jobs in 

government? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well let me put it this way, all 
unionized jobs pay better than all non-unionized jobs as a rule. 
And most of the public sector — all of the public sector is 
unionized. So yes these would be some of your better paying 
jobs in society plus they tend to be more professional jobs as 
well. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Then, Madam Minister, doesn’t it seem 
strange for a government . . . yourself to, you know, claim that 
you’re such a caring and compassionate group that you would 
leave out the poorest paying jobs in society — those working in 
the group homes. And our caucus is involved in meeting with 
some of these people that . . . that . . . you know, from the 
NGOs, from the group homes and such, and it is a shame what 
. . . what these people are getting paid for the work that they do. 
 
But yet you’re prepared to bring in pay equity into your 
executive government and forget about the people that really 
need it. Isn’t that a case of priority? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Actually in the last three budget years 
— which the Minister of Finance could confirm as well as the 
Minister of Social Services — we’ve increased the wages to 
workers that we fund in that sector in every one of the past three 
years. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Madam Minister, when you look at 
collective bargaining in the province — and I know there’s 
some cases I guess before the Labour Board now on whether or 
not your 2, 2, 2 wage gap even allows collective bargaining — 
do you really in your heart of hearts feel that we have true 
collective bargaining in this province under your government? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well it doesn’t matter whether you’re a 
big corporation or a government, everybody has some kind of a 
budget they’re working with. And I guess I would have to ask 
you what your definition of fair is because what we’ve tried to 
do is take the money available and try to distribute it as fairly as 
possible amongst those affected, even with an element of 
progressivity including things like pay equity. 
 
And you could disagree with that but when we had the issue of 
dealing with a $15 billion debt, you chose to run and hide and 
we chose to actually deal with it. So I don’t know that you 
understand what it is to have a budget and try to deal with it. 
 
But I am going to quote this little bit of late-breaking news that 
came to me, in the essence of fairness, about your quote during 
the SaskPower strike: 
 

“The people of this province can’t afford to have games 
being played by either side at a time when we’re setting 
record cold temperatures; the power must remain on; and 
we speak for the consumers of the province,” the Liberal 
MLA Glen McPherson said Friday. 

 
(2015) 
 
So I don’t know that I take too seriously your concern for 
fairness when it seems to be variable from day to day. 
 



May 4, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 1047 

Mr. McPherson: — Well, Madam Minister, when we talk 
about sincerity then you should be . . . you should be a little 
closer with the truth because our caucus is very firm on where 
we stood last fall with what your government did in locking out 
. . . the key is locking out — key word, locking out — its 
employees only to use the heavy-handle legislation to bring 
them back. So, Madam Minister, it’s your government that’s 
really on the hook here. You’ve failed dramatically in all areas. 
 
Now you’re saying, well . . . you know, you don’t want to 
answer the question on whether or not you feel we have free, 
fair, collective bargaining in this province because you know 
you can’t look at the camera and say yes we do. 
 
So you say it’s budget; it’s budget; it’s budget. That’s what 
your answer is. But quite frankly, you had lots of budgets. 
When you’re giving your CEOs (chief executive officer) of 
health districts who are making a hundred thousand bucks a 
year, you’re giving some of these people 17 per cent increases. 
That’s fine. We got health district board CEOs that make as 
much as probably the Prime Minister of Canada does. Now 
that’s a priority to you. 
 
It’s also a priority when day after day we raise in this House the 
millions and millions of dollars that are being blown and wasted 
by your advertising companies, your companies that are 
preparing for your election and coming in with budgets that are 
absolutely horrendous, doubling year after year; 50 per cent 
growth in some of these payments to Phoenix Advertising. I say 
shame on you. You’re talking about millions and millions of 
dollars. We’re not talking about little bits here. 
 
And what was saved in the IBEW lockout? What did you save? 
I think it was . . . I don’t even know if it was a million bucks. 
Do you know that almost any one contract that your 
government gives to your hacks and flack friends in Phoenix 
Advertising would come to a million bucks and you’re trying to 
tell the public tonight that you’re sincere and somebody isn’t. 
 
How many times have we raised questions about your 
investments? Sixty-two million bucks that your government 
wants to stick into a TV company in Guyana . . . not Guyana, in 
New Zealand. Well it’s a good thing I said Guyana. You’re 
prepared to throw 30 million bucks there. 
 
You have investments all over the world and people did not 
give you the mandate to make those kind of investments. 
You’re talking about sincerity and you’re talking about the 
hundreds of hacks and flacks that you have in government, all 
making huge wages and that’s not to be talked about tonight 
because you have all these budget constraints, right? 
 
You had budget constraints when the old jet wasn’t good 
enough and you had to have a new jet. You needed a new 
airplane; you needed your new plane while you’re closing the 
Plains hospital. 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. I’ll remind the member from 
Wood River — order — that we are on the estimates for Labour 
and that I’ve been listening very carefully to the last couple of 
minutes and we’re off the subject. And I would invite the 
member to get back on to the estimates of Labour. 
 

Mr. McPherson: — So what we’re talking about is budgets. 
And the minister raised the concern that somehow they’re 
hamstrung on their budgets and what they can do under her own 
budget. And that’s what we’re raising. There are people out 
there that can’t make a go of it. There are seniors that can’t 
make a go of it because of your back-door taxation with utility 
rates, because of your way that you’re actually taxing the 
people of this province through forcing them to not have health 
care out in their own areas of the province but having to drive 
hundreds of miles to get their health care and sit in motels 
because they’re on waiting lists. That’s called priorities. 
 
You can cut it any way you want. You’re saying that, you 
know, people have got budgets and in fact 2, 2, 2 is all you got. 
And I don’t see anyone else in society that is a friend of yours, a 
friend of your government, that is sticking to 2, 2, 2. Because 
you have hundreds of millions for your friends and you have 
hundreds of millions to run an election. And I say shame on 
you. 
 
Subvote (LA01) agreed to. 
 
Subvotes (LA02), (LA03), (LA05), (LA04), (LA07), (LA06), 
(LA08) agreed to. 
 
Vote 20 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1998-99 
General Revenue Fund 

Budgetary Expense 
Labour 
Vote 20 

 
Subvotes (LA01), (LA02) (LA05) agreed to. 
 
Vote 20 agreed to. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes, I’d just like to thank my officials 
for taking time to be here several evenings now and to be 
available to us, and thank you for your excellent work over the 
year. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 36 — The Animal Protection Act, 1999 
 
The Chair: — I would ask the minister to introduce his 
officials please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To my right is 
Terry Scott, deputy minister of the Department of Agriculture 
and Food. To my left is Dr. Al Choquer, director of livestock 
and veterinarian operations branch. And to Al’s left is LeeAnn 
Forsythe, livestock and veterinarian branch operations. 
 
Clauses 1 to 28 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 



1048 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1999 

Bill No. 36  The Animal Protection Act, 1999 
 

Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill be now 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
(2030) 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Education 

Vote 5 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I invite the Minister of Education to 
introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Seated beside me is 
the deputy minister, Mr. Craig Dotson. Directly behind me is 
Mr. Ken Horsman, who is the associate deputy minister. And 
seated next to him is the executive director of finance and 
operations, Mae Boa. John McLaughlin is at the back of the 
room, or not the back of the room, he’s seated in the back 
chairs. He is the executive director of teachers superannuation. 
Michael Littlewood is seated just off to my left. Larry Allan, 
seated directly to the left of the deputy, Craig Dotson. Cal Kirby 
is seated at the back of the room. And Gerry Sing Chin is on his 
way in, in a couple of minutes. Those are my officials, Mr. 
Chair. 
 
Subvote (ED01) 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
Welcome Mr. Minister, and to your officials. I know we’ve had 
the opportunity to discuss Education estimates before for a 
considerable length of time, and there are a few other issues that 
we haven’t had the opportunity to check with you, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, in the area of capital, this year, surprisingly, if we 
look at the total amount of money that’s been assigned to 
capital, we see for both capital expenditures and interest, we see 
in fact a decline from last year of almost $2.4 million. A 
significant decrease, and I think everyone in the province, Mr. 
Minister, is aware that capital expenditures from years gone by 
are declining because boards were responsible for in most cases 
10-year debentures. And as a result we’re seeing interest 
charges in the capital area drop year after year after year, 
allowing what I thought was going to be additional monies to be 
put into the capital side. 
 
Mr. Minister, could you explain to the House and to the people 
of Saskatchewan what you see in terms of the capital needs of 
school division and how a fund that has now been cut by 2.4 
million is going to address the capital concerns of school 
divisions in this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well Mr. Chair, to the member, the 
reduction of course is just in the less interest that we’re paying 
this year; it’s the 2.4. But we’re actually expending the same 
amount of money in capital this year as we did in the past, 
which is the $24 million. 

When you ask us what the capital requirements are across the 
province, as you well know, they’re significant. And as our 
resources provide into the future, we’re going to continue to 
build additional schools around the province like we have, and I 
think this year we’re doing something like about a hundred 
different capital retrofits across the province, and I think five or 
six new projects in the province this year. In fact, just recently I 
was in Kennedy, announcing the project in Kennedy, of which I 
think the member from Souris-Cannington sitting beside you 
was at the event. And we’re doing a number of other projects 
across the province. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. While we’re very 
aware of the number of projects, Mr. Minister, a lot of school 
divisions have been anxiously awaiting the announcement from 
the facilities department. And as you’ve indicated, your budget 
for the actual capital expenditure is the same in terms of the 
capital projects — no change. 
 
Mr. Minister, when I add the two numbers up of capital 
expenditure plus capital interest, we see an expenditure this year 
of $30.1 million. Whereas, Mr. Minister, in 1991 or ’92 or ’93 
when your government came to power, we saw capital grants of 
70 million and 63 million — huge amounts of money being 
spent in capital. And I recall a member of your Assembly, of 
your government, Mr. Minister, prior to 1991, saying that there 
wasn’t . . . 70 million wasn’t meeting the needs of capital 
expenditures in the province. That’s prior to 1991, Mr. Minister. 
 
Here we are, eight years later — 70 million has now become 30 
million — and we’re now talking almost a decade of increases 
in costs. What are you suggesting to boards of education that 
they should be doing in light of the fact that we have something 
like 400 projects. And I’m sure your officials know the exact 
number of the projects that have been submitted by boards on 
B1’s and you’re telling the Assembly that you’re going to 
announce 5 or 6 majors, and maybe something in the area of 90 
to 100 small ones. What’s going to happen to the other 300 
projects? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I’m reading off a sheet, Mr. Member, that 
was prepared for me in terms of the two different areas of 
accounting, two different years of accounting that you speak 
about. And when I look at the 1991-92, when you look at the 
comparable related figures, it was 22.2 million of the new 
capital approvals ’91-92; compared to 1999-2000, the year 
’99-2000, which is 24.2 million. And that is almost the same 
amount of dollars that we’re expending in 1999 as we were in 
1991. 
 
I think what’s important for us to recognize here is that I know 
that there are lots of pressures around the province, as you can 
well appreciate, not only in the education piece on capital. But 
from time to time members on your side of the House will stand 
up and talk about the kinds of pressures that we have in 
highways and hospitals and nursing homes. And so when you 
put all that together, you see a huge, huge need for capital all 
across the province. 
 
And as you can well appreciate, if we could do away with the 
$750 million that we have today in interest payments in this 
province, we could put that towards a variety of different things 
that you’d like to put it towards. We could put it towards greater 



May 4, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 1049 

capital expenditures across the province. We could reduce the 
taxes in the way which you speak of, or that we can build 
additional hospital health care facilities in this province. There’s 
a variety of different things that we could do. 
 
And I think when you look at the kinds of expenditures 
throughout the ’80s that took us to 1991, a lot of those dollars 
that we’re talking about — that you’re talking about — was 
really borrowed money that the previous administration had in 
fact borrowed. So when you talk about the expenditures that the 
previous administration had in fact spent, a lot of that was 
money that you and I are paying for today. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, from 
the early 1990s or late 1980s to today, there’s been also a 
tremendous change in how capital projects are funded. In fact, 
Mr. Minister, if you look at your dollars and the $70 million 
expenditure in capital grant in 1991-92 . . . was such that it paid 
for a large amount of interest costs because boards of education 
were responsible for a much smaller percentage of a capital 
project. The remainder of the project was picked up by 
government. 
 
And as a result, if you looked back at those records, you’ll see 
that government allocated its portions over a great length of 
time, 10 years in come cases. And the debenture interest costs 
continued to be picked up by your government. And those costs 
are payable to boards of education. So as a result, we saw a lot 
of projects at that time that were funded in large portion by the 
government and a much smaller portion by the taxpayers. 
 
Today we see a great shift in that. We see boards that are 
picking up 48 per cent and 52 per cent of the capital cost. And 
as a result, your dollar figure, as you’ve indicated, your 
expenditure of 24 million is almost equivalent or maybe slightly 
larger than the equivalent back in 1991. But the difference is 
you’re asking boards of education now to pay 50 per cent of the 
costs or more, and back in 1991 the percentages were much 
smaller. 
 
So you’re mixing apples and oranges here, Mr. Minister. I think 
what you need to explain to the people of the province is the 
kind of funding that was in place before versus the kind of 
funding that is in place today because when you indicate that 
the number is larger today in fact that number is much, much 
smaller. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well I appreciate the member’s point as it 
relates to the new capital approvals where in fact we’re now 
both agreeing that the fact the difference is only about . . . is 
about $2 million in terms of what we were picking up today as 
to what was picked up in the years 1991-92. And clearly, when 
I take a look at the capital grants that you talk about which is 
the $70.5 million over that previous period of time, those 
numbers of course today we’re picking up, as you say, a smaller 
percentage. 
 
Now I think we can say to you comfortably, that over the next 
several years, our hope will be that we can continue to enrich 
the level of expenditures in capital across the province. And we 
have lots of pressure as you can well appreciate. 
 
I think today in Saskatchewan we have something in the 

neighbourhood of about 780 or 790 schools right across the 
entire piece. Some of these schools don’t need the same kinds 
of retrofit or remodel that others do. 
 
But based on the level of funding today that we have for all of 
the issues in . . . for all of the issues that government addresses, 
we’ll do what we can as the finances of the province continue to 
improve and we continue to make education a priority for the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, could you clarify one other 
thing in regarding capital expenditures? You’ve indicated — 
and I don’t have the breakdown of that 70 million, how that was 
broken down in terms of what was capital and what was interest 
— I think you’re indicating, by your numbers, that interest was 
somewhere around 50 million. And in 1999-2000 you are 
estimating $6,000 worth of interest costs. Could you explain to 
the people of Saskatchewan how interest costs in 1991-92 were 
50 million and today they are only 6 million? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I think what’s important to the member, 
and what I’m alluding to here is the Public Accounts document, 
1993-94, which I think is important because what you will 
recognize and understand is that there has been in fact a change 
in the way in which the accounting is currently administered or 
prepared. 
 
And under the note of the Provincial Auditor, Mr. Strelioff, and 
I’ll read from you the comparative figures as he’s described 
them in 1993 and he says: 
 

The 1994 financial statements are prepared using the 
accrual basis of accounting; however, the 1993 
comparative figures are prepared using the modified cash 
basis of accounting. 

 
And that’s the difference in which you’re alluding to today in 
terms of the interest charges in there, stated in that document. 
 
(2045) 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — In relative terms though, Mr. Minister, I take 
it that we’re spending considerably less . . . the government is 
spending considerably less on capital interest today, or this next 
year, than it was eight years ago. Could you explain why that is 
so? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — My officials, Mr. Member, say to me that 
what’s happening is that there’s been . . . The change is really 
that we’re up-fronting the payments on each of the capital 
projects that we’re providing right now. And we’re allowed to 
do that, of course, under the new accrual accounting system. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, one 
other area in the estimates that I think has a number of concerns 
around it and I’d like some clarification, is in the area of teacher 
pensions. There are two pension plans, as I understand, for the 
teachers in this province — those that entered the teaching 
force, I guess, prior to 1980 and those that entered the teaching 
force in 1980 and afterwards. 
 
Could you give us a quick summary — and especially for 
myself because I’m not quite understanding the numbers that 



1050 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1999 

you have in your estimates — could you indicate to us what the 
two systems are that are in place and what kind of plans 
currently exist for all of the teachers in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — You’ve described accurately that there are 
two plans, the one prior to 1980 and the plan currently after 
1980. And as you can appreciate, these are matching 
contributions beyond the 1980. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, then 
if I refer you to page 40 of the Estimates and the line item that I 
see called Saskatchewan Teachers’ Retirement Plan, I take it 
that that is the new plan. I’ll refer to it as the new plan. And that 
is the plan that I understand now is being administered by the 
Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation and the monies that you 
contribute to that plan, of course, are matched by the teachers 
and it is totally administered. Could you confirm if that is the 
line item. 
 
And also, Mr. Minister, while you’re looking at that line item, I 
note that from the last three years, of course, we’d seen each 
year almost, we’re seeing nearly a $2 million increase. Do you 
expect that to continue to grow by that same amount? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — This is, as the member indicates, this is the 
new plan that we’re identifying here in the Estimates on page 
40. And clearly the number is growing because there are of 
course teachers retiring and so there’s an additional cost here 
that would be appearing as you see on page 40. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — I see the increases in that cost not because of 
teachers retiring, but because of teachers entering into that plan. 
Is that not the correct interpretation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — That’s correct. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, the 
other . . . the line item that I guess is the other plan is the 
teachers’ pensions and cost of living allowances. Mr. Minister, 
this one is most confusing to me because I’ve seen over the last 
couple of years significant reductions in the amount of money 
that is being allocated on this particular line item. I see this year 
in fact $23 million less than the previous year. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I know from talking with the Saskatchewan 
Teachers’ Federation that the retiring teachers right now are 
those teachers that are retiring under the old plan. And I’ll refer 
to it I guess as not the fully funded plan because we know 
where we are with the unfunded pension liabilities. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you explain how you arrive at a figure of $82 
million which is $23 million less than last year? How is your 
department able to reduce the cost of the pension costs for 
retiring teachers under the old plan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Member, we’re just reviewing this 
item with one of my officials here. The entire payroll forecast 
for the year — if I might just go through this for you — is 186 
million. And then the small benefit payout, 65 plus 1 is 2 
million. Then the total payroll cost is then 188 million. The 
matching contribution of that then would be $20 million, so the 
total money required would be 208 million. 

Then to that we would apply the credit to the retiring teachers, 
and the number of retirees is 475. The average dollars to their 
credit would be $256,480. Total monies to the retirees then 
would be $121,000,828. And then the drawdown on the surplus 
would be 1.2 million. The budget dollars required then would 
be $82.472 million. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. A complicated set 
of numbers. But, Mr. Minister, the point that I’m trying to make 
here, I think, and I think that teachers in the province and I 
think that taxpayers . . . you talk about, you know, what we are 
currently paying for as far as interest costs because of 
inappropriate policies of former governments. 
 
Mr. Minister, I take a look at what the auditor has indicated, and 
I take a look at the documents from the auditor’s department 
about pension liabilities. And I see that the estimated pension 
liabilities in 1992 were approximately 2.2 billion — and I say 
approximately. And today, Mr. Minister, as of . . . not of this 
current year, but as of March 31 of 1998, I think we’re seeing 
pension liabilities of $3.6 billion. So we see pension liabilities 
continue to increase while we know that the teachers’ pension 
plan, the new pension plan — you’ve already stated that, that 
it’s managed by the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation, and 
we have no unfunded liability there. That is fully taken care of. 
The old teachers’ pension plan — is that the plan that is causing 
part of the government’s pension liability to increase 
dramatically? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Member, when you look at the 
current contributions that we’re making to the pension fund, it’s 
my view and our view that we’re providing the statutory 
requirements to the pension fund. The pension liability, as 
you’ve said, has grown over the last couple of years. And we 
recognize that, and I think what we’ll do is continue to work at 
trying to meet those obligations as time passes. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, I’m fearful for your children 
and my children. And let’s look at this scenario, Mr. Minister. 
You’re going to be in a situation very soon where all of the 
teachers who are currently under the old plan will have retired. 
 
You’re saying there are about 475 teachers that retire on a 
annual basis. And that’s probably going to increase slightly as 
we move along because we know that the age of the teacher that 
is currently in the workforce is increasing. 
 
So we’re going to reach a point, Mr. Minister, as I see it — and 
I don’t know where that’s going to be. But if the new plan 
started in 1980, you can quickly do some mathematical 
calculations and I think you’re somewhere after the year 2010 
to 2015, there will be a year where you will not have 475 
teachers who will be retiring of which you are using that 
particular fund from those teachers. That balance that you will 
have, there will be zero in fact, Mr. Minister. 
 
But the pension liability that you will have, that you will have 
to have in this document in the year 2012 or whenever it is, it’s 
going to have to be in excess of 200 million as you’ve indicated 
today to this House. 
 
Now that’s as I see it, Mr. Minister. Today that’s an unfunded 
pension liability because in the 2014 or 2015, you, the 



May 4, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 1051 

government of the day, is going to have to come up with $200 
million in the pension category. We’re not setting that money 
aside. You’re indicating that today that you’re only budgeting 
$82 million because of a statutory condition, even though you 
know you’re going to have to pay out $208 million this year in 
pensions. 
 
And as a result when you get to the end of all of the teachers in 
the old plan who’ve retired, they’re still going to be collecting 
the pensions, and you have no money now to pay them. Will 
that not be the responsibility then on our future generations to 
pick up that tab because of your government’s policy of today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well I said earlier to the member that what 
we’re doing today is that we’re continuing to meet our financial 
obligations as it relates to the pension funds. And we can 
appreciate your concern as they’re very much ours too as they 
relate to the unfunded pension liabilities, not only for teachers 
but we experience some of the same issues as it relates to the 
public sector, the public service, and can appreciate that over 
the next several years we’re going to need to ensure that we can 
meet those obligations. 
 
And I think it’s important when I say that that you also pay 
attention to it as well, because from time to time in this 
Assembly you stand in your place and you talk about all the 
expenditures that you’re prepared to make in a variety of 
different fronts across the province. And I think it’s important 
then when you’re making your speeches or making your 
statements as it relates to what the financial obligations will be 
of future governments of which you aspire to be one of those as 
well, that you keep in mind that these obligations are there. 
 
And today this government is meeting those obligations in a 
way in which we can, at the same time trying to provide all of 
the other necessities that are required to serve the people of 
Saskatchewan. And I give you the best assurance that I can 
today that as it relates to the teachers’ pension that we’ll 
continue to set things aside over time to try and meet those 
obligations when they arrive here — and if they become $200 
million we know that those commitments will need to be made 
— but at the same time be cognizant of all the other expressions 
of need across the province. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, as 
I’ve indicated . . . And you haven’t confirmed whether or not 
my question about the year 2012 or 2015 is in fact accurate. 
Will we require 200-plus million dollars in this line? And the 
other part, Mr. Minister, is this whole aspect of pension 
liabilities. Teachers are very, very concerned that the pension 
liability continues to grow and in fact, as I’ve indicated, the 
government . . . the auditor . . . the Provincial Auditor is 
showing that the pension liabilities are at about $3.6 billion as 
of last year. 
 
I don’t know how much of that pension liability is only 
teachers, and I don’t know how much of the 1.4 billion that this 
fund has grown at over the last six years is attributable to the 
teacher pension plan. I know teachers are very concerned that in 
the year 20 . . . whatever . . . 2012 when all of the teachers who 
are currently under the old plan have retired, that indeed there is 
a fund and a pension plan that can pay the pensions that they 
have contributed to over their careers. 

Mr. Minister, can you confirm that the debt that you are 
creating is a debt that the people of the new millennium will be 
responsible for. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member, I am reading 
from the annual report 1997-98 which I tabled, and in that 
report it talks about the amount of dollars that will be required 
in the year 2014-15. And based on the sort of constant dollars 
will require about 166 million of which, of course, we’re going 
to be making those kinds of obligations over that period of time. 
I say to the member opposite that if you’re asking, you know, 
what the unfunded liability might be by that period of time it 
will depend on a variety of issues. 
 
I think it will depend, of course, on the change of teacher 
salaries over that period of time. It will obviously depend on the 
performance of the fund, and will also depend on the rate of 
inflation over that period of time. 
 
(2100) 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, one 
other question in that same section of the Estimates is around 
the teachers’ dental plan. I noticed that the estimate indicates 
that you have increased the amount of expenditure on that line 
item by almost 20 per cent. 
 
Could you indicate to the House why the dental plan costs have 
jumped by 20 per cent in one year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Member, it will be . . . it will be 
in relationship I expect to the — well it is — to the collective 
agreement which was signed on March 24, 1998. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Are you suggesting then that that is the 
premium cost to the carrier of the dental plan? That that is the 
sum of money that has been transferred to the dental plan 
carrier? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member, this would be 
based on actual costs that the program would incur. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, one 
final question in the area of transportation. Has your department 
altered the transportation grant structure that you have . . . that 
you pay out to both rural and urban school divisions for pupil 
transportation for this year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — There is no change, Mr. Member, in that. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
I have a couple of questions on special needs children. Last 
week we brought up in the House the fact that disabled children 
are . . . have the right to special care and training designed to 
help achieve self-reliance and a full and decent life in society. 
 
That’s part of Article 29 of the UN (United Nations) 
Convention on the Rights of Children, and Saskatchewan has 
signed this agreement and your government has . . . supposed to 
be working towards the problem of making sure that disabled 
children have education right across this whole province. 
 
But are we . . . the families of children with disabilities have 



1052 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1999 

asked me to ask you a question, the question of what your 
government is doing to re-ensure that they are indeed following 
the . . . Article 29 and that they will . . . their children really can 
expect a life that will allow them to live to their fullest 
capability. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well thank you for the question, Madam 
Member. I want to say to you that, as you are probably well 
aware, that last year the previous minister of Education 
commissioned in this province a special education review 
which is well underway now. In part of the rationale for the 
review across the province was to address exactly what you’ve 
just raised, and that is to ensure that we have the equitable and 
quality programs for young people today who in fact are 
disabled or disadvantaged. 
 
The committee is well on its way to having met with 
stakeholder groups across the province and currently are 
meeting with special interest groups in the spring of this year 
reporting out likely in early this summer, early fall, on sort of 
the outcomes of which we need to proceed as it relates to 
special needs programming across the province. But I couldn’t 
agree more with you when you raise the point that we have in 
this province a growing number of special needs children, and 
we’re trying to address that in the way in which we’ve 
developed the special needs review. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, there was already a task force 
committee that worked on this project, and I believe they 
brought forward 22 recommendations the government’s already 
. . . work that they should, that should be looked at, dealing with 
such items as the opportunities in urban versus rural places. 
And I’m wondering is this task force’s recommendations going 
to be ignored? Are you working on some of the real issues that 
your government is aware of at this time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Madam Member, I’m not fully familiar 
with the task force that you’re talking about, and what I will do 
is explore with my officials what work you think might have 
been done within the department over a period of time or 
whether it was a special committee or task group that was put 
together. And maybe we could have that discussion. It will help 
refresh the work that we’ve done within the department, if 
there’s been some done, and then provide a written response to 
you on that if that would meet with your requirements. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, the report that I’m talking about 
is the Special Education Review Committee and the work that 
they did. And they talked about . . . in 1997-98 there was 
192,508 students in Saskatchewan, and out of them 2,810 were 
identified as having disabilities and another . . . over 1,900 of 
them had what were considered to be mild to moderate 
disabilities, and they aren’t being looked at at all. 
 
I think the SACL (Saskatchewan Association of Community 
Living), I believe it is, that has been trying very hard to get your 
department to look at these needs are getting more than 
frustrated with the lack of attention that this whole issue has 
been given. And I’m wondering if you have been talking to 
them about these issues that they brought to your attention for 
the last three or four years. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Chair, to the member, I want to 

say that the numbers that you’re identifying for me and relating 
are ones that we do have some familiarity with in terms of the 
number of students across the province, or children across the 
province, who are requiring some additional services. And we 
are attempting to address that, as I said in my first comments, 
through the special needs review that is currently underway 
across the province, which I’ve indicated will be reporting out 
sometime early this summer or early in the fall. 
 
I think what else I want to share with you is that when you take 
a look at the investment that we’ve made in special needs 
programming across the province, in 1991 we were spending 
about $48,000,354 in special needs funding, in 1991, as I’ve 
mentioned. In 1999 that funding has been increased to 
64,806,000, which will give you some idea of how much we, 
like you, recognize the importance of enriching the funding for 
special needs kids across the province. And we’ll be able to 
speak more about this when the review comes to fruition within 
the next couple of months. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, one of the issues that they’ve 
been talking about is the speech and language pathologists that 
are required in this province. And there’s such a limited number 
of them for rural Saskatchewan that each one of them has very 
high caseloads. And they’re very lucky if they can get help once 
every four or five weeks. 
 
Are you working with the Department of Health? Are you 
working with different government departments to make sure 
that all resources are looked at and there isn’t duplication and 
people that actually have an opportunity to work when they’re 
already out in that area can be used to their fullest right now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member, this is a very 
important area that the member raises, and certainly we are very 
anxious to continue to pursue this, not only with dialogue with 
mental health but also . . . with mental health services but also 
district health boards, but also pursuing this discussion with the 
STF (Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation) because today we 
recognize that the need for speech and language pathologists 
around the province is significant. And for sure in rural 
Saskatchewan, from where you come and the area that I’ve 
spent a lot of time travelling around in the last several months, 
this has been identified as one of the areas of which we need to 
do more work in trying to find and recruit people. 
 
I might say to you that there’s some work being done in the 
Swift Current area, in that part of the province with the school 
division there, where there has been a fair bit of dialogue 
actually with the school division and the mental health folks 
about how they might in fact even assume some of the 
responsibilities of the speech pathologists really working within 
the school division. 
 
And the need for the integration of services is very much on my 
mind and I know that it’s on yours as well, so that we can 
provide some enrichments in those areas to young people who 
really are requiring these services. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, the government has already 
received 16 different studies supporting the auditory integration 
therapy and applied behaviour analysis. They are effective 
treatments in improving persons . . . in helping people with 



May 4, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 1053 

autism. Now we understand that Saskatchewan Health is not 
willing to accept these studies. And we’re just wondering how 
many more studies are going to be done before the ones that 
have already been worked on are looked at and actually some of 
the recommendations brought forward, not just having another 
study done so that people who are really requiring help are just 
waiting. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I think, Mr. Chair, to the member, what’s 
important here is that we recognize that there have been a 
number of studies that have been done as they relate by Health 
departments across the . . . over the period of time. What we’re 
suggesting here is that as we review the special needs of 
students in this province through our review, we’ll incorporate 
some of that documentation that’s already been prepared, and at 
the end of the day we hope that we’ll have a process in which 
we can deal and address many of the issues which you’re 
identifying today. We’re not unusual in Saskatchewan to what’s 
happening across Canada. We have all the provinces today 
grappling with how we’re going to deal with special needs of 
young people who are having a variety of different issues today 
that the schools are trying to deal with. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, I guess we can’t belabour this 
because it is an important issue and sitting here tonight isn’t 
going to answer a lot of the questions that we have, but I’m sure 
that you’ve met with families that have children with 
disabilities and you understand the stress that there is in 
families. The fact that they just feel like there is no one to reach 
out to, that the schools don’t have the capabilities. Maybe their 
teachers haven’t been afforded the education and training it 
takes to deal with all the different disabilities that there are. And 
I think it’s so important for you as you are dealing with this 
report to be meeting with the families, to be meeting with the 
parents, and understanding yourself, not just through a report on 
a piece of paper that somebody else is giving you. We’re 
talking about the most vulnerable people in our society — 
young people with a disability, whether it’s mental or physical 
disabilities; in lots of cases both of them. 
 
And you offered a few minutes ago that maybe we should be 
discussing this in another forum that’s not just in this forum, but 
I’m asking that maybe we could sit down and talk with a couple 
of the families in my area who I have been trying so hard to 
make . . . see something that would make a difference where 
this would give them some hope. A lot of them . . . they form 
support systems in small towns for each other because they 
don’t have anybody else to hold onto. Their families and their 
neighbours do help them out, but to live 24 hours a day with 
someone you love who has disabilities is a very . . . it’s 
something that I’m sure you and I can’t really understand 
because we haven’t been there. 
 
So what I’m asking from you tonight, Mr. Minister, is a 
commitment that you will meet with me and with these families 
that I’ve been talking to, and just discuss what it really means to 
have someone living with you and understand what their needs 
are. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Chair, to the member, you’ve 
raised a very, very important issue and one that’s very close, 
and of which I have a great deal of sensitivity to through my 
years of practice as a social worker and my years of 

administration of a private service agency. We had within that 
agency a program called Parkland early childhood intervention 
whose job was to work with families and young people in 
preparation for school programming and also in the community. 
So I have over the years met with many, many families whose 
children in fact were requiring some special needs, some special 
attention. 
 
(2115) 
 
And you couldn’t express it any better than . . . or I can’t 
express it any better than which you have, which is identifying 
some of the difficulties that families have today in coping with 
children who in fact are disadvantaged. And surely when we . . . 
as I’ve travelled around schools over the last several months, 
have been into many of the special needs programs that we have 
within our schools, and schools are having some difficulty 
coping with the growing pressures in this area. And through 
hopefully the special needs review, hopefully through the 
launching of the role of the schools, and that in fact we’ve 
announced that we’ll see some greater involvement by inner 
agencies into the future in terms of how we address some of 
those specialized needs that children are having and families 
have to the school system. And certainly when you raised with 
me the opportunity to meet with families from your 
constituency who in fact are going through these periods of 
time, I’d be happy to do that around the schedule that we’ll 
meet with, yours and mine. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, one other area that I’d like to 
hear from you on is the small schools factor. For the last couple 
of years, many boards of education and communities have 
raised the whole interpretation of the regulations around the 
small schools factor. And, Mr. Minister, I’ve pointed out to 
your predecessor many times in this House that individual 
communities and boards of education — many boards of 
education — feel that the interpretation that the department is 
using right now is unfair. 
 
And just a quick review of that, Mr. Minister. What many 
communities are concerned about is that the small schools 
factor that is in place with the Department of Education, the 
small schools factor for a particular school, is determined by the 
next nearest school — regardless of what grade configuration is 
within that school. And the point, Mr. Minister, is in many 
communities now a lot of changes have been made by boards of 
education, and there has been some centralization of the more 
senior grades. And as a result we now have small schools — 
kindergarten to grade 12 schools — that are left, but they are 
long distances away from the next school that will have a grade 
10, 11, and 12 configuration. 
 
But your department still assigns the small schools factor on the 
basis of the next nearest school. So as a result, and I think, Mr. 
Minister, you’re very familiar with your own hometown, where 
you grew up in, where the grade 10, 11, and 12 — in fact it’s 
now the grades 9 to 12 — have been discontinued. Last year the 
community was very concerned because the small schools 
factor that was paid out to the community of Theodore — to the 
Yorkdale School Division, I should say, on behalf of the 
Theodore school — was very, very small because the two 
nearest schools were in fact a kindergarten to grade 6 school in 
Springside, and a kindergarten to grade 9 school in Sheho. 



1054 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1999 

Those were the two nearest and second-nearest schools. Neither 
of those two schools had grade 10, 11, and 12 in them. 
 
School divisions are asking, Mr. Minister, have you made a 
change to that regulation already? And have you adjusted for 
the fact that we need to start to compare apples to apples to 
ensure that boards of education who’ve tried to be efficient, 
who’ve tried to centralize but still now have a small school 
situation that’s miles and miles away from the next large high 
school. But now they’re being penalized because there’s an 
elementary school eight miles away that’s maybe a K to 6 and 
as a result now they’re loosing the small school’s factor for 
their senior grades. Has your department reviewed that and have 
you made any changes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Yes, we’ve reviewed it and we’ve made 
some changes in anticipation that you might ask this question, 
and so what we’ve done here is we’ve modified it to compare 
the schools to the nearest two schools with the same division 
level of instruction. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, I want to thank you and your 
officials for your answers and your ability to share with the 
opposition tonight. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, ladies 
and gentlemen. I just have a couple of questions that I’d like to 
go back to what the member from the official opposition was 
pursuing. And that is something that’s very real, and I recall in 
an earlier debate on another issue in the House the fact that our 
schools are now dependent upon more than just the three Rs. 
That there is this need for integrated services and special needs 
cares, not only as an extension to the families, but within the 
school environment itself totally. 
 
I guess what I was wondering and the previous member alluded 
to your participating with other departments in dealing with 
these issues. It crossed my mind that perhaps when sitting down 
to consider the budget in the area of transfer of funds to teachers 
and to teaching operations, that perhaps there might be some 
consultation with the Department of Social Services and the 
Department of Health to pool some money for the kind of 
resources that are needed in those special care areas. 
 
I know that the school districts have in fact brought these very 
real concerns to my attention and I’m sure to yours, Mr. 
Minister, and to other members. And it would only make sense 
to me that if you need a heath nurse at a school that you would 
talk to the Health department to help pay for some of those 
services. As you would for emotional needs of students that you 
would go to Social Services and say that how about kicking in 
some money into this kitty because it addresses some of the 
problems or situations that you’re responsible for, so cough up 
some of that money because we just don’t have it in our 
Education budget for the extension of these required needs. 
 
Is that a possibility that will be pursued, has it been pursued? 
Does it make sense to you? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well thanks very much, Mr. Chair, to the 
member. And I want to say to the member opposite that there 
are lots of things that make sense on this side of the House. I 
can understand why there might be some things a bit confusing 

on that side. 
 
But I know that we want to say to the member opposite that 
there are a number of things . . . the process of which you talk 
about we support very highly. And this is part of the reason why 
we have launched what we have — and that is the role of the 
school — because we have been identifying for a number of 
months . . . and I know that the Saskatchewan School Trustees’ 
Association a couple of years ago identified the need for us to 
build stronger schools and stronger communities and stronger 
families. 
 
And the way in which we enrich some of that process is to 
integrate much of our services today. So when I look at the 
Nutana model in Saskatoon today, where you really see a 
school that’s actually become functional with a variety of other 
disciplines within it, is where I think we need to be going into 
the future. 
 
And I hear you saying some of the same things. Where in the 
Nutana high school in Saskatoon today what you have is you 
have social workers that are working alongside teachers. And 
you have people from the police forces that are working 
alongside teachers in the schools. You have addictions 
counsellors who are working in the schools. You have mental 
health staff who are working in the schools. So what’s 
happened is that you have a greater integration of human 
services or public services within that environment. 
 
Now we’re doing other things today on a . . . sort of an 
intermittent basis across the province with the child action plan. 
You see a variety of different disciplines working with one 
another, working within the school system, and you can find 
school boards across the province where you have some of 
those shared services happening today. 
 
So we’re very much on the same page as you are in terms of 
that direction. We are going to try and lead that process through 
the roles of the school which we announced just recently and 
soon will be appointing a Chair and a group of individuals 
who’ll be working across the province to try to build that. 
 
Mr. Osika: — That’s commendable that these programs are 
being initiated and are available. And I can understand why 
they would be readily available in the larger urban centres 
because of the accessibility to these other agencies. 
 
But I’m talking about Deer Park and I’m talking about the 
Scenic Valley school divisions that do not have such immediate 
access. And I guess going back to my question: where do these 
school districts get the additional funding for those special 
needs and care people? Is that totally out of the Education 
budget? And if it is, perhaps it shouldn’t be. 
 
I guess that’s what I’m trying to address, that there should be 
some addition to the kitty, if you wish, from some of these other 
departments to offset the costs taken from that Education 
budget, from those school districts who are already financially 
hard-pressed as you well know. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well I think that one of the things that 
could occur, I think, through the process of examining what 
kinds of services are required in schools today might see a 



May 4, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 1055 

redirecting of resources as you outlined. 
 
Where in the future, the school in my view, which has already 
become the most central piece . . . and particularly in rural 
Saskatchewan today where in many communities that I visit 
today the school is an instructional venue by day and in the 
evening it’s used as a community hall and often on the 
weekends. And on a Sunday you can find the . . . it is a place of 
worship. So the school has in fact become a very central piece 
of your community, and more so as I say to you in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now there may be an opportunity to fundamentally shift the 
way in which services are delivered in this province today 
where a larger part of those services can come through the 
school system, but the resources for them might come from the 
Department of Social Services or it might come from Justice or 
certainly could come from Health. And some of that’s being 
done already in a small way across the province in various 
different venues. 
 
But I’m . . . I guess I’m really hoping that as we go through the 
dialogue on the role of the school across the province and they 
begin to identify the various different things that schools are 
doing today — pre-kindergarten programs, preschool programs 
today, nutrition programs, a variety of different types — today 
where we’re dealing with a growing number of single parents, 
so there are more and more social agencies that are making their 
way into the school. 
 
And as time passes, and as the review makes its way across the 
province, I’m hoping to see a greater integration of those 
services. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Might that mean, Mr. Minister, that we might 
see in the future that there is an item that’s specifically 
identified as special needs which would be a lump sum of 
money that’s a pool . . . that’s a pool from Social Services, 
Health, and other agencies, and Justice as you suggested, that’s 
identified as being specifically targeted for those special needs 
over and above the reading, writing, and arithmetic that schools 
have been traditionally known for? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well I’m very much open to what you’re 
suggesting and I think that this is part of the whole process that 
I think the role of the school is undertaking. I think today when 
you look at preventative and support programs that the 
government provides, in a variety of different venues, be it 
through Health or Social Services, you might find a line today, 
for example, where the child action plan in fact does some of 
that work. 
 
And in the future it may very well be in the Department of 
Education’s estimates where we might be having this discussion 
and I’d love to have it from this venue, you know, a year or two 
from now when I’m on this side of the House telling you how it 
is that we’ve accomplished the kinds of things that you and I 
both want. And certainly we’re going to continue to work in 
that direction to try to accomplish that. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Just another question along those lines. Are 
there any specific programs or special types of programs that 
may be funded or supported in urban centres that are not in 

rural areas? Perhaps I can be a little more specific when it 
comes to First Nations communities. Are there any special, 
funded programs between urban and rural school districts in 
that respect? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I think in the urban areas, what you would 
find, Mr. Chair, to the member, is a number of community 
schools. I think now we have 31 community schools now that 
you’ll find in urban communities across the province which you 
would not find in your rural communities. And of course my 
interest would be to try to grow the community schools. 
 
Now we have the Indian and Metis educational grant which we 
provide across the province to Aboriginal children, so that 
would be the only area where you would see some similarity. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Just to clarify, those specific programs are 
geared for the urban community schools but not in the rural 
areas. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — The community school program has also 
extended itself to the North. We have one in Meadow Lake as 
well, and we have one in your constituency of Fort Qu’Appelle. 
 
Mr. Osika: — That would be for the member from Indian 
Head-Milestone’s constituency, Mr. Minister, but it’s near 
enough to mine that I’ll accept that as an answer. 
 
And I wasn’t leading towards, but I have to ask, is there then 
some disparity when you have certain programs, if you wish, 
and funding available for one particular school, unless there’s a 
specific criteria, and not for others that may fall into a similar 
category but happen to be in a rural community. 
 
(2130) 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member, I thought that 
maybe the boundary reorganization was already complete, and 
we also had won the seat of Fort Qu’Appelle as well and 
Qu’Appelle, but I guess that’s not the case yet. 
 
But I want to say that there are some specialized programs that 
are provided across the province that have some differentiation 
to them. For example, the community schools program, as I’ve 
identified, is primarily in urban centres. But when you look at 
the rural technology grant which we provide, it’s specific to the 
rural communities. So there are occasions within the funding 
formula where we provide some funding to rural communities 
in a different way in which to urbans, and then to urbans as 
opposed to others in the rural areas. 
 
But I mean my hope would be that in the future we might see 
community schools that would be located all across the 
province. Because they would have the kind of integrated 
component that you talked about earlier of which I think is 
imperative as we look at how in fact communities and families 
and schools have changed. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Probably one of my last questions, Mr. Minister: 
can we foresee in the future four-day school weeks being 
expanded to a larger part of the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well we’re continuing that examination. I 



1056 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1999 

know you’re asking me that only because it’s in your backyard 
and you have some appreciation for how well it’s working in 
that part of Saskatchewan. And we’ve had an opportunity to 
look at it and to some degree I have to concur that it is working 
relatively well. We’re currently examining it and we’ll keep you 
posted in terms of what the outcome of that will be. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you. On that note I want to commend the 
Scenic Valley School Division for implementing those 
programs where they were able to save money. There was 
cost-saving measures that they put into effect. Unfortunately 
they weren’t able to keep all that money for their special needs 
and for the reasons that they saved it. However I understand 
that now everybody’s come to their senses and seen fit to return 
that type of funding that school districts work very hard to save 
and not to have taken away but to apply to their special needs 
over and above the grants that they do get. 
 
So I appreciate that very much and thank you, Mr. Minister. 
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, and 
your officials, welcome. Just a few questions. First one, 
Minister, regarding the issue of where people live and their 
children attending other schools. I had a number of calls and 
complaints and letters and chats with people from across the 
province that live in a particular school division and wish their 
children to go to school in another school division. And of 
course because of the squeeze, the tight squeeze that’s being put 
on boards of education, the matter of a student leaving and the 
money following him is not something very attractive to most 
school boards. 
 
Can you tell me, Minister, what you’re doing to address that 
problem? And how you’re making it work so that your thinking 
goes along the lines of what’s best for the students and how do 
we get them the best possible education that meets their needs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well it’s been the tradition in this province 
that local school boards would really make decisions in terms of 
where students would attend a school. And one is a resident of a 
particular school division which will decide where in fact you 
think your child should be attending school. 
 
And so today if there’s a student that wishes or a family that 
chooses to have their child go to a different school division, 
first of all I would expect there’s a dialogue between the two 
school divisions and hopefully they can resolve it at that level 
which is customary in terms of the way in which decisions have 
been made since we’ve had school divisions in this province. 
 
Mr. McLane: — I guess, Mr. Minister, maybe it is customary 
but what isn’t customary is the amount of money that the 
provincial government has put into the Education budget. And 
we’re seeing the government’s share shrinking since your 
government came to power, which in turn has put extreme 
pressure on school divisions in not wanting these children to go 
to another school, another school division. 
 
So I think it’s maybe time that your department and you 
rethought your position on that, because from my understanding 
and with the cases that I’m dealing with is that it’s not being 
resolved by the local community, by the local school divisions, 

even though in many cases the community is in support of the 
individuals wanting to do this. 
 
So what are your plans to solve those problems, Mr. Minister, 
and be part of the solution instead of part of the problem? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well I’m a little surprised, I think, by the 
member’s comment or the question on a couple of fronts. One 
is that I don’t think that the member is suggesting that the 
ministry should be assuming the responsibilities of school 
divisions in making determinations over locally elected school 
divisions about where it is that students should be attending a 
school. 
 
Really our belief and my belief on this side of the House is that 
we have locally elected school trustees today who manage the 
affairs of school divisions in my view very, very well and the 
future of where students should attend, I think, really should be 
left to them. And I would expect that your view isn’t far from 
that. 
 
I want to say to the member opposite that today we in fact are 
investing more funds in the foundation and operating grant in 
the history of this province. We make the largest contribution 
today, and we are continuing to say that we are going to grow 
that, you know, as time passes . . . which when we had our 
dialogue with the Saskatchewan school trustees . . . or the 
Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation just recently of which your 
leader was also a partner of, when I read your Liberal platform 
book, nowhere was it identified that you even have K to 12 
education as a priority. And it’s not in here at all. I have the 
platform document here, and I’ve read it from front to back. 
 
There isn’t one word here about K to 12 education. It’s not even 
a priority on your sheets so if you haven’t had a chance to look 
through it, if you think there’s something in it, I can hand this 
over to you; you can take a look at it and you’ll find that there’s 
nothing here on K to 12 education. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Well, Minister, I can see that you’re more 
interested in playing politics than you are in the lives of our 
students — the next generation of taxpayers in this province, 
Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, the question was quite a simple one. 
When the many cases that the issues are not being resolved, it’s 
simply a matter of dollars that the school divisions are put in 
because of your government’s policy. 
 
One particular case and, Mr. Minister, I know you’re aware of it 
because I’ve seen letters both from your office and to your 
office regarding this case down near the Swift Current area, and 
it’s the Deobalds that have been an issue for about two years 
with this specific problem and want their children to go to a 
different school. The actual school bus goes right by their front 
door and they’re not allowed to partake in that particular 
education system. 
 
So, Minister, my question is: are you going to address these 
things and work with the school divisions who are indeed 
locally elected, and you’re an elected official as well by the 
people in this province to serve the needs of the students. How 
are you going to bring these two groups together to solve these 
problems that are . . . and they’re occurring right across this 
province. 



May 4, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 1057 

Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member, as I’ve already 
outlined to you that the decisions regarding which school 
divisions children will attend is really left with that of the local 
school boards. And certainly I have no intent, or for that matter 
interest, to take on that responsibility from the school divisions 
because they’re duly elected within their school-division 
jurisdictions. They’re elected by people who can appreciate the 
work that they do, and it’s my view that we should continue to 
leave that in the hands of school trustees in the province. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Well, I’m sad to hear, Minister, that you’re 
not that interested in children’s education. If the problem isn’t 
getting solved, Mr. Minister, the buck stops with you. You’re 
the last one in the pecking order, and your role is to try and 
bring discussions closer together through the two groups — in 
this case, two school divisions and a family. Why are you not 
interested in doing that, Mr. Minister? 
 
You’re more interested in playing politics than trying to solve 
the problem of a family and a children’s education. And it boils 
down to the simple matter of economics — dollars and cents 
with the school divisions. If they lose some students, they lose 
some money. One particular case, Mr. Minister, that’s what it’s 
about. That’s all it’s about. And if you would be part of the 
solution and say, well maybe we can do this, maybe we can do 
that, and accommodate everyone’s interests. These kids get to 
go to the school of their choice and get the education that they 
deserve. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, I want to say to the member opposite 
that this government and certainly this administration is very, 
very concerned about the future of Saskatchewan children, and 
that’s why in fact we made the greatest investment in K to 12 
education in the history of this province in the foundation 
operating grant today. 
 
So it’s my view that that’s a clear reflection of what our 
priorities are. And certainly — which is not yours. I mean, 
when you take a look . . . as I’ve already said, when I take a 
look at the platform document that you folks have put out, 
nowhere in this platform document does it talk about K to 12 
education. It’s not even a priority. 
 
So it’s not about politics; it’s about determining which party in 
this province has some interest in supporting or has the great 
interest in supporting the education system in this province. 
 
And so I say to the member opposite, I would like for you to 
include in your platform how it is that you think that 
government should intervene or the ministry should intervene in 
decision-making where in fact local individuals have been 
selected by the ratepayers to look after the needs of their 
communities. So that’s not where I’m going with that, but I’d 
be very interested if you would stand in your place and say that 
you would support having a Minister of Education assume the 
responsibilities of deciding where young people in this province 
should go to school if there is in fact a dispute. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Minister, I’d be interested in standing in my 
place and telling you that your government has not kept up its 
commitment to education in this province, and certainly under 
the funding formula are way off base. 
 

And our office has calls and letters coming in from 
municipalities all over this province, both urban and rural, 
saying that they can’t afford one cent more in property taxes. 
Your government is deaf to those concerns, Mr. Minister, and 
you don’t seem to care. 
 
That’s exactly a symptom of what’s happening with these 
families that want their kids to go to another school, is because 
of the funding, Mr. Minister. So if you’re not going to . . . if 
you’re not interested in addressing the children’s needs and 
trying to solve the problem, at least you could try and solve the 
funding problem. 
 
For many years local taxpayers have been telling your 
government that you’ve got to get back to funding the lion’s 
share of education. I can show you a stack of letters from 
municipalities right across this province saying that you’re not 
pulling your weight — and you aren’t. And so, Mr. Minister, 
my question to you would be, what kind of a commitment do 
you have to the taxpayers of this province to try and turn that 
trend around, and you take back the lion’s share of funding for 
education, K to 12 in this province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well I want to say to the member opposite 
that for him to stand in his place and suggest that we’re not 
interested in supporting public education in this province, I 
think you need to take a look at what we’ve done over the last 
number of years. 
 
And when I look at your platform I see nothing here at all that 
addresses itself to special education — not one word about 
special education. And if you were listening when I was 
speaking to the member opposite from the Saskatchewan Party, 
I told you about how we’ve grown the special needs 
programming in this province by almost $20 million over that 
period of time. I want to say to the member opposite that we’ve 
put additional funding into small school grants in this province 
and enriched those and grown those. And nowhere here does it 
say anything about Aboriginal education in this province — not 
a word about Aboriginal education in your platform. 
 
So I mean when you compare the differences in terms of what 
we’re doing in Saskatchewan, directions we’re going versus 
what you have in yours, I see a huge, huge vacancy in terms of 
where your platform is as it relates to education. 
 
(2145) 
 
Mr. McLane: — Mr. Minister, our commitment is to the 
people of Saskatchewan. Our commitment is in health care, Mr. 
Minister, that your government has bumbled since you came to 
power in 1991. That’s the Liberal commitment — is to fix 
health care in this province that you won’t do. Our commitment 
is to the rural communities in this province, Mr. Minister, to 
stop the destruction of our rural communities, stop the 
destruction of the rail lines, the senseless bulldozing down of 
facilities that many communities want to use, Mr. Minister. 
That’s where our commitment is, is to the people of the 
province. 
 
Our commitment is also to post-secondary education students, 
to make sure that they get an education which your government 
doesn’t seem too interested to do because your government has 



1058 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1999 

cut funding to post-secondary education since 1944, as the 
member from North Battleford indicated earlier today. So our 
commitment, Mr. Minister, is to the people of the province — 
not to playing politics, Mr. Minister, but to make sure that 
children get an education in this province. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, where is your commitment to ensure that 
these people that are having trouble getting their kids to go to 
the school they want to, to go to the school of their choice, and 
you intervened to try to bring the sides closer together and get 
the kids to the school that they want to go to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I think I’m going to repeat one more time 
to the member opposite in terms of what the role of school 
divisions across the province are. And the determination of 
where children go to school in this province are really 
determined by school divisions. Families make those initial 
choices. They then consult with the school divisions in terms of 
which school division in fact they would choose for their 
children to go to, and at the local level they would decide where 
in fact that child should go to school. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Minister, I understand the process, and I can 
see that you’re sincere in maybe wanting to address this 
problem finally. So all we’re asking for is, and I know that 
you’ve had discussions with many of these people and you’ve 
had discussions with the school divisions, why won’t you take 
the time to try and bring them closer together and say maybe 
there’s something the government can do to accommodate 
them, whether it’s solving the economic crisis for the school 
division that is maybe losing the students. Let’s put the students 
first, Minister. Let’s put our students, our young people in this 
province first above your politics and let’s try and find a 
reasonable, common sense solution so that kids can go to the 
schools of their choice, especially when the school bus is 
running right by their front door. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well what we’ll continue to do here is that 
in the case that you’re talking about, I know that Mr. Luke has 
an opportunity to speak with the families, and I’ll continue to 
encourage Mr. Luke to meet with the families and see if he can 
sort that out on a local basis. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I appreciate that, 
that you’re finally taking an interest in those students and I 
know you’re sincere. I guess we’ll take it one step farther. Now 
that’s an individual case that I want see solved, certainly for the 
good of the children. I think you need some sort of a process 
right across the province that addresses those concerns, 
whatever the community they’re in. And they’re all over the 
province, Mr. Minister, because I’ve talked to these people. 
 
So can you give us some reason of security that you’re going to 
initiate some sort of a process that will accommodate these 
special requests that need some special type of mediation, if you 
will for a lack of a better word, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Chair, to the member, I meet 
with the Saskatchewan school trustees on a regular basis. What 
I will do is I’ve made a note of your request in terms of what 
you’re suggesting. I’ll take it back to the Saskatchewan school 
trustees and we’ll have a discussion about how it is that we 
might be able to put that process into place if there’s any . . . 

(inaudible) . . . or interest to do that. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister. I 
want to welcome you and your officials here. I received a letter 
today that in fact was addressed to yourself and it’s a public 
document so I’ll quote from it. And it’s from the Shaunavon 
School Division No. 71 dated April 30, 1999. And I think I’m 
going to read it into the record because I think it says 
everything that needs to be said about what’s happening in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 

To the Hon. Clay Serby, Minister of Education. 
 
Dear Mr. Serby: 
 
Our Board of Education has just completed its budget for 
1999 and wishes to share with you some of its thoughts so 
that you may become more familiar with the plight of 
School Divisions. 

 
Once again this year our Board has had to go to its 
ratepayers for additional revenue in order to maintain 
(only) our present programs. This was done with the full 
knowledge that we have been told by a local village Mayor 
that, if our mill rate goes up in 1999, he will lead a tax 
revolt amongst our local municipalities. To illustrate the 
effect of just “maintaining” our programs, we are not 
providing needed repairs to our facilities nor are we 
keeping up with bus replacements. As a result, repair items 
are increasingly being referred to Occupational Health & 
Safety Committees by staff and we have seven route buses 
with over 300,000 km. on them, bringing into question the 
safety of their passengers. 

 
Budgetary expenditures amounting to 60% to 70% are 
outside of the Board of Education’s control! These items 
range from Saskatchewan Education initiatives to the price 
of bus gas. When these restrictions are combined, our 
hands our tied when it comes to implementing needed 
improvements — dare we say, to do anything! 

 
Over the years, provincial support for the education of 
students in the Shaunavon School Division has dropped 
from 58% to 20% of total expenditures! Our enrolment has 
declined over those years and where possible, staffing has 
been reduced. You will although understand that staff 
changes can not be proportional to enrolment changes, as 
those changes occur in numerous classrooms/schools. The 
grant formula recognizes enrolment changes but each year 
we seem to lose any recognition gains in the revenue 
equalization factor. This year our enrolment only dropped 
by four students but we lost $184,000. 
 
The recognized local revenue factor in the grant formula is 
of concern as well regarding the assessment figure used. 
We are only able to generate tax revenue from 83% of the 
agriculture lands due to the .83 factor. According to the 
grant formula, we are considered to be receiving 100% of 
this tax revenue! This is extremely inequitable and we 
encourage your department to make the necessary changes 
that would see the use of actual figures rather than 
numerously adjusted figures that end up being 
meaningless. 



May 4, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 1059 

We understand the financial plight of provincial finances, 
but without immediate, and substantial, increases in our 
school division’s grant revenues, devastating results are 
predicted. Prior to considering any inflation or other cost 
increases for next year, we already know that we will be 
short over $100,000. We cannot keep going to our 
ratepayers for the financial support that should be coming 
from the province. 
 
It is difficult, in one letter, to fully describe the effects that 
insufficient funding to School Divisions has on schools, 
staff, communities and most importantly, on students. If 
we can be of assistance in providing more information, we 
are more than willing to meet with you at your 
convenience. 
 
Respectfully yours, H.H. Conrad, Secretary-Treasurer. 

 
And, Mr. Minister, I think this letter really says it all when 
you’re looking at what’s happening out there, especially in rural 
Saskatchewan. And I would have to ask you — we’ll sort of 
step through this letter — I would have to ask you, do you 
believe there is more room to tax property owners? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Chair, to the member, I want to 
say to the member opposite that first of all I take quite seriously 
the letter of which you’ve read into the record tonight, and 
certainly we’ll be looking to see it. I have not had an 
opportunity to review it in the way in which you’ve read it a 
couple of minutes ago . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That 
would be good if you send a copy over to me, and we could 
take a look at it and address . . . there are a number of issues in 
that letter that we’d like to address. 
 
I think what I might say to you is that there has been clearly an 
enrolment decline, and the assessments are certainly up in that 
part of the province. And I’m very much concerned about how 
we address, particularly on the southwest side of the province, 
where the population sparsity is becoming even more of an 
issue than it has been over the last — say — 10 or 15 years. 
 
And so I would appreciate very much that letter making its way 
to me, and we’ll address some of those issues directly with the 
individual from whom it comes. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, for answering 
questions that weren’t asked as yet, because the question is 
quite simple. And the letter is getting copied; you’ll have a copy 
within a few minutes. But the question is as put in that letter, 
because they’re talking about a tax revolt . . . do you feel that 
there is more room to have more property taxes? Simple as that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I think there isn’t anybody in the province 
who wants to pay any more tax irrespective of whether it’s 
personal income tax or . . . (inaudible) . . . the education and 
property tax. For sure, nobody wants to pay any more of that. 
But I think today, what I’ve been saying around the province to 
many people is that we have about $1.1 billion today that we 
spend on education in this province. 
 
And it doesn’t matter where I go. I mean when I go to your 
constituency and speak to the people in your school system 
there, or I go to my own community, or I go to the northern part 

of the province, they all say to me that we’re not spending 
enough money in education. 
 
Not necessarily the 60/40 of which the property tax gets 600 
million and we get 400 million, but they say that we need to 
grow the base. And so today, through our examinations with the 
school trustees and with the SUMA and SARM, we’re 
examining how it is that we might be able to provide some 
additional resources into the education pool, and that the 
property tax gets reviewed and assessed at the same time. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Minister, you really haven’t answered 
that yet. I guess you want to skirt around and skate around the 
issue about whether or not you believe there’s more room to 
raise more tax off of property, and we’ll come back to that. 
 
So for now I’ll ask you: do you think there’s more room to take 
more staff out of these rural schools and increase the classroom 
size? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, we’re looking at a variety of 
different mechanisms and a way in which we can deliver 
education, particularly to rural Saskatchewan today. I mean, 
when you start looking at the small school enrolments that 
many of our schools have in the province today, and 
particularly, as I say to you, in the southwest side of the 
province, we’re looking at different ways — like technology, 
for example — in which we might be able to provide greater 
access to some of our smaller schools in rural Saskatchewan so 
that we can keep those schools open to ensure that we can 
provide quality education for that part of the province or for 
smaller rural communities. 
 
Clearly, and I agree that there’s a need for us in this province to 
grow the level of funding that we have in education today. I 
don’t think that you’re going to find a great deal of dispute 
about that. The mechanism as to how you grow that, of course, 
is going to be dependent on the kinds of resources that 
governments have today to provide additional funding, and 
we’re examining that with our partners. And our partners today 
are Saskatchewan school trustees, I think SUMA and SARM, of 
which I’ve already made a commitment to meet with these folks 
and have a discussion about what our future direction will be in 
terms of funding. And those commitments are underway today 
and those discussions are within days away. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Minister, you know it’s not unlike the 
crisis that you were warned about a few years ago when we 
started . . . well four or five years ago when we started raising 
these health care crisis questions day in and day out. And really 
it’s coming at you in spades, Mr. Minister. 
 
You ignored it when you were the Health minister, and look at 
where it’s got you now. Now you’re in Education, and I think 
you’re ignoring another crisis that’s coming at you. And the 
question is simple enough: do you support cutting programs, 
salaries, not taking care of your buildings, not replacing buses? 
Or are you in favour of more property tax? Which is it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well I think I want to say to the member 
opposite that you draw a long bow when you talk about the 
education system in Saskatchewan and the level of its 
functionability and its service delivery. Because in 



1060 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1999 

Saskatchewan today, when you look at what we have in terms 
of partnership with existing individuals and SSTA 
(Saskatchewan School Trustees Association) and STF and the 
ministries and the department, I think you’ll find an education 
system that will be hard to resemble anywhere else in Canada. 
 
Because we have today a very good core curriculum; we have a 
variety of specialized programs within the system today; we 
have an excellent teaching core of people today in our 
environment. So we don’t have a crisis in education. And the 
last thing that you should be promoting on that side of the 
House is the thought that we have a crisis in education today 
because it’s nowhere near being the truth. Because today in 
Saskatchewan we have a very, very good education system that 
we are proud to stack up with any other province across the 
nation, and will continue to work at growing it into the future in 
a variety of different ways. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Minister, then I draw your attention to 
. . . you have the letter now before you, that you are saying that 
we’re drawing long bows and trying to say there’s a crisis when 
there isn’t one. Look at page 2 in that middle paragraph: 
 

We understand the financial plight of (the) provincial 
finance but without immediate, and substantial, increases 
in our school division’s grant revenues, devastating results 
are predicted. Prior to considering any inflation or other 
cost increase for next year, we already know that we will 
be short $100,000. We cannot keep going to our ratepayers 
for the financial support that should be coming from the 
province. 

 
To me that sounds like there’s a crisis coming from the point of 
view of this board of education. Do you not agree that they have 
these crisis concerns? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I think what’s important for the member to 
understand here is that in this province today we have an 
appreciation of each other’s role, and certainly with school 
trustees and the ministry in the Department of Education. 
 
I mean as late as this afternoon I’m having a meeting with the 
Saskatchewan School Trustees Association who will say to you 
that they support the foundation operating grant in this province 
in the way in which it’s in place — they support it across the 
piece in Saskatchewan — the foundation operating grant. And 
school boards in this province will tell you, led by the 
Saskatchewan School Trustees Association, that in fact they 
should have taxing authority and taxing power. So they believe 
that they should be involved in that process. 
 
Now in this province today, this year we put in $13.14 million 
to grow the base in education. Last year we put in $21 million 
to grow the base in this province. So I mean we’re continuing to 
go in the right direction in my view. We’re continuing to grow 
the base in this province in education. And we make the 
commitment here that it remains one of our highest priorities in 
government and are going to continue to provide funding 
towards education in the province. 
 
(2200) 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Minister, you know, take a look in the 

letter here. 
 

(For) over the years, provincial support for the education of 
students in the Shaunavon School Division has dropped 
from 58% to 20% of total expenditures! 

 
If you’re talking about your trend line, I don’t think this is a 
trend line that you want to say is good and healthy because 
there is a crisis. These people want to meet with you and talk 
about this crisis. It comes to this, Mr. Minister, and it’s no more 
than this. 
 
Either as Minister of Education you’re going to ask them to go 
back to the property tax and get their increases — hundreds of 
thousands of dollars in one school division — get it from there. 
Or they can go with another option I guess you — really by way 
of your actions — put before them is cut out building repairs 
and buses. 
 
They have buses here. We have seven of them with over 
300,000 kilometres and they’re saying that they’re not safe for 
the kids any more. And you can cut teaching positions, have a 
lot larger class sizes, or cut programs because, quite frankly, 
you’re not prepared to put more money in. You mustn’t be. You 
had your opportunity in this budget. 
 
And you know, Mr. Minister, I remember very well on budget 
day what happened. And the Minister of Finance stood up and 
gave the budget — so coined the health budget — and all your 
members sat there and did nothing; barely a sound from you 
when you talked about things that you’re prepared to do. 
 
And yet when he stood up and announced that we’re going to 
cut 1 per cent off the PST (provincial sales tax), Mr. Minister 
— because you’re very close to him in your seats there — you 
were one of the first to reach over and give him a high-five, 
cutting the PST, weren’t you? 
 
And I know you know I remember that by the way you’re 
sitting there looking. You were in favour of cutting the 1 per 
cent PST, a hundred million bucks, right. And you’re the 
Minister of Education and you say there’s no crisis. And we 
take a look here at the kind of cuts that you have promoted. 
 
You promote these cuts to education by your inaction. You’re 
either saying cut services, cut teachers, cut buses, cut building 
repairs, or go back to the property tax because you’re not 
getting it from us. And quite frankly, you sat there — you sat 
there, or you stood there that day — and high-fived the Finance 
minister for his 1 per cent in PST cut. Don’t you think it’s a 
case of priorities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well it may have looked like a high-five 
but I was just giving the signal about five people who’ll be 
disappearing from that side of the House and that’s . . . 
(inaudible) . . . Okay? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I want to say to the member opposite that 
today in Saskatchewan we have a solid commitment to 
education — solid commitment. And when you take a look at 
what we’ve done in the last couple of years to growing the base 



May 4, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 1061 

on the foundation operating grant, it’s revealing if you look at 
that to see what we’re doing. As I say to you, $13.4 million this 
year and maybe you’ll say it’s not enough and that we should 
have . . . we should have selected our priorities in a different 
way. 
 
And maybe you’re going to stand in your place and say, well 
we shouldn’t have put $195 million, you know, into health care, 
and that you should have taken some of the $195 million and 
put some of it into education. You might say that. Or we might 
have taken some of that 195 and put it into highways, but 
overall in the province we provided some balance for you. We 
provided some on highways and education and in social 
services and in health, and that’s part of what of government is 
about — and balancing the books and reducing the debt. 
 
Now in the future we’re going to say, as I’ve said, we’re going 
to continue to try and put additional resources into the 
education pool. And I’m optimistic that as our opportunities 
financially in this province improve, we’ll continue to invest in 
education and into the future of young people in this province. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Minister, you know we appreciate that 
you sit around the cabinet table and help make these decisions 
and you’ve been doing it for some time, talking about your 
priorities. And when we take a look at some of the things that 
your government has done: whether it’s even to just buy a brand 
new fancy jet for a few of you to fly over this province so you 
don’t have to drive on our roads; or you know, the 62 million 
bucks that you’ve spent as government buying a TV company 
in New Zealand; or prepared to spend 30 million in an unstable 
environment in Guyana with a power company; or losing 
money on Channel Lake; or paying severance packages of 
300-and-some-thousand; or health CEOs getting 17 per cent 
increase. I mean we could go on and on and on about where 
your priorities are. 
 
And you can talk about all the meetings you’re going to be in 
with this group and that group, but at the end of the day it’s 
whether or not you’re sitting at the cabinet table and saying: 
you know what, as Minister of Education I accept there’s some 
serious problems. We have cut back in school divisions such as 
Shaunavon School Division where the . . . your proportion has 
dropped from 58 per cent down to 20 per cent of expenditures. 
Are you fighting for them? Are you fighting for them, Mr. 
Minister, or not? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Member, my job in the ministry 
— which may be foreign to you in terms of ever having an 
opportunity to do this job — and I want to say to you that as an 
individual cabinet minister around the table, we always 
represent the views of the constituents of whom we represent. 
Today it’s the education people of whom I represent. 
 
And I travel the province and get a better appreciation of what’s 
happening in school districts and what’s happening within the 
classrooms, the schools, and try to bring that back to the 
Assembly or bring it back to the table of which my caucus 
colleagues sit around and promote the importance of growing 
the education base in this province. And I’ve been saying that 
now for some time. 
 
In fact, I said it just a couple of weeks ago when we were at the 

forum with Saskatchewan teachers — of which your leader was 
there — and said that it’s important for us to grow the base in 
this province and that we’re going to make a contribution to 
growing that into the future, and that in our platform we’re 
identifying how we’re going to do that. 
 
And when he went to speak about his — there’s nothing in the 
K to 12. There isn’t a single word about the K to 12 in your 
platform. And so when you say to me, where are we going in 
education, you can see what we’re doing and where we’re 
going. It’s clear. 
 
And so I ask the member opposite to examine that and to assure 
him that on a regular basis, an ongoing basis, I support very 
hard for the people who are delivering education in this 
province. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well, Mr. Minister, would you accept . . . 
if you’re not saying there’s a crisis, if you don’t say these kind 
of numbers are serious in a crisis, would you at least accept that 
there’s a serious concern on the financing of these school 
districts? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well I’m saying to the member opposite 
that we have a responsibility to grow the base in education in 
this province because I think that $1.1 million today in the K to 
12 system is not doing the kind of job that I’d like to see it do. 
And so my commitment, along with school trustees in this 
province, is to see how we can grow that into the future. And 
my commitment is very solid and I’ve been saying that for 
several months. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well then are you saying that you’re 
ineffective in cabinet. If you’re prepared to vote . . . or the 
others are voting for 62 million bucks to be spent in New 
Zealand on a TV company, but in fact you’ve got this serious 
concern before you and you can’t get money for the education 
of Saskatchewan kids, and this government is making the kind 
of ridiculous investments around the world that they are and 
putting these monies at risk — are you not effective? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well I want to say to the member opposite 
that I’ll continue to press for growth in the education file. I’ll 
continue to work with the school trustees to try to enrich the 
funding base. That’s my commitment that I’ve made to school 
trustees, and I make it to you. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well, you know, Mr. Minister, you talk 
about where our commitment is. And we’ve been on record for 
a long time to 60/40 split. We fully support that. But, you know, 
I recall going into the 1991 campaign, as I did, 60-40 split. You 
know, it . . . your percentages though are going the wrong way, 
and perhaps you just didn’t realize that, but you’ve dropped in 
Shaunavon from 58 to 20. What do you think of that trend line, 
Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I say to the member opposite that the 
60-40 split, which is your position, doesn’t do anything in terms 
of growing the base. It doesn’t do a thing for education in this 
province. So when you identify education spending in this 
province . . . because when you look at what the financial needs 
in the province are, I talk about growing it. You talk about 
keeping it level. And if we have all of the issues across 



1062 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1999 

Saskatchewan which I identify with you are there, in terms of 
rural technology, how we provided district resources, grow the 
teacher base in the province, it’s about putting additional 
resources into the system. Not flipping 60-40 only, it’s about 
growing it — that’s my commitment. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Minister, maybe we should back up 
here a little bit and you define exactly what growing the base is 
for the good folks of Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well I want to say to the member opposite, 
first of all you say to me that there isn’t enough funds in the 
system today. And I say to you that what we’re trying to do is to 
provide a greater equity and quality of education to students 
across the province. That’s my responsibility in partnership 
with the Saskatchewan school trustees, who’ve identified for 
me some of the same issues and that is that we need to provide 
greater rural technology where we can, to provide greater equity 
and parity across the piece, to provide equal opportunities and 
special education programming, and the list goes on and on. 
And the commitment that I’ve made is that collectively, with 
Saskatchewan school trustees, we’re going to try to accomplish 
that. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Minister, I don’t think you’ve defined 
what growing the base is, and maybe if you’d get right to that 
fine point: what is growing the base? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — It’s pretty simple for me. I mean, if the 
base is 1.1 and you’re going to grow the base, that means that 
you’ve got to grow past 1.1. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — What’s the 1.1? Tell us what it is. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — The 1.1 is the total cost of public 
education in this province shared by the school trustees and by 
the provincial treasury. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — But, Mr. Minister, we’re asking . . . when 
you’re saying growing the base, are you saying getting other 
groups involved to help fund education? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well if the education base today is 1.1 
million, and we . . . 1.1 billion, anything over 1.1 would be 
growing the base. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — So when you’re saying growing the base, 
are you talking about provincial share — your share? Or 
somebody else’s share that you’re talking about? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I’m talking about the total growth of the 
base. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — And so you’re saying then SARM, 
SUMA, they’re prepared to put more money into this. What are 
they saying? They have more room in their property tax base to 
do it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I said to you earlier that I’m having a 
dialogue with school trustees and SUMA and SARM. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — And so where, Mr. Minister, are they 
going to get the money to help you grow this base? 

Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Chair, to the member opposite, 
that’s part of the dialogue that I’m having with the school 
trustees and SUMA and SARM. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Maybe you’d like to give us some 
examples where you think they can get this extra funding? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Chair, to the member opposite, 
I’ve already said that we’ve grown the base the last couple of 
years. The provincial government has grown the base and 13 
and a half million and 21.3 or 4 million. So we’ve grown the 
base over the last two years and continue to go in that direction. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — So you’re saying growing the base is 
directly from the provincial coffers, right? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — That’s exactly where the growth of the 
base has occurred over the last couple of years in partnership 
with the SSTA. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — So you weren’t able to just say we’re 
going to put more provincial money in it a long time ago, and 
we can avoid this. But now if you are prepared to grow the base 
and put more money in, how much more money would we 
expect to take care of these problems? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I don’t know the answer to that question 
because that’s part of some of the dialogue that I’m having with 
school trustees and municipal leaders. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — If you can appreciate what you’ve been 
hearing from all of those groups up to date who are saying we 
really don’t have any more room on our property tax base, 
we’re all being cut short here, and it really is on your shoulders 
to come up as a provincial government and properly fund, you 
know, kids’ education in this province, surely you can have a 
number and a timetable as to when you’re going to adequately 
fund education. You can’t give us some idea? 
 
(2215) 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well I’ve given you a time table in terms 
of evaluating what the role of the school is, so we’re doing a 
role of the school evaluation which is now underway, or soon 
will be underway. I have given the commitment on a number of 
occasions now that I’m going to be meeting with SUMA and 
SARM and SSTA. That process is underway. So the work is in 
progress today as we speak. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — But, Mr. Minister, when you talk about all 
these meetings — and you and I both know what you’re 
government’s meetings have done for other groups to date; it’s 
really just a way of creating buffers and killing time and making 
sure you do absolutely nothing — that’s the only thing that your 
government has a good track record on, Mr. Minister . . . is 
doing absolutely nothing in a crisis. 
 
So tell me what your meetings would do in regards to doing 
something with these, you know, where the enrolment dropped 
by four students and they lost 184,000 bucks. How are you 
addressing those things? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — The equalization grant would look after 



May 4, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 1063 

those kinds of shifts, both in assessment and in student 
population. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — So in a school division like this where 
they’re going to be short — as it says in the letter — 100,000 
bucks, I guess a great deal of it is because of this lack of 
funding from you, but in fact a change in enrolment. Are you 
not prepared to take some action immediately? Because we’re 
talking about this year’s budget for this school division. So and 
what are you talking about? Having meetings for a few years 
where in fact more teachers have got to be let go, and buildings 
have got to be forgotten about, and buses can go from 300,000 
clicks or miles up to what — 5 or 600,000? What is it that 
you’re really thinking about that can happen to make some 
change in this year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — As I’ve said to the member opposite, that 
the foundation operating grant really does make the adjustments 
for student enrolments, decreases and increases, and also the 
assessments, decreases and increases in assessments. The 
foundation operating grant really addresses those. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — So do you expect you’ll have some resolve 
in this particular year for school divisions such as Shaunavon’s 
where they’re $100,000 short? Will you have some resolve in 
providing more funding, perhaps not investing around the world 
in Chile or Santiago or somewhere, but investing here in 
Saskatchewan, in Saskatchewan kids, to take care of this 
problem? Will you do it in this particular year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well as I’ve said to the member opposite, 
Mr. Chair, that we’ve already made an investment in education 
this year. It’s $13.4 million; $24 million in capital. Last year 
$21 million in operating; $24 million in capital, and my 
intention is that we continue to grow the budgets into the future 
for education. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Minister, you know you’re just 
avoiding it. You’ve got to actually come and deal with the 
problem. These school divisions — you’ve been getting letters 
the same as I have. This just didn’t . . . these letters didn’t just 
come up in this year. We’ve been seeing them from school 
divisions year after year after year. And in fact you have a, you 
know, what’s the saying: after all is said and done, more gets 
said than gets done. 
 
And I think that really says something about your government. 
You’re prepared to do nothing. These are the education of our 
Saskatchewan kids, and your priorities are all over the map, but 
it’s not for Saskatchewan. I mean shame on you and your 
government. At some point you’re going to have to face the 
facts. There’s tax revolts; there’s underfunding; classrooms are 
already getting too large. Do you not feel you have some 
responsibility as the minister to deal with this stuff? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I want to say, Mr. Chair, to the member 
opposite, that we’re very, very proud of our education system in 
Saskatchewan and today we’re making a huge investment into 
the future of our young minds so that they can continue to grow 
and supply the kinds of educational needs that we have in this 
province for the future. 
 
In fact we’re so committed to ensuring that we have an 

excellent curriculum in this province and that we have 
accessibility, that all teachers in the province have accessibility 
to our core curriculum, that just recently what we did is we put 
on a CD-ROM — and I have a copy of the CD-ROM here — of 
which on this small little CD-ROM we have the entire core 
curriculum of the provincial education system. 
 
And what I have that will help the member opposite to 
understand more fully about what it is and how we’re growing 
education in this province, I’d like to provide a copy of this 
CD-ROM to the member, and he can take it home and stick it 
into his computer and get a full appreciation of what it is that 
we’re doing in Saskatchewan to help our young people educate 
in the fashion in which they’re going to provide contributions 
into the future. 
 
And this little CD-ROM, by the way, the only cost was 73 cents 
for this little ROM, and we provide it to every teacher in the 
province . . . to every teacher in the province, and to all the 
young teachers that are currently being trained in the 
universities, and we can certainly provide it for all members of 
the Assembly so that they have a full and better appreciation, 
and we’ll do that. Absolutely we will. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Minister, you talk about how proud 
you are of the system. Would these seven school buses that 
have well over 300,000 kilometres bring them into question of 
their safety? Are those some of the things you’re proud of? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well I think the member should be careful 
when he talks about the safety issues as it relates to school 
buses in this province and clearly . . . I mean I’m very, very 
much concerned when somebody raises, in this Assembly, the 
fact that there may be some kinds of safety issues as it relates to 
transporting of children in the province. 
 
And I say to the member opposite that school divisions in this 
province, in my view, are responsible men and women who are 
elected by ratepayers of their jurisdictions. And to raise in this 
Assembly a question about the safety of children who travel on 
school buses today, who are really represented by individuals 
from your community, is an area that I would be very cautious 
about proceeding in. 
 
And I would say to the member, if you have some concern 
about the safety issues of school buses in your jurisdiction, you 
should take that to your school board. You should let them 
know what concerns you have, and I’m sure that they’ll address 
them immediately. And if that doesn’t happen, I would 
encourage you to come to my office or send me a note or give 
me a call. I’d be very happy to examine it. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. In fact, I’ll 
raise it with you right now because it was in the second 
paragraph of the letter if you would be so kind to read. And it’s 
not me saying that there is safety concerns out there although I 
support the constituents when they raise that. 
 
This is the Shaunavon School Division No. 71 board saying: 
 

As a result, repair items are increasingly being referred to 
Occupational Health & Safety Committees by staff and we 
have seven route buses with over 300,000 km. on them, 



1064 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1999 

bringing into question the safety of their passengers. 
 
So you can point at us all you want. These people are already 
raising it. You’re sitting there doing nothing about it, sir, and 
you should be. It should be a major concern with you. 
Obviously it’s not. I dare say you know the details of the money 
that you’re spending in New Zealand on a TV company much 
better than you understand the condition of our buses in 
Saskatchewan rural school districts. I dare say you know a lot 
more about how fast that jet is that you ride than the kind of 
buses that our kids are riding on. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Member, I appreciate you sending the 
letter to me. I’ve just received it today. It’s dated April 30, and 
so I’ve made a commitment that we’ll review the letter and that 
we’ll respond through our regional directors . . . have an 
opportunity to speak with our regional directors and respond to 
the issues that are within this letter to the individuals of whom 
you’ve provided me the letter from. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Minister, to take it a step further — 
because you said you have some concerns about the safety 
issues that were raised, some of the financial concerns that were 
raised — they have asked for a meeting. Can we have a date? 
You’ve got staff with you. Can we have a date perhaps right 
now as to when you would be able to be out there within a few 
days to meet with this school board? And I’d gladly be there 
with you. In fact I’ll drive you out, if that’s a concern. If the jet 
is being used by the Minister of Agriculture — who will not 
quit heckling here tonight — if he’s using the jet to be in China 
or San Diego or wherever he’s going to, I’ll drive you out there. 
 
But would you in fact come out to that meeting within a few 
days? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chairman, to the member, I’ve met 
now I think with probably 30 or 40 school divisions across the 
province and certainly I’d be very, very happy to meet with the 
school division no. 71. I can’t make a commitment today that I 
can do this within the next couple of days but I certainly will 
make a commitment that I will meet with the school division at 
Shaunavon within the very near future, and I would be very 
happy if you could jet down from wherever you’re jetting from 
and join me. I’d be happy to have you. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Minister, can we at least get a 
commitment from you that you would be out there, say, within 
the next 10 days? We would like you to be out there before your 
government calls an election and you just forget all about it. So 
a week or 10 days — I don’t know how soon you’re going to 
call the election — but I think it’s important for you to come 
out and talk about your government’s priorities which you’re 
well on record for, but come out and talk about them and talk 
about the priorities of the people that live under your system, 
that try to educate our kids, that try to take care of our sick and 
our elderly. Would you at least give a commitment that within a 
week you could make it out? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Again, I don’t know what my itinerary is, 
Mr. Chair, at this point in time, but I know that it’s full. But 
what I will do is make a commitment to the member that 
through my chief of staff and through my office and through the 
Department of Education and our regional director in your 

school division, we’ll make arrangements to get together in the 
next little while. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — With that, I would like to thank the 
minister and his staff for providing what answers he was able to 
provide to some of the questions tonight. I think there was 
several that he didn’t answer, that he completely avoided. And 
perhaps when he is out in Shaunavon we’ll put some of those to 
him and get more of an answer, not of the political nature but 
one of real concern of our kids and what we’re going to do to 
make sure they have a decent education. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Now, Mr. 
Minister, just a couple of questions in conclusion. You were a 
little put back when the member from Wood River raised the 
issue about buses with a lot of mileage on and that the 
children’s risk might be unsafe. And our children in this 
province that ride our school buses every day back and forth to 
school, Mr. Minister, are often put at risk because of something 
that’s out of the hands of the school divisions, and that’s 
something that’s in the hands of your government and that’s the 
highways. 
 
With roads that these buses are travelling on day after day, right 
across Saskatchewan, we’re putting our kids’ lives in jeopardy 
every time they get on that school bus and go on to the 
highways that your government is not prepared to fix. 
 
Now in cabinet, Mr. Minister, do you take offence with the 
Minister of Highways and say that, well I take offence that 
you’re not fixing the highways, Mr. Minister, or do you care, 
Minister? Can you tell us what your view is on the shape of the 
highways in this province that our school buses are being forced 
to drive on every day. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Chair, to the member. I know 
that he’s anxious to have a discussion about the roads and 
highways in our province, and I know that the minister 
responsible for Highways and Transportation would be very, 
very happy to accommodate that discussion with you. And I’m 
very pleased to continue any kind of discussion you want to 
have on the education piece and would be very happy to answer 
any questions as it relates to the education piece. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Minister, that does certainly relate 
to the education system. But one last question and that’s 
regarding amalgamation of school divisions. Can you talk for a 
minute on that process and how it’s proceeding. How many 
school divisions are under serious discussions, and how many 
of them amalgamated, and how many do you suspect in the next 
six months or so that will have done that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I think what I want to say to the member 
opposite and Mr. Chair, is that there have been 30 
amalgamations in the province to date. There are a number of 
school divisions that are talking with each other about the 
process of amalgamations. And you may be familiar — I’m 
sure you are familiar — with the school division in your own 
riding where they’ve had some discussions with Saskatoon and 
Saskatoon West, but the amalgamations are continuing to 
proceed on a voluntary basis, and there are a number of 
discussions that are going on around the province today. 
 



May 4, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 1065 

Subvote (ED01) agreed to. 
 
Subvotes (ED02), (ED04), (ED03) agreed to. 
 
Vote 5 agreed to. 
 
(2230) 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1998-99 
General Revenue Fund 

Budgetary Expense 
Education 

Vote 5 
 
Subvote (ED03) agreed to. 
 
Vote 5 agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — In concluding the estimates, I want to 
thank the members opposite for their thoughtful questions in the 
time that we spent on the estimates from Education. 
 
And I also want to take a moment to thank the officials from the 
Department of Education who have worked very hard in putting 
together this year’s budget, because I really do believe that this 
is one of the more important portfolios in government. Working 
towards enriching the minds of our young people in this 
province and educating our young people for the future has to 
be one of the major portfolios, and I really want to extend my 
appreciation to the officials from the department who’ve 
worked so hard in putting this budget together. And I thank the 
members. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 25 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Serby that Bill No. 25 — The 
Education Amendment Act, 1999/Loi de 1999 modifiant la 
Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation be now read a second time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:35 p.m. 
 



 

 


