





























































Hansard: December 14, 1999


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 177 
 December 14, 1999 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
present a petition today concerning the fuel tax revenue. This 
petition was sent to Mr. Glen McPherson but since there’s no 
Liberals, I would like to present it on his behalf: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call on federal and provincial 
governments to dedicate a significantly greater portion of 
fuel tax revenues towards road maintenance and 
construction so Saskatchewan residents may have a safe 
highway system that meets their needs. 
 

From the good people of Shaunavon, Tompkins, Eastend. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
stand today to present petitions on behalf of Saskatchewan 
citizens concerned about the automobile insurance Act. The 
petition reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Whereas your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to repeal the provisions of the 
personal injury benefits contained in the automobile 
insurance Act and adopt a return to an add-on insurance 
system that would provide benefits on a no-fault basis to 
all victims without taking the innocent victim’s right to 
seek compensation for the person responsible for the 
accident, but with appropriate modifications to reduce 
overall personal injury costs. 
 

And I have petitioners from Regina, from Waldheim, and 
Wadena and Kelliher. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
today that was originally sent to the Liberals, but the people that 
have signed this petition felt that it wasn’t being recognized, so 
I feel it’s a responsibility to bring it forward to the House. The 
petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that the Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call on the federal and 
provincial governments to dedicate a significantly greater 
portion of the fuel tax revenues towards road maintenance 
and construction so Saskatchewan residents may have a 
safe highway system that meets their needs. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Shaunavon, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too stand today to 
present petitions on behalf of the Saskatchewan citizens 
concerned about the automobile insurance Act. And it reads as 
follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to repeal the provision of the 
personal injuries benefits contained in the automobile 
insurance Act and adopt a return to an add-on insurance 
system that would provide benefits on a no-fault basis to 
all victims without taking away the innocent victim’s right 
to seek compensation from the person responsible for the 
accident, but with appropriate modifications to reduce 
overall personal injury costs. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The petitioners are from Regina and Yorkton. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — I’m pleased to present a petition on behalf of 
residents of Saskatchewan concerned about the automobile 
insurance Act. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to repeal the provision of the 
personal injuries benefits contained in the automobile 
insurance Act and adopt a return to an add-on insurance 
system that would provide benefits on a no-fault basis to 
all victims without taking away the innocent victim’s right 
to seek compensation from the person responsible for the 
accident, but with appropriate modifications to reduce 
overall personal injury costs. 
 

This petition comes from the good people of Prince Albert, 
Saskatoon, Regina and Yorkton. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the petition presented at the last 
sitting has been reviewed and found to be in order. And 
pursuant to rule 12(7) is hereby read and received. 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 
repeal the personal injury benefits in the automobile 
insurance Act. 
 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 

Special Nominating Committee 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 
the member from Regina Victoria: 
 

That the first report of the special committee appointed to 
prepare a list of members to compose the standing 
committees of the Assembly be now concurred in. 

 
I so move. 
 
I wonder if I could have a friendly amendment to this. If I could 
get the member for Souris-Cannington to second this motion. 
 
The Speaker: — Since I’ve heard no objection, I take it as an 



178 Saskatchewan Hansard December 14, 1999 

approval. 
 
Motion agreed to. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce 
to you and through you to the members of the Assembly, the 
Canadian spokesperson for both the 1998 and ’99 International 
Labour Organization, Child Labour Committee deliberations, 
Sandra Morgan. And members will know that in June the 174 
members of the ILO (International Labour Organization) 
unanimously adopted The Worst Forms of Child Labour Treaty, 
banning the worst forms of child labour. 
 
And as well, Mr. Speaker, Miss Morgan is also the deputy 
minister of the Department of Labour. So I ask all hon. 
members to join with me in welcoming Miss Morgan to the 
Assembly. Stand up there. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — And Mr. Speaker, with Miss Morgan, I 
would also like to introduce to you and through you to the 
members of this Assembly, two special people from 
Saskatchewan who have taken an active part in helping to 
eliminate the worst forms of child labour around the world, and 
that’s Chris Gibbs and Erin McGinnis, if I could get them to 
stand. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Erin and Chris were among five young 
people from our province who with the financial assistance of 
the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour and several of its 
affiliates, travelled to Calcutta, India, last year, to take part in 
the global march against child labour. They are excellent 
examples for us all and they’re to be congratulated for their 
ongoing efforts to help the fight of the world’s children. 
 
Now Chris is accompanied by his mother Natalie today; and 
Erin’s grandparents, Dee and Earl McGinnis, are also with her 
in the gallery today. So again I just as ask all hon. members to 
join me in welcoming all to the Assembly today. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the Saskatchewan 
Party I would also like to welcome these two special people 
from Saskatchewan who have taken an active role in helping to 
eliminate the worst forms of child labour around the world, 
Chris Gibbs and Erin McGinnis. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like 
to introduce to you and through you to all the members of the 
House, six individuals who are seated up in your gallery, Mr. 
Speaker. And they are from the Southeast Metis Development 
Association from Fort Qu’Appelle — Vince Folk, Bev 
Worsley, Tina Suru, Ms. Morin, Carmen Ocampo, and April 
Low. And these folks are in the House here today, Mr. Speaker, 
to take in the proceedings of question period and I understand 

they’re going to have a tour of the Legislative Assembly 
afterwards. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I ask all the members to give them a warm 
welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I too would like to join the 
member in welcoming the Metis from the southern part of our 
province. As a northern Metis person I’m always very proud to 
see the developments. I know that Metis people were part of the 
building of this country and also a part of the building of this 
province, and it’s good to see the positive contributions come to 
the floor as we move on into the next century, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure this 
afternoon to introduce to you and through you to the members 
of the Assembly, my cousin Jason Wall, who lives here in 
Regina and his son Daegan is with him. Jason and his wife 
Leanne have opened up their home to me while I am here and 
allow me to stay which I greatly appreciate. Jason not long ago 
moved to Regina from Medicine Hat actually. Although he’s 
got some grave concerns and he’s made it pretty clear that 
unless there’s some substantial tax relief in the very near future, 
Mr. Speaker, he may have to move back. I just want to 
encourage him to hang in there for about two to four more years 
and we’ll be able to give him that tax relief and he can stay here 
in Regina. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. Two individuals seated behind the rail on our side, the 
former deputy premier Ed Tchorzewski and Grant Whitmore 
are with us today, and I just wanted all members to recognize 
them and welcome them to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Royal Canadian Mounted Police Swearing-In 
 

Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday I was 
fortunate enough to witness the swearing-in for Canada’s 
newest members of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police. 
 
Twenty-two young men and women were sworn in after 
completing their training as members of the world’s most 
revered, recognized, and honoured police force. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to say that among those decked 
out proudly in their red serge was my nephew Eldon Draude, 
now Constable Draude, who will begin his career in Surrey, BC 
(British Columbia). 
 
Mr. Speaker, all Canadians should continue to take pride in the 
RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police). For over 100 years, 
these men, and now women, have kept peace in our country and 
were instrumental in the peaceful settlement of the West. 



December 14, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 179 

The RCMP mission statement spells out the force’s 
commitment to service. It reads: 
 

The Royal Canadian Mounted Police is Canada’s national 
police force. Proud of our traditions and confident in 
meeting future challenges, we commit to preserve the 
peace, uphold the law, and provide quality service within 
our communities. 

 
Mr. Speaker, at the church service I was struck by one of the 
prayers read during the installation ceremonies and I’m sure all 
members of the legislature would like to join me in this prayer: 
 

Endue them with loyalty and courage, and grant that 
wherever they may be called to duty or to danger, they may 
be under your protection. Amen. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

New Doctors for Broadview 
 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have some more good 
news for rural Saskatchewan. Dr. Michael DeBeer has arrived 
in Broadview and will soon be joined by Dr. DeWitt. These two 
doctors will replace two who have moved on. Everyone knows, 
and we freely admit, that keeping doctors in rural areas 
anywhere in the world is difficult, but we are having some 
success, as these two arrivals indicate. 
 
Another interesting part of this Broadview story is that Dr. 
DeBeer is quoted as saying that we have a good medical system 
in Canada: “Go to the United States,” he said, “and see what 
happens to you. I think you have some of the best medical 
systems in the world,” DeBeer said of Canada. 
 
I’m happy to welcome Drs. DeBeer and DeWitt to 
Saskatchewan. And they will find their community and our 
province progressive, and our people friendly. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Weyburn to Host the 2001 Canadian 
Mixed Curling Championship 

 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to congratulate the city of 
Weyburn and the Weyburn curling club for being awarded the 
bid to host the 2001 Canadian Mixed Curling Championship 
which will run January 6 to 14, 2001. 
 
A team from Weyburn won the first Canadian Mixed Curling 
Championship ever held, and that was in 1964. Weyburn has a 
great group of volunteers and we are well-known for putting on 
first-class events. 
 
Again, congratulations on a job well done to the bid committee. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Metis Employment and Training Awards 
 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I’d like to tell 

all the members about an awards ceremony I attended on 
Friday, December 10 and it was the first of its kind. 
 
Myself and our Speaker had the opportunity to attend the first 
ever Metis Employment and Training Awards held in Fort 
Qu’Appelle. This was a very enjoyable evening and I would 
like to add my own congratulations to the groups and the 
individuals that won the award that evening. 
 
These awards are long indeed . . . These awards are indeed 
important and overdue. The award celebrations are ongoing 
achievements of the accomplishments of the people enhanced 
employment and training in Saskatchewan Metis people. Five 
group awards and five individual awards were given out in all. 
And there are plans for the year 2000 Metis Employment and 
Training Awards. 
 
I enjoyed the entire evening and I wish to congratulate not only 
the winners, but everyone involved in organizing the Metis 
Employment and Training Awards. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Swift Current Comprehensive 
High School’s Football Team 

 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, on November 13 at Taylor Field, the 
Swift Current Comprehensive High School football team 
appeared in their first provincial football championship in over 
two decades. Their combatants that afternoon were the Martin 
Collegiate Monarchs. And what ensued, Mr. Speaker, was just a 
great football game. The game had to be settled in overtime 
with the Monarchs coming out on top. 
 
I’d like to congratulate every single member of the Colts, Mr. 
Speaker, for a remarkable season. All season long they have 
demonstrated heart, and desire, and a will to win. Hats off to 
head coach Rod Siemens and his entire coaching staff, and to 
the parents and fans and family, two hundred of whom made it 
to the game from Swift Current in Regina at Taylor Field. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, because Martin Collegiate is in the Deputy 
Premier’s constituency, I challenged him to a gentleman’s 
wager, with the loser having to give a member’s statement, 
purchase a plaque for the winning team, and buy the winner 
supper. I have to admit, Mr. Speaker, after the events of last 
week I’ve been tempted to renege on the bet chalking it up, of 
course, to just political rhetoric. 
 
But I can’t bring myself to do that, Mr. Speaker, so I’m on my 
feet to give the member’s statement; I’ve sent the plaque over to 
the Deputy Premier. The head coach of the Colts has given me 
two coupons for Big Macs for our supper and we’ll be enjoying 
that. 
 
Regardless of the bet, Mr. Speaker, the real winners of course 
were the provincial champion Monarchs as well as the Swift 
Current Comprehensive Colts football team. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
member opposite, the member from Swift Current, that I 



180 Saskatchewan Hansard December 14, 1999 

appreciate very much the honouring of what he calls a 
gentlemen’s wager, using the word very flippantly when you 
refer to both of us as gentlemen. 
 
But I do want to say that indeed having played football down in 
the southwest part of the province a long time ago, I know 
you’ve got some pretty rough and tough characters. But I have 
to say that the Martin team outshone by a small amount. And so 
if you’re going to win in Regina, boy, you’ve got to work a 
little bit harder than you do down in Swift Current. So good 
luck and congratulations. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Private Member’s Bill on Dealer Purity 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to address 
football of a different sort. Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech this 
past week employed the theme “a brand new day” anticipating a 
new approach to politics in this province. And I quote from the 
speech where I say, the people told us to work together to fight 
for our farm families, to better serve the people who elected us 
to this legislature. 
 
I even had the member from Regina Dewdney come to my 
office a few days ago to make the point that a good idea, no 
matter from which side of the House it came, would be given 
credit and positive response. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday in this House we saw an opportunity 
missed to see that co-operation become reality. Unless of 
course, as it appears, government . . . co-operation rather, is just 
a one-way street in the government’s favour. 
 
Mr. Speaker, late last week the official opposition introduced a 
private member’s Bill on the issue of dealer purity. And when 
we made the introduction, we offered to wholeheartedly support 
any government initiative in that area if they had similar 
legislation. 
 
Now we view this issue as immensely serious, and failure to act 
in the short time frame available to us could have disastrous 
consequences. For whom, you ask? 
 
Well for every manufacturer of short line farm equipment in 
Saskatchewan, including Bourgault Industries of St. Brieux, 
Morris Industries of Yorkton, and Honey Bee Manufacturing. 
Consequences for every employee of the said companies. For 
every dealer which, because of lowered sales, is going to run 
into survival problems. And finally for the economy of the 
province. 
 
We are home to one of the broadest, brightest, and most 
energetic farm machinery manufacturing sectors in North 
America. This group has contributed substantially to the 
economic . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order. Time has expired. 
 

Significance of Synchrotron 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
announcement that most profoundly proves that Saskatchewan 

is poised to sail into the new millennium is that $173.5 million 
Synchrotron being constructed in Saskatoon on the campus of 
the University of Saskatchewan. 
 
When it is completed in the year 2003, Mr. Speaker, the 
Synchrotron will place us in the international forefront of 
scientific research and technological advancement for years to 
come. This is really a big deal, Mr. Speaker. And it is also a big 
deal for the whole province, not just for one university or one 
city. 
 
A firm from my city of Regina, for instance, will also play a 
major role. Regina-based PCL Maxam will build the house in 
which the Synchrotron will reside. The building is scheduled to 
be completed by the end of next year. 
 
As I said, Mr. Speaker, the Synchrotron is a big project. But 
unlike other megaprojects of the past and days gone by, this one 
will have a thousand uses for hundreds of researchers and firms 
who will extend our collective wisdom and expand our modern 
economy. 
 
My congratulations to PCL Maxam and all those responsible for 
the entire Synchrotron project. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

2002 Canadian Special Olympic Summer Games 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. This Thursday at the Gateway Mall in Prince Albert, 
there will be a community rally of which all members should be 
aware. 
 
This community rally is in support of Prince Albert’s bid to host 
the 2002 Canadian Special Olympic Summer Games. 
 
Prince Albert has already demonstrated that we are more than 
able to hold such an event. The Western Canada Summer 
Games this summer proved that. But, Mr. Speaker, this time 
we’re going for the national. 
 
As committee chairperson Phil Fredette said, Prince Albert is 
the perfect centre for such an event. The selection committee 
will be in P.A. (Prince Albert) this week and I’m sure that they 
will see our bid in a favourable light. 
 
All of the event locations are within easy walking distance of 
the games village at Carlton High School, and Mr. Fredette and 
his committee can point to corporate, government, and 
volunteer support. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that our community, if we’re successful in 
this bid, will be extraordinarily good hosts for extraordinarily 
incredible games and will be there to support the athletes and 
their families. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



December 14, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 181 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Plains Health Centre Closure 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today my 
question is for the Premier. 
 
Mr. Premier, later today the Provincial Auditor is expected to 
release the results of his special investigation into the closure of 
the Plains hospital. 
 
Mr. Premier, in 1998 you stood here in the legislature, wagged 
your finger at the Saskatchewan Party and said this: 
 

I want to tell you this. Don’t ever forget this. When the 
Plains is closed in October there will not be one bed lost or 
closed in Regina. Not one bed lost or closed in Regina (you 
repeated yourself). 
 

That’s what you said, Mr. Premier. Mr. Premier, do you still 
stand by this statement? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As the people 
will know, the decision was made in 1993 to consolidate the 
services located at the Plains hospital into the Regina General 
and the Pasqua. And at the time the decision was made on the 
basis of a number of reports that indicated, as a result of the 
capital construction that had taken place in the 1980s under the 
former administration, the Progressive Conservative Party of 
which some people are from that party, these two hospitals were 
the newest in the city of Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we agreed to consolidate those services into the 
Regina General and the Pasqua, and what I can report today is 
that people living in Regina and southern Saskatchewan have 
the very best mental health facility in this country. They have 
an MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) for southern 
Saskatchewan, a new MRI. They have the best hemodialysis in 
this province. And the list goes on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
People in Regina have the very best health services available to 
them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, I was disappointed the 
Premier didn’t answer my question nor did the Minister of 
Health. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the original budget for closing the Plains hospital 
was $83 million. The NDP (New Democratic Party) has always 
said that the Plains closure was on budget and on time. They 
said it dozens of time. 
 
Mr. Premier, earlier this year the Saskatchewan Party said that 
this project may be as much as $40 million over budget. The 
Health minister said those were wild allegations. 
 
Mr. Premier, in just a few minutes we hope to find out who was 
right. Will you admit that the Plains closure is now grossly over 
budget, and that you covered it up to get yourself through the 

election? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, last Friday I believe 
that the Aboriginal healing centre was opened at the Regina 
General. We now have two Aboriginal healing centres — one at 
the Pasqua and one at the General. Prior to the consolidation of 
those services, there was not an Aboriginal healing centre. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a spiral CT (computerized tomography) 
scanner at the Pasqua Hospital. Prior to the closure of the 
Plains, there was not a spiral CT scanner at the Plains. We have 
a second cardiac cath lab. You don’t wait for angioplasty in the 
city of Regina. That was not there prior to the consolidation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a new dialysis space — the most 
up-to-date space in this province. Mr. Speaker, we have a new 
burn unit. We have a second cardiac cath lab. We have satellite 
services. We have a therapy centre, Mr. Speaker. All of these 
services have been added. They’re enhanced services, and it 
means that we have the very best health services for the people 
of Regina and southern Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m disappointed that the 
minister doesn’t have the courtesy to actually answer the 
question that was asked. Mr. Speaker, though, it’s kind of ironic 
that the Liberal leader once promised to chain himself to the 
Plains hospital. Now instead, he wound up chaining himself to 
the NDP. It’s turning out to be more like a ball and chain. 
 
The Liberal leader now sits in cabinet with the same NDP 
government who ignored a hundred thousand names on 
petitions, the same NDP government who ignored all the Plains 
rallies, the same NDP government that closed the Plains 
hospital, and the same NDP government that covered up the 
real cost. 
 
My question now is for the Minister of Education. And I expect 
a thoughtful, honest reply. Mr. Minister, after everything you 
said in the past, how can you support the government that 
closed the Plains hospital? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1400) 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m surprised by the 
member’s question. The reason I’m surprised is because it was 
over a, I believe, a year ago, close to a year ago, that it was very 
clear that there were the cost overruns at the Plains, from 83 
million to 95 million. In addition, it was reported that there had 
been enhanced services that were going to cost, well, tens of 
millions of dollars, Mr. Speaker. And at the time we indicated 
that these services were there to enhance the kinds of health 
care available to people living in Regina and southern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this is coming from the member who is the 
former Reform Member of Parliament, and, from 
Rosetown-Biggar and, Mr. Speaker, I’ve just received a flyer 



182 Saskatchewan Hansard December 14, 1999 

from the Reform Party that indicates that they’re in favour of 
two-care health care — private health care, Mr. Speaker. And 
this comes from the member that wants to freeze health care for 
the next five years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Now we’ve 
had three non-answers and nonsensical ones as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is now clear that the closure of the Plains 
hospital was a huge, huge mistake. The worse thing is 
thousands of people told the NDP it was a huge mistake. They 
reasoned. They pleaded. They demonstrated. But nobody over 
there listened. 
 
Mr. Premier, you have gutted health care in Regina and you 
have closed hundreds of beds. And now you have also wasted 
millions of dollars — money that could have been spent on 
patient care. 
 
Today will you simply admit that what everyone else in 
Saskatchewan already knows — that it was a mistake — a big 
mistake — to close the Plains hospital? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, with the changes of 
services in the Regina Health District, we now have more 
diagnostic treatment available for people. We don’t have 
waiting lists for angioplasties in the city of Regina. We have a 
new MRI. We have a hemodialysis unit that is providing 
services to Yorkton so that they can have services in Yorkton 
without those people having to travel to Regina. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I don’t understand this. This is coming from 
the Leader of the Saskatchewan Party that comes from a federal 
political party that believes in two-tier health care; you know, 
private services for those of us who could afford it and queue 
up for those of us that can’t. That’s their position. And here we 
have the Leader of the Saskatchewan Party saying we shouldn’t 
have done this at a time when he said he would freeze health 
spending in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the coalition government wants to get rid of 
waiting times for diagnostic services, and we want to reduce 
waiting lists, Mr. Speaker. That’s our commitment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Central Plains Health District 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Health. 
 
Madam Minister, the Central Plains Health District has had 
their accreditation status suspended by the Canadian Council on 
Health Services Accreditation. Madam Minister, the loss of 
accreditation status means the district does not meet the 
minimum national standards for quality care. 
 
Madam Minister, you and your department say you expect all 
health districts to meet minimum accreditation standards. Your 
own department and officials have attended almost every 
meeting of the Central Plains District Health Board over the last 

seven years. You had knowledge and you had direct 
involvement in this matter. And it isn’t only the blame to put on 
the district health board, but directly on your department. 
 
This, Madam Minister, is confirmation that your health system 
has failed the people of the Central Plains Health District. 
 
Madam Minister, will you accept your responsibility for the 
failure of this district to meet minimum standards as required by 
your department? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — For the information of the member, at 
no time has anyone indicated that we do not have quality health 
services in the Central Plains Health District which includes the 
town of Humboldt. 
 
What I can tell the member is that there was an initial 
accreditation report from September 1998 which contained 27 
recommendations, and in September 1999 they followed up to 
see what sort of progress had been made on 12 of those items. 
The items, Mr. Speaker, were around priority-setting and 
budgeting, resolution of medical staff issues, and risk 
management, Mr. Speaker. At no time did they talk about 
quality of care. 
 
Now what the recommendations now talk about is the need to 
have a restatement of values for physicians and staff, and the 
member knows about that; district operational and business 
plan; regular performance appraisals for staff; a process to 
identify community needs. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, these are administrative issues; they are not 
quality of care issues. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Well, Madam 
Minister, in September 1998, when the accreditation council 
indicated that there were some outstanding issues, one of those 
named by the chairperson of the district was that there was no 
formal human resources plan. 
 
Now, Madam Minister, that would mean to me that if there’s no 
formal human resources plan, that there is a quality of care 
problem. The Canadian Council on Health Services 
Accreditation sets these national health standards to ensure 
quality care is being provided across country. And it’s very 
disturbing that in this province of Saskatchewan, we have a 
health district which has lost its accreditation and is not meeting 
the minimum standards that are needed for quality of care. 
 
Madam Minister, the health district and the Department of 
Health would like us to believe the problems are all 
administrative in nature, but the residents of the health district 
think differently. They have raised 130 concerns with me that 
were to be put forward at a public meeting. 
 
Madam Minister, how can you say that there has been no 
impact on the quality of care when the district is failing to live 
up to your department’s own minimum standards? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



December 14, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 183 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — To report to the member, because I 
think she does . . . the health district that she is the MLA 
(Member of the Legislative Assembly) for a great deal of 
disservice. 
 
And let me, let me, let me, let me, let me report what was said. 
The report says, and I quote, Mr. Speaker — if the members 
would listen — that: 
 

The district offers an extensive range of services, and 
clients and their families who utilized these services 
provided entirely positive feedback about the staff and 
quality of care, (Mr. Speaker). 

 
Mr. Speaker, there are some human resource relationship issues 
that the member is aware of. She did call a meeting, but no one 
was interested in coming because they didn’t want to escalate 
some of those human resource communications issues, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And the reason why they did not receive accreditation was 
because of some administrative problems that have to do with 
the district and some of the affiliates that they deal with, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Madam Minister, yes, I did call a public meeting. I 
called a public meeting because the constituents and members 
of that district were very concerned over the quality of services 
that they were reserving. I have a hundred and thirty questions, 
many of which point to the fact that there are concerns about 
services. 
 
Now, Madam Minister, not only did your . . . the district refuse 
to attend, but in conjunction with the department officials, the 
Sask Health department officials, the meeting was blocked. 
 
Madam Minister, we have since had Sask Health officials 
writing advertisements to justify the mess that this district has 
been in. We have public money going towards ads being put in 
that paper to try to cover this very serious issue. 
 
Madam Minister, your department has been involved all along 
and your department has purposely sabotaged . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, please. Order. Order, 
please. The member has been lengthy in her preamble. Would 
you please repeat your question? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I think that the member 
does the health district a great disservice. And what do I mean 
by that? 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is . . . what the member is talking about is the 
St. Elizabeth’s Hospital. Mr. Speaker, the St. Elizabeth’s 
Hospital is being transferred to the Saskatchewan Catholic 
Health Corporation which is a creation of the Catholic Bishops 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we do not want to . . . we think it’s important that 
all of us elected have respect for the bishops, Mr. Speaker, and 
it’s important that we treat the bishops with respect. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the St. Elizabeth’s Hospital and the 
corporation are working together to transfer the finalization of 
the hospital, and once that hospital is transferred to the 
corporation, there will be an interim board. And we believe that 
once we can work through the arrangements with the bishops, 
that we will be able to show the accreditation process that we 
can have a health district that’s accredited. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Victims of Dow Corning Breast Implants 
 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
also for the Minister of Health. Madam Minister, personal 
health tragedies are hard to deal with anytime. They are made 
more difficult to bear when the government adds to the burden. 
 
In 1989 Sandra Laliberte underwent a double mastectomy for 
medical reasons and at the same time received Dow Corning 
breast implants. These implants caused extreme health 
problems, were eventually removed, but the complications 
continued. Ms. Laliberte has undergone 17 surgeries related to 
health problems caused by these implants. She is just one of 
many Saskatchewan women waiting for a legal settlement from 
Dow Corning. Now the Department of Health wants 
reimbursement for the costs of medical procedures she has 
undergone. 
 
Madam Minister, will you confirm before the Assembly today 
that you are going to recover costs on the expense of Mrs. 
Laliberte’s claim against Dow Corning? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — No I won’t confirm that. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Madam Minister, will you confirm that the 
Department of Health is attaching itself to the claim that is 
registered by Ms. Laliberte? Ms. Laliberte has information that 
was sent by yourself, Madam Minister, that says that you are 
seeking recovery from the victims of these Dow Corning 
implants. 
 
Madam Minister, these implants were authorized by the 
Department of Health of Canada. They were approved by Sask 
Health to be used in this department and the US (United States) 
bankruptcy division has set aside $1.3 billion so that provincial 
governments could access claims against Dow Corning. 
 
Madam Minister, why are you attaching your claim on the back 
of these victims instead of seeking recompense directly from 
Dow Corning? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, for the information of the 
member, I have received a letter from the lawyers representing 
the victims of the Dow Corning breast implants. They asked for 
initial response. The lawyers have written me again, and I can 
assure the member that we are actively considering the request 
of the lawyer. And I will not confirm that we are going to attach 
ourselves to that claim. 
 



184 Saskatchewan Hansard December 14, 1999 

Mr. Gantefoer: — If you will not confirm that you’re going to 
attach yourself to the claim, will you confirm that you will 
waive any attachment to any claims by Mrs. Laliberte and any 
other people that are involved in the Dow Corning lawsuit? 
Will you waive any claim so that you’re off the backs of these 
women, Madam Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, the lawyers for the 
victims, a lawyer in particular, Mr. Dennis Loewen, has written 
me asking me to waive a claim to recover the medical costs. 
What we have done is reviewed the number of claims. We 
believe the number of claims, the medical costs, range around 
$1,100. This would mean about $100 to $2,500 per claim. 
There are a significant number of lawsuits around the world. 
We believe that this is a nuisance situation, that we don’t want 
to add to it, and that we will be giving the lawyer information 
shortly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’re reviewing this and I will not, at all, say to the member 
that we’re going to keep, we’re going to keep the funds that 
they might get from their claim against Dow Corning. 
 
(1415) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, Order, Order please. I just remind 
members again to pass their questions through the Chair, direct 
them through the Chair. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again, to the 
Minister of Health, a very simple question that a simple answer 
will suffice. Will you waive any claim to any settlement of the 
women who are going to receive settlements from the Dow 
Corning implant? Yes or no, will you waive any attachment to 
their claim? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, the member has asked me 
a very important question. I have said that the lawyers 
representing the victims have written me. I have written the 
lawyers back. The lawyers have written me again. 
 
We are reviewing their request. I consider the request quite 
legitimate; I think it is a logical request. And I am hopeful that 
within the next day or two, we will be able to provide the 
victims’ lawyer with an answer that will make the victims 
happy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Contract Negotiations with Smaller Retail Co-ops 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Premier. 
Mr. Premier, on September 16 the people of Saskatchewan sent 
a very clear message. They voted to get rid of the NDP. And do 
you know why, Mr. Premier? It’s because while the NDP was 
busy lining its own nest, communities were suffering. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the evidence of NDP carnage is everywhere. 

Hundreds of schools and hospitals closed, highways crumbling, 
young people forced out of the province. Now 16 retail co-ops 
that serve communities outside Saskatoon and Regina are 
fighting for their lives because the Retail Wholesale & 
Department Store Union is attempting to force the smaller 
co-ops to accept the same contract the union negotiates for 
employees in our major cities. 
 
All 16 co-ops are strongly opposed to the RWDSUs (Retail 
Wholesale & Department Store Union) attempt to take away 
local control over contract negotiation. 
 
Mr. Premier, does the NDP support the union’s attempt to take 
local control away from locally owned and operated retail 
co-ops? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, this is a matter that’s 
before the Labour Relations Board and the Labour Relations 
Board is a quasi-judicial body that has the ability to make 
rulings in the province based on the province’s legislation. 
 
The board is equally made up of employers’ representatives and 
workers’ representatives. And I think it would be very 
presumptuous of us to prejudge the outcome of that ruling. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, my question is once again for the 
Premier. Mr. Speaker, the Premier has just demonstrated why 
the NDP is on its way out. He’s good at the bob-and-weave 
manoeuvre, but when it comes for fighting for our struggling 
communities he quickly finds a dark place to crawl into. 
 
Mr. Premier, do you support what your Minister of Labour just 
said? Is the NDP going to turn its back while the RWDSU 
attempts to steal local control away from 16 rural co-ops? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the co-ops are fighting the union because they 
know that one collectively bargained labour agreement that 
covers all retail co-op employees would not be affordable for 
many small rural co-ops. The result, Mr. Speaker, job cuts and 
service reductions in our rural communities. 
 
Mr. Premier, what is your NDP government doing to stop the 
irresponsible and self-serving action of the RWDSU from 
killing local jobs and shutting down co-op services in our rural 
communities? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, perhaps the member 
knows something about how this ruling is going to go that I 
don’t know, and if he does he certainly could share that with us. 
 
But it’s my understanding that the Labour Relations Board, 
which is made up equally of employer representatives 
nominated by business, and working representatives nominated 
by workers, and the representative organizations, will make the 
ruling on this and when they do, then we will know whether we 
have a problem or not. 
 



December 14, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 185 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

International Treaty on Child Labour Abuse 
 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, today I’m pleased to 
announce the Government of Saskatchewan has ratified an 
International Labour Organization treaty banning the worst 
forms of child labour. 
 
The International Labour Organization is the oldest agency of 
the United Nations. It’s been working to create global standards 
for working people since it was founded in 1919, to give you 
some idea what a forward-looking organization it’s been. 
 
The ILO United Nations organization where participants, 
governments, employers and workers have equal representation 
and voting rights. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the ILO defines the worst forms of child 
labour as follows: slavery, forced recruitment for combat, 
prostitution and pornography, illicit enterprises such as work in 
the drug trade, and work that by its nature or circumstances 
threatens the health, safety or morals of children. 
 
Now in Canada children are protected by the Criminal Code. 
And in Saskatchewan The Labour Standards Act, The 
Occupational Health and Safety Act, 1993, The Education Act, 
1995, Family and Community Services Act, and Family 
Maintenance Act, 1997 work together to ensure that children 
are not exploited and that they have an opportunity for an 
education and to become more self-sufficient. 
 
The UN (United Nations) says that Canada is the best place in 
the world to live, and as such, we have an obligation to help the 
less fortunate around the world. This treaty has the potential to 
save lives and ease the suffering of millions of children around 
the world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are 250 million children, ages 5 to 14, in the 
world’s labour force. Almost half of them — 120 million — are 
full-time workers. Each day about 80,000 more children are 
added to their total. These throwaway children work as miners, 
indentured servants, soldiers, prostitutes, field hands, and 
sweatshop labourers. 
 
They make everything from toys and designer clothing to 
surgical tools, glassware, rugs, sports equipment and fireworks 
— commodities that North Americans are demanding. 
 
Nor is slavery dead. Authorities are aware of five major 
international networks selling children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in June the 174 member-states of the ILO and 
more than 1,000 delegates representing employers, workers and 
government unanimously adopted The Worst Forms of Child 
Labour Convention and the approval process for this 
convention is now under way throughout the world. Canada 
hopes to be one of the first nations to ratify the new treaty. 
 
In closing I want to recognize the contributions of 
Saskatchewan young people to ending the worst forms of child 
labour. Two of them again, Chris Gibbs and Erin McGinnis, 
who are with us in the Assembly and who I had the pleasure of 

introducing earlier today. 
 
And for the sake of all the world’s suffering child labourers, it’s 
our sincere hope that the governments of the world, including 
Canada, act on this ILO treaty very quickly. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And thank you, as 
well, to the minister who provided me with a copy of her 
remarks prior to question period today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I, too, would like to salute all those individuals 
who have worked so hard to bring about the treaty banning all 
forms of child labour. While we may from time to time disagree 
with the government over certain labour-related policies, there’s 
no question that efforts to ban child labour, or child slavery as 
some see it, are worthwhile. 
 
Of course we should mention that this treaty covers such things 
as forcing children into child prostitution and working in the 
drug trade, two things people may not necessarily think of when 
they hear the term, child labour. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we approve of any measure that keep children safe 
both here at home and abroad. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 7  The Student Assistance And Student 
Aid Fund Amendment Act, 1999 

 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that Bill 
No. 7, The Student Assistance And Student Aid Fund 
Amendment Act, 1999 be now introduced and read the first 
time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 9 — The Child and Family Services 
Amendment Act, 1999 (No. 2) 

 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
9, The Child and Family Services Amendment Act, 1999 (No. 
2) be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 10 — The Department of Health 
Amendment Act, 1999 

 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill No. 10, The Department of Health Amendment Act, 1999 
be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 



186 Saskatchewan Hansard December 14, 1999 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 

The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, hon. members, I lay 
before the Assembly in accordance with the provisions of 
section 14 of The Provincial Auditor Act, I hereby table the 
1999 Fall Report Volume 2. 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Ruling on a Point of Order 
 

The Speaker: — Also, my hon. colleagues, before orders of the 
day, before 5 p.m. yesterday, the member for Cannington, the 
Opposition House Leader raised a point of order regarding the 
procedure for taking a voice vote. As requested, I reviewed the 
voice vote taken earlier on a superseding motion. I find that the 
voice vote in question was conducted in the usual manner, in 
keeping both with our own practice and with parliamentary 
tradition. 
 
A description of that parliamentary tradition from Erskine 
May’s Parliamentary Practice, 22nd Edition, page 349 may 
help to clarify the issues as follows: 

 
When debate on a question is concluded, the question must 
be put . . . The Speaker takes the sense of the House by 
asking that ‘As many as are of that opinion say “aye,”’ and 
‘As many as are of the contrary say “no.” When each party 
has responded the Speaker endeavours to judge from the 
loudness and general character of the opposing 
exclamations, or from a consideration of the probabilities 
of the case, which party has the majority. As his judgment 
is not final, he expresses his opinion by saying: ‘I think the 
“ayes” (or “noes”) have it’. If the House acquiesces in this 
decision, the question is said to be ‘agreed to’ or 
‘negatived’ as the case may be, but if those declared to be 
the minority dispute the fact, they respond with (a request) 
. . . to start the process of counting the numbers on each 
side, which is termed as a division. 
 

I also refer hon. members to the Précis of Procedure, 3rd 
Edition, of the Canadian House of Commons, on page 57 where 
the voice vote is described as follows: 
 

Having heard both responses, the Speaker, judging not 
only the voices but also the probabilities, then says, “In my 
opinion the yeas (or nays) have it.” 
 

It is clear that the Chair makes a judgment at the time the voices 
are given in a vote, but does not count the votes. It is up to the 
members to call for a recorded division if they disagree . . . it is 
up to the members then to call for a recorded division if they 
disagree with the Chair’s opinion regarding the results of the 
voice vote. 
 
That is what happened in the vote yesterday. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the 
day, by leave of the Assembly, I have two regular motions that I 
need to move, if I could get leave, on membership of certain 
committees. 
 
Leave granted. 

(1430) 
MOTIONS 

 
Appointment of Special Committee to Consider every 

Regulation filed with the Clerk of the Legislative Assembly 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 
the member from Saskatoon Idylwyld: 
 

That members Allchurch, Bakken, Harper, Hart, Higgins, 
Jones, Thomson, Toth, and Yates, be constituted as Special 
Committee to consider every Regulation filed with the 
Clerk of the Legislative Assembly pursuant to the 
provisions of The Regulations Act, 1995, with a view to 
determining whether the special attention of the Assembly 
should be drawn to any of the said regulations on any of 
the following grounds: 
 
(1) that it imposes a charge on the public revenues or 
prescribes a payment to be made to any public authority 
not specifically provided for by statute; (2) that it is 
excluded from challenge in the court; (3) that it makes 
unusual or unexpected effect where the parent statute 
confers no express authority so to provide; (4) that it 
purports to have retrospective effect where the parent 
statute confers no express authority so to provide; (5) that 
it has been insufficiently promulgated; and (6) that it is not 
clear in meaning. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker: 
 

That the committee have the assistance of the Legislative 
Counsel and Clerk in reviewing the said regulations and 
that it be required, prior to the reporting that the special 
attention of the Assembly be drawn to any regulation, to 
inform the government department or authority concerned 
of its intention so to report; 
 
And that the committee be empowered to invite any 
regulation-making authority to submit a memorandum 
explaining any regulation which may (be) under 
consideration by the committee, or to invite any regulation 
making authority to appear before the committee as a 
witness for the purpose of explaining any such regulation. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker: 
 

That the committee be empowered to review the bylaws of 
professional associations and amendments thereto to 
determine whether or not they are in any way prejudicial to 
the public interest. 

 
I so move. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Referral of Professional Associations’ 
Bylaws to Special Committee 

 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 
the member for Saskatoon Northwest, and by leave of the 
Assembly: 
 



December 14, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 187 

That the bylaws of the professional associations and 
amendments thereto tabled during the previous legislatures 
and not ratified by the committee and the bylaws and 
amendments as tabled in the present session be referred to 
the Special Committee on Regulations. 

 
I so move. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Composition of Continuing Select Committee 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, finally, I move, 
seconded by the member for Regina Victoria, by leave of the 
Assembly: 
 

That members Bakken, Boyd, D’Autremont, Kasperski, 
Kowalsky, Lingenfelter, Melenchuk, Trew, and Weekes be 
constituted a Continuing Select Committee pursuant to rule 
92 with the power to call for persons, papers, records, and 
to examine witnesses under oath and whose duty it shall be 
to establish from time to time, select committees with the 
powers to call for persons, papers and records and to 
examine witnesses under oath and with the power to travel 
and to hear testimony away from the seat of government; 
and 
 
That the continuing select committee will have the power 
to set the terms of reference for each select committee; and 
 
That each select committee shall report directly to the 
Legislative Assembly from time to time. 

 
I so move. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Ms. Higgins, seconded by Mr. 
Addley, and the proposed amendment thereto moved by Mr. 
Hermanson. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s a pleasure for me to rise for the first time in this historic 
Chamber to address the Speech from the Throne. And I should 
say at the outset, that the constituents of Saskatoon Fairview 
twice this summer had the opportunity to vote in an election; 
and I’m pleased to say they voted for me as their member of the 
legislature, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
An Hon. Member: — Wise choice, wise choice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — And I’ll come to that in a minute, Mr. 

Speaker, but they indeed are very wise and they told very wise 
stories and developed wise analysis on the doorstep in response 
to some of the promises made by the Saskatchewan Party and of 
course rejected them out of hand, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I should also say a few words about my 
predecessor, the former member of the legislature from 
Saskatoon Fairview. Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Bob Mitchell served 
that constituency well for many years both in opposition and in 
government, and of course served this legislature as minister of 
Justice and in many other capacities. And it would be remiss of 
me if I didn’t say, Mr. Speaker, how much we valued his 
services in Saskatoon Fairview and indeed across the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this was my fourth and fifth election for most of 
the residents of Saskatoon Fairview. On three occasions, they 
elected me for good or ill, as their Member of Parliament, and 
then twice as the member of the legislature, Mr. Speaker. And I 
want to thank them very much for that privilege and for the 
opportunity to continue to serve that part of Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that part of Saskatoon, on the west side bordered 
by 33rd Street, the edge of the city, and Fairlight Drive, Mr. 
Speaker, is a community full of hard-working, diligent people, 
Mr. Speaker. I’ve never seen . . . in fact, as a result of the last 
eight years of government I’ve never seen that part of 
Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, so prosperous and doing so well. And 
it’s a credit, Mr. Speaker, to the economic and social policies of 
the government in the last eight years that they are doing as 
well as they are. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, there’s no end of new 
cars in the driveway, no end of additions to houses, and no end 
of new housing being built there, Mr. Speaker. Families moving 
in, the schools full. Mr. Speaker, it’s a privilege to represent 
that part of Saskatoon. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when I was on the doorstep, on those two 
occasions for a month at a time, in the summer, Mr. Speaker, I 
had many opportunities to speak with residents. And on every 
occasion, Mr. Speaker, they talked about the time when they 
voted for the Conservative Party. 
 
They voted once, Mr. Speaker, for the Conservatives. They’ve 
made one mistake in 1982. Ever since then, they voted for New 
Democrats, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, they talked about that 
experience, Mr. Speaker. And they talked about the 
Saskatchewan Party’s platform and how they’d seen it all 
before, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They’d seen the promises, Mr. Speaker, to spend, spend, spend. 
They’d seen the commitments, Mr. Speaker, to balance budgets, 
Mr. Speaker. And they’d seen what had happened in those years 
of Grant Devine, Mr. Speaker. And they, needless to say, 
rejected them out of hand. They didn’t believe them then, Mr. 
Speaker; they don’t believe them now. They said they didn’t 
add up then, Mr. Speaker, and they say don’t add up now. 



188 Saskatchewan Hansard December 14, 1999 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — And, Mr. Speaker, the people of 
Saskatchewan, of Saskatoon Fairview, are, of course, right. The 
Saskatchewan Party’s platform doesn’t add up. It won’t add up 
no matter how they shake it around. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, they talked about tax cuts for example. Now 
these are people, Mr. Speaker, raising families, working hard. 
And it’s not as easy as they would hope it to be. But, Mr. 
Speaker, many more have jobs than they did before. Many more 
have new homes than they had before. And, Mr. Speaker, what 
they said about the Saskatchewan Party’s approach to tax cuts 
is, well where’s all this money going to come from. 
 
They knew, Mr. Speaker, even if the Saskatchewan Party didn’t 
know, that you can’t just draw this money out of thin air. You 
can’t just make up tax cuts, Mr. Speaker. That money has to 
come from somewhere. The Saskatoon Fairview residents knew 
it had to come from somewhere, Mr. Speaker, and they didn’t 
buy the arguments of the Saskatchewan Party across the way. 
 
And they didn’t buy either, Mr. Speaker, the divide philosophy 
of the Saskatchewan Party. Mr. Speaker, time and time again I 
heard on the doorsteps from urban residents how much they felt 
the need to address the concerns of rural residents, Mr. Speaker. 
There was a need, there was an acceptance, Mr. Speaker, of the 
importance of working this out together . . . that urban residents 
and rural residents are in this together, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We help each other out whenever we can. That’s the 
Saskatchewan way. That’s the way of co-operation, of 
community, of working together. That’s the New Democratic 
Party way, Mr. Speaker. But it’s not the Saskatchewan Party 
way, and the Saskatoon Fairview residents knew that and 
rejected the Saskatchewan Party’s approach. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what I must say about the comments on the 
doorstep through the summer, Mr. Speaker, is how well those 
people understood what was going on in our province, what was 
going on in our country, and how important it was to work 
together, and how important it was, Mr. Speaker, to invest in 
Saskatchewan as has been happening in the past. 
 
And I want to just say a few brief words, Mr. Speaker, of 
contrasts between the Saskatchewan Party and this government 
in the way it approaches things for which I’m now responsible, 
Mr. Speaker — matters of justice and matters of crime. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, for all the talk of the Saskatchewan Party 
about crime in our communities . . . And in fact, Mr. Speaker, I 
sometimes wonder whether the Saskatchewan Party just doesn’t 
like children. The only time they ever mention children, Mr. 
Speaker, is when they’re talking about youth criminals. 
 
And we have . . . the vast majority of children in our society and 
our province, Mr. Speaker, are good kids doing the best they 
can. There’s a small group that is not. I don’t know why the 
Saskatchewan Party always focuses on that small group, Mr. 
Speaker. We need to focus on the good kids too. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Now, Mr. Speaker, with all that talk 
and with all the breast-beating and the rhetoric of being tough 
on crime, what, Mr. Speaker, did the Saskatchewan Party 
promise in its election platform? What did it promise the people 
of Saskatchewan on September 16? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it promised them a big fat freeze on justice 
spending — a big fat freeze on spending on crime, a big fat 
freeze, Mr. Speaker, on support on initiatives for our 
community. That’s what the Saskatchewan Party promised, Mr. 
Speaker. Nothing on justice; nothing on crime. 
 
And I’d like to just contrast that, Mr. Speaker, with the 
commitments made by our government and by our party. 
 
We all know, Mr. Speaker, that in the election campaign, the 
government . . . the party, New Democratic Party, committed 
itself to 200 new police officers — 200 police officers, Mr. 
Speaker — on the beat, in the community, police officers who 
weren’t there before. That was a commitment, Mr. Speaker, to 
ensuring safety and security in our communities. 
 
What did the Saskatchewan Party promise, Mr. Speaker? A big 
fat zero. No more money for police officers, no more money for 
safety in our communities, no more money for security, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s what the Saskatchewan Party promised. And 
that’s the difference, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What about, Mr. Speaker, with regards to dealing with violent 
offenders. Well, Mr. Speaker, the commitment was made to 
double our spending on SHOCAP, on the serious and habitual 
youth offender comprehensive action program. Mr. Speaker, 
this year alone, $635,000 to deal with those worst young 
offenders, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now what does the Saskatchewan Party have to offer, Mr. 
Speaker? A big, fat zero. Not one thing, Mr. Speaker, to deal 
with those serious and habitual youth offenders in our 
community, that they talk so much about. Mr. Speaker, sharp 
contrast between the approaches of this government and of the 
Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what about serious crime? The party opposite 
talks about serious crime. What did they promise, Mr. Speaker, 
with regards to dealing with serious crime? A big fat zero, Mr. 
Speaker. The Premier knows it’s a big fat zero, Mr. Speaker; 
he’s saying it’s a big fat zero. What about the guys opposite? 
Do they know it’s a big fat zero? Because that’s what it was, 
Mr. Speaker, in sharp contrast to the three-quarters of a million 
dollars that this government has put forward. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I could go on and on and on. I could talk too 
about the commitment to communities to solve the problems at 
their core, and I will go on a little bit, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, $1.5 million dollars for new court facilities. Mr. 
Speaker, $350,000 for Aboriginal organizations to deal with the 
vicious cycle of family violence, Mr. Speaker. And, of course, 
Mr. Speaker, the children’s action plan, with the major, major 
investments there. 
 
(1445) 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, what did the Saskatchewan Party have to 



December 14, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 189 

offer the people of Saskatchewan? Are you ready for this, Mr. 
Speaker? What did they have to offer, Mr. Speaker, to deal 
with, to deal with the serious problems in our communities? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, a big fat zero. Not one penny, Mr. Speaker; 
not one new penny to deal with the challenges in our 
community, Mr. Speaker — not one penny. Nothing, Mr. 
Speaker, to be tough on criminals; nothing, Mr. Speaker, to be 
tough on the causes of crime. That’s the legacy of this party 
opposite, Mr. Speaker; that’s the promise that they made to 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The promises we made, Mr. Speaker, are to fight those issues, 
Mr. Speaker; to deal with crime; to deal with the safety and 
security in our communities; and to help families bring up their 
children in such a way, Mr. Speaker, that they become good, solid 
kids and good, solid adults. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well Mr. Speaker, I don’t think I need to 
go on. I think I’ve made my point. And Mr. Speaker, I think the 
important thing to recognize Mr. Speaker, is the Speech from the 
Throne presents a forward-looking vision, a new way forward for 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 60 percent, after all, of the people of Saskatchewan 
voted for the government we have before us. Again they rejected, 
Mr. Speaker, the mean-spirited, narrow-minded approach of the 
most recent right wing party in this province, Mr. Speaker. We 
have had experiences of right wing parties in government before. 
The people of Saskatoon Fairview have had that experience Mr. 
Speaker, and they say no way, not today, not ever, we don’t want 
that again. 
 
What we want, Mr. Speaker, what we want, Mr. Speaker, is a 
government, what they want Mr. Speaker, is a government which 
stands up for them in a progressive, creative, collective, 
community way. That puts community in its right perspective, 
supports community as it . . . as community supports individuals 
and families as they make their way in the world, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It rejects the dog-eat-dog world of the people opposite. It rejects 
the “me first” attitude of the Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Speaker. It 
puts it into context and presents a balanced approach, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I am happy to support the Speech from the Throne. I’m happy to 
support the Speech from the Throne, Mr. Speaker, and I look 
forward to four more years of good government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
great privilege and real honour to stand before you at the House 
today to make my first, my maiden speech. What I would like to 
do today is cover off three main areas. 
 
First of all, what I want to do is thank the number of people that 
helped me get to this point today. Secondly, I would like to 
express a number of the reasons why I pursued this particular 
honour. And third, I would like to talk about the direction I think 
this province needs to go in order to be a success in the quickly 
approaching millennium. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — I said it’s a real honour and a real privilege, 
although with the sleepless nights I’ve had, I do question that at 
times, but anyway the thank you’s. 
 
First of all, I would like to start by thanking my wife, Cindy, very 
much. When I first decided I was . . . when we were first talking 
about whether a person should enter the field of politics, there was 
some hesitation. But once we finally decided that’s the direction 
to go, I must admit she’s been behind me all the way. She kept 
me on track at times when I was perhaps getting off track. She 
kept me going perhaps when times were a little tough to keep 
going on. But probably most of all the biggest contribution she 
made, or one of the most important contributions she made in 
my campaign, was keeping me dressed in colours that actually 
matched. So I’d really like to . . . I’d like to thank her for that. 
 
I’d also like to thank my sons, Craig and Mark — Craig who 
turns 8 today, and Mark who just turned 6 about a week ago. I 
questioned as to whether they really understood the political 
process, but the other night I was putting Craig to bed and Craig 
says, dad what do you do at the legislature? Do you make laws? 
And I go, well I guess that’s part of the job that we do. And he 
goes, well I think every kid should have a dog. So I guess that’s 
the first piece of legislation I may be introducing. 
 
My other son Mark is working on some legislation regarding 
Pokémon, but we don’t expect that to be ready till the 
springtime. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — However I did look and listen very closely 
in the Speech from the Throne and heard neither one of the 
subjects mentioned, so once again I’m sure we can blame the 
government for that. 
 
To my brother and sister and their husbands and especially my 
mother and father-in-law, I think any person that enters the 
political game has self doubt at times and questions whether 
they’re made for this profession. But I really want to thank 
them for having faith and confidence in me when perhaps I 
didn’t have enough myself. So I want to thank them for that. 
 
Even more importantly, I guess, would be my mother and 
father. I want to thank them for being role models in my life; 
they truly have been. They’ve given me everything that I’ve . . . 
that I’ve got, and I don’t mean materialistic things; I mean 
values. They’re hard-working, honest, sincere, and caring — 
values that I hope to pass on to the great constituents of Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
But most of all, Mr. Speaker, I wanted to thank my dad. My dad 
always taught me to believe in what I stand for, but more 
importantly stand up for what you believe in. That’s what I’m 
doing here today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — The voters of Indian Head-Milestone. I want 
to thank all the voters that voted for me because perhaps they 
knew me personally or voted for the Saskatchewan Party 



190 Saskatchewan Hansard December 14, 1999 

policy. And contrary to popular belief on the other side, that 
was almost 50 per cent of the voters of Indian Head-Milestone. 
But probably even more importantly than that is I want to thank 
all the voters that took the time to exercise their right. There are 
people dying today to have the right that we take so for granted. 
To all the voters of Indian Head-Milestone, I thank you for 
exercising your right. 
 
While I’m on the Indian Head-Milestone area, I’d like to talk a 
little bit about the constituency that I represent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Indian Head-Milestone is a constituency that is made up of 
agriculture. And that’s what it is. It has some of the highest 
assessed farmland in all of the province. I think back when I 
was in school and we used to talk about the bread basket of the 
world, I do believe they meant the Indian Head-Milestone 
constituency. 
 
No longer though is it the bread basket of the world. We 
produce lentils, top-notch lentils, canola, peas, sunflowers, 
canary. It is a real diverse constituency, not only in grains, but 
also in livestock with elk ranches, buffalo, alpaca, and many 
others. We have taken diversification seriously. 
 
The town of Indian Head, briefly, is a real historic town. The 
experimental farm was established there in 1887 and has led 
research to bring our agriculture to the top of the world. In 1902 
the PFRA (Prairie Farm Rehabilitation Administration) shelter 
belt was also started. It supplies millions of trees for all over 
Western Canada every year. 
 
The Calling Lakes area I’d like to touch on briefly is really a 
true jewel. It makes up the northern border of my constituency, 
with lakes of Pasqua Lake, Echo Lake, Mission, and Katepwa. 
 
The town of Fort Qu’Appelle, which is in between Echo and 
Mission, is an all-season resort town with lakes for fishing and 
water sports as well as a beautiful golf course in the summer. In 
the winter, snowmobiling, ice fishing, and of course Mission 
Ridge ski resort. Mr. Speaker, I think you do have to agree with 
me it’s a great town. 
 
Other towns in the area that I just briefly want to mention — 
too many to mention all of them — but towns like Milestone 
with the award-winning, international award-winning dinner 
theatre; Montmartre, Vibank, Edenwold, and Lewvan also. 
 
As far as the reasons why I got — I had to get Lewvan in there 
— as far as the reasons why I got involved in the political life, 
there are many reasons why I decided to get involved, but there 
are four main reasons. And I’d like to share them with the 
Assembly today. 
 
I believe this province has fallen far short of its potential. I’d 
like to compare this province to a good athlete, a very good 
athlete that’s got speed, endurance, strength, smarts — all the 
ingredients that it takes to make a good athlete, but not all the 
ingredients that it takes to make a great athlete. A poor attitude 
and poor management — and that’s what I think this province 
has been forced under, under the last eight and a half years of 
NDP government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, out of the last 55 years of 
governing, the CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) 
have been in power for 40 of them. — CCF, which has recently 
changed to NDP. 
 
But even more recently, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know if you are 
aware of the new name change of the government over there. 
It’s the NLDP — NLDP, that stands for the new liberal 
democratic party. But, Mr. Speaker, after listening to question 
period the last couple of weeks, it’s still pronounced NDP — 
the L is silent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — This party’s policies of government 
ownership, policies of land bank, control over the resources in 
potash have left us lagging behind the rest of the nation. Fifty 
years ago, Mr. Speaker, our province had a million people in it. 
Today, our province has a million people in it. 
 
I have a couple of stories that I would like to share that I think 
really illustrates this very fact. A number of years ago — many, 
many years ago, in the early ‘70s — a cousin of mine had 
bought Beltone hearing aids, had worked for the company, and 
then bought into the company. 
 
Well just shortly after he got into that business, which was 
doing quite well, Uncle Al and his pals decided that would be 
something that the government should own. And that’s what 
they did. So off to BC this family moved with four young 
children, and now are very successful throughout the island and 
inner interior of British Columbia. 
 
The government has forced people out of this province. 
 
Another cousin who started Mid Canada Medical Supplies, 
offering medical supplies to hospitals throughout Western 
Canada. But that wasn’t quite good enough. Maybe he might 
have been doing too well. Let’s make the government take that 
over; let’s take it over and see what we can do with it. Force 
them out. They’re living in Sarnia, Ontario now, running a very, 
very successful medical supply company. 
 
Free enterprise can no longer be a dirty word in this province. 
Profit is okay. We need an attitude change. 
 
The second area I’d like to cover is the health care system. It’s a 
mess. It truly is a mess. I believe this and I know this because 
I’ve lived on both sides of that health care issue. Cindy, my 
wife, is a registered nurse in the Regina Health District. She’s 
been a nurse for about 14 years; 13 of those years was at the 
Plains health care centre. That was the centre that the Minister 
of Education was going to chain himself to — in case anyone 
forgets. 
 
Well I’ve listened to a few replies to the speech from members 
opposite and they’ve said it’s perfectly fine. I would challenge 
those members to spend a weekend with a health care worker in 
the Regina Health Care District. 
 
Cindy, my wife, happens to be working in the operating room 
as an operating room nurse. And it’s not uncommon for them to 
start a shift at 3 in the afternoon, work through the night, and be 



December 14, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 191 

forced back there at 3 the next day for another 18-hour shift. 
Because the waiting lines are so long that they’re trying to catch 
up through the middle of the night. It is in a crisis situation. 
 
On the patient side, I’d like to touch on a constituent of mine 
that was in contact with the health care system. This person had 
been feeling rundown and getting more and more rundown, so 
she relied on our health care system, our single-tier health care 
system. 
 
She went to the doctors and they had found that she was 
anemic. She wasn’t producing enough red blood cells. And so 
their solution was, of course, transfusions. They couldn’t find 
any cure, but their solutions were transfusions. This person had 
got to the point of having a transfusion every month. You can 
imagine what that does to the system. 
 
Well these people had been very hard-working and they decided 
to go down to the States to see if there could be something 
done, because the prognosis here in Saskatchewan was not 
good. They went to Phoenix and they went through the Mayo 
Clinic. And to make a long story short, after about a week of 
testing, they came up with a drug that they felt would help. 
 
That person has not been for a blood transfusion for four and a 
half years. That person was my mother. If it wasn’t for their 
hard work and accessibility to a second health care system, I’m 
not sure that she would have been here today. 
 
We need to conduct an audit that calls of a big, fat zero are 
false. We need to conduct an audit to make sure the money is 
going to where it needs to go. To front-line workers, to patient 
care; not to administration. 
 
The third topic I’d like to talk about is agriculture. And let it be 
known agriculture is in a crisis situation. I think we have all 
come to an agreement that the federal government has a large 
responsibility in this area. We need money to help the 
agriculture in the short term. But let’s not forget that it’s just . . . 
let’s not just think that it’s the federal government. The 
provincial government can do a lot when it comes to 
agriculture. 
 
I get a kick out of listening to this government say, agriculture 
is in a crisis now. Agriculture didn’t start to become a crisis on 
September 17 when the government lost seats like Carrot River 
Valley, Spiritwood-Shellbrook, Last Mountain-Touchwood, 
Saskatchewan Rivers, Lloydminster, Redberry Lake, Indian 
Head-Milestone, Weyburn-Big Muddy, Swift Current, Estevan, 
Rosetown-Biggar. That’s when their agriculture started. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. McMorris: — That’s when their agriculture crisis started, 
Mr. Speaker, but on my farm it started long before that. 
 
There are many things that this government can do to help 
relieve some of the pressure that we’re facing on the dirt these 
days. Programs like reducing the property tax, which has been 
discussed but there are has been absolutely no movement over 
there. Dealer purity, a new day of politics, that’s what we’ve 

been hearing. We introduce a Bill that is good for the province, 
good for rural Saskatchewan, good for agriculture, and it was 
flatly denounced. 
 
Input costs are another area that this government talked about in 
the Throne Speech. They’re going to monitor it. Monitor it is 
not good enough. This Throne Speech is not bankable. There is 
nothing out of that Throne Speech that farmers feel they can 
take to the bank and continue on with. 
 
I think probably one of the biggest issues that I would like to 
see changed — and this government has failed to address it; it 
was addressed by another member in her speech yesterday — is 
the area of marketing. This government stands behind the 
Wheat Board. I’m not against the Wheat Board but, boy, I’d 
sure like to market my grain where I see fit, whether it is a pasta 
plant in Weyburn or whether it is across the line. I grow it; I 
should be able to market it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — I had an opportunity at dinnertime today 
hearing from a farmer, a very disgruntled farmer, and I don’t 
blame him. He said, what has happened in the last week and a 
half of discussing agriculture? What has this government done 
to help? They haven’t done one thing. They’ve talked about it 
and haven’t done a thing. Show some leadership. 
 
Final area of concern that really pushed me into entering the 
political game, political field, is taxation. It makes me wonder 
when I hear the government talk of tax reductions, which I 
heard one of the speakers opposite talk about earlier this week, 
when they talk about they already have reduced taxes. It makes 
me wonder, when we’re still the second highest taxed province 
in the nation. And they’ve reduced taxes? Well you’ve got a lot 
of work to do. 
 
During the past election we’ve talked seriously about tax 
reductions on two fronts — on the PST (provincial sales tax) 
and on income tax, and it resonated well throughout the 
province obviously. The NDP, that is with a silent L, laughed at 
us. They said it couldn’t be done. 
 
Well I think we have been proven correctly. The Vicq report 
that came out last week, Mr. Deputy Speaker, calls for even 
larger tax cuts than what we said in our platform. The Throne 
Speech mentions tax reductions, but that’s about it. 
 
I challenge the Minister of Finance to adopt our taxation plan. I 
challenge the Minister of Finance to be competitive for 
taxpayers. I challenge the Minister of Finance to be competitive 
to attract businesses. And I challenge the Minister of Finance to 
make all people — to be inclusive — make all people pay tax. 
We need a change in government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — In closing, I’d like to share a vision of where 
I’d like to see this province go in the new millennium. I want to 
see a province that is not scared to strive to meet its potential. I 
want to see a province that is willing to say yes we can, not no 
we can’t. I want to see a province that is a have province, not a 
have-not. 



192 Saskatchewan Hansard December 14, 1999 

I want to see a province that can be compared to that 
world-class athlete with good management, good attitude, and 
the resources that we have available to us. And probably more 
importantly, Mr. Speaker, I want to see a province that our 
boys, Cindy and my boys, want to stay in, not one they want to 
vacate like so many other youth have done before them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it gives me great privilege to agree with the 
amendment put forth by the Leader of the Official Opposition, 
the member from Rosetown-Biggar. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I feel that it’s a 
great honour to be able to address the Assembly here today in 
response to the Speech from the Throne, and I welcome all the 
members on both sides of the House and offer them my 
congratulations. We should be going down the same road over 
the next few years and whether it be bumpy or smooth, it’ll be a 
learning process, a building process, and a shared process of 
attempting to create a stronger and more vital Saskatchewan. 
 
I would like to thank my team of colleagues and our caucus 
staff for all their encouragement and support. Each day my 
appreciation for this group of people only grows greater and I 
couldn’t be more proud of being a part of the so-called 
Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — They are a dedicated team who are both 
compassionate and passionate about the responsibilities that are 
bestowed upon them. I know that there are days ahead where 
we will work together, laugh together, and probably get a little 
frustrated with one another, but I’m looking forward to each 
and every day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s with great pride that I stand here representing 
the constituency of Watrous. The Watrous constituency is in 
central Saskatchewan and it stretches from the eastern edge of 
Saskatoon through to the Quill Lake. The Yellowhead highway 
runs through the length of the Watrous constituency and it 
contains small stretches of Highway 6 and 2, but any other 
major roadways within the constituency can be more accurately 
described as obstacle courses that have been assigned a number. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Watrous is a constituency of people with integrity, 
honesty, and ingenuity. It’s a constituency of hard-working 
Saskatchewan families. Within its boundaries are contained 
four potash mines, the largest feedlot in Saskatchewan, 
numerous small businesses and manufacturers, Saskatchewan’s 
only ethanol plant, and many, many farmers. There are grain 
farmers who grow an incredible variety of crops, including 
herbs and spices. There are hog operations, poultry producers, 
beef producers, and now due to the necessity of diversification 
there’s a growing number of buffalo, elk, and other exotic 
animal producers as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of the Watrous constituency are truly 
extraordinary people. They strongly believe in family and in 
community. Their basic values and morals make it a wonderful 
place to live and to raise a family. It’s a constituency of rural 
people committed to a way of life and to each other to ensure a 

quality of life that has to be envied. They are the personification 
of community. They know their neighbours, they help their 
neighbours, and they care and share with their neighbours. 
 
I feel very privileged to be able to live in the Watrous 
constituency. I was raised by a farmer in the Watrous 
constituency. My parents farmed a section of land, and lived a 
humble and very proud life. They were hard-working but 
content people. They were content in their faith, with their 
family, and with their love of the land. I didn’t have the luxuries 
that most children took for granted such as running water, and 
in the early years electricity, but I was raised in a secure, loving 
environment that encouraged me and gave me the confidence to 
know that I could reach for any dream and achieve it if I 
worked hard to get it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Education was the extreme importance to my 
parents and I can’t thank them enough for the discipline and the 
example that they gave me which shaped the foundation of 
character that I needed to succeed in my life. When I left home I 
moved to Saskatoon and took the education necessary to 
become a laboratory technologist and was later employed at the 
Royal University Hospital in the microbiology department. And 
I worked there for a number of years. It was while I lived in 
Saskatoon that I met and married my husband Larry. And 
shortly after, I returned to the Watrous constituency where we 
live on our farm. 
 
I’m the sixth generation in my family to be farming in Canada. 
My father’s family farmed in Ontario for three generations, and 
then my grandfather followed the calling to go west and he 
homesteaded in Saskatchewan. I’m very proud of that heritage. 
 
Every change and every challenge I have met in my life has 
been an enormous learning experience. For example, when I 
moved to Saskatoon I learned that running water was a 
wonderful thing and that there’s no place to put wood in an 
electric stove. But more importantly, I learned that there’s no 
greater pleasure than being able to do something to help a sick 
child get better. 
 
When I moved back to the farm with my husband, I learned that 
a farmer’s shop is two to three hours away from being declared 
a national disaster. I learned that if you put a water pump on a 
John Deere tractor a half a turn out, it fits fine but you have 
bolts left over and a very excited husband on your hands. 
 
I learned the combine has air conditioning, the grain truck 
doesn’t, so I know where I’d rather be. And I learned that 
there’s nothing more important than watching the sunset on the 
golden crop of wheat, and there’s no better place to raise my 
children. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — This choice in my life has also been, and will 
continue to be, a learning process. I was never politically active. 
I had never purchased a membership to any political party 
before, and I was quite content to raise my three daughters, 
work on the farm, and complain with my neighbours about how 
bad things were. It wasn’t until I became extremely alarmed 



December 14, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 193 

over the neglect and negligence of the NDP government that I 
decided to become politically active. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the health care system of this province did not 
deteriorate overnight. The farm crisis did not occur overnight. 
The high taxes did not drive away our Saskatchewan families 
and businesses overnight. Where was our government over the 
past eight years? If I could see the oncoming of a Saskatchewan 
crisis, why couldn’t our government? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the campaign was completely foreign . . . it was a 
foreign experience to me. I was an unknown with little 
experience, and I was competing against a cabinet minister. 
 
I learned very quickly that the Watrous constituency has an 
incredible number of dogs, and every morning I prayed that 
they’d be friendly. More importantly though, I learned that my 
husband and my three daughters were the strongest, the most 
supportive, and the most valuable people I know and I’m truly 
blessed to have them in my life. I quickly learned that the 
constituents of Watrous were just as discontented, concerned, 
and outraged with the lack of vision by our government for 
Saskatchewan’s future as I was. 
 
On Monday in listening to the Speech from the Throne I heard 
that it’s a brand new day, but I ask you, Mr. Speaker, what 
happened to yesterday? Well let’s see. According to the Speech 
from the Throne, yesterday left. Too many families in 
Saskatchewan having a hard time making ends meet. Too many 
of our young people who are still concerned about their futures. 
Too many of our rural families as victims of a vicious trade 
war. Too many of our seniors and our families still worried that 
our health care system will not be there when they need it. And 
too many of our citizens alienated from our province’s public 
life and too many of our Aboriginal citizens excluded from our 
social, economic, and civic life. 
 
But now we’re being told we have a brand new day. Could our 
government possibly be trying to whitewash the yesterday of 
the past eight years in the hopes that the people of 
Saskatchewan will forgive and forget the fact that there have 
just been too many mistakes made by our NDP government? 
 
During the campaign I sat on the step and cried with a young 
woman who farmed with her husband. They were leaving their 
farm and they already spent every dime of her inheritance to try 
to save it. I would appreciate it very much, Mr. Speaker, if a 
member from our government would go and visit this 
devastated young woman and tell her not to worry because now 
it’s a brand new day. 
 
I also met an 85-year-old gentleman on the campaign trail. He 
met me at the door and, upon finding out who I was, he vented 
his anger with the NDP government because he had just lost his 
wife. Now that was sad in itself but the horror was that this 
85-year-old gentleman had driven through the night with his 
dying wife to Lanigan only to be turned away because due to 
the cutbacks by our government, there were no beds. He drove 
on to Nokomis only to be turned away again. 
 
This panicked 85-year-old gentleman drove all the way to 
Regina with his wife, and she was finally admitted into the 
hospital here where she passed away shortly after their arrival 

because it was too late. Mr. Speaker, he was just one vote. 
 
I didn’t knock at any more doors that day. I held this gentleman 
as he cried. I sat as he showed me his wedding pictures and I 
stayed and listened as he told me all about his wonderful wife. 
And he was just one vote. I would do it again even if the time 
spent cost me the election because that evening that gentleman 
needed the assurance that he had done all that he could do for 
his wife. It was the NDP government that let them down. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1515) 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I would really appreciate it if 
someone from our NDP government could visit this gentleman 
and tell him not to be so angry, so frustrated, and so sad, 
because after all, now it’s a brand new day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, after the election, the Premier of this province 
stated that he had heard the voice of the Saskatchewan people. 
But I question that he did indeed hear it. If he did, it appears 
that he certainly didn’t understand it. The Saskatchewan people 
are not so easily fooled by refreshing, regenerating optimism of 
the words, a brand new day. 
 
If anything, it’s an insult to them because it makes light of the 
past eight years that stripped them of the hope and the 
motivation and the incentive necessary for them to keep 
working in this province to try to achieve their goals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, instead of our NDP government coming up with 
another lame catchphrase, they should examine their old 
overworked words, the ones that they very adeptly taught the 
Liberal leader to parrot to perfection — responsible, sensible, 
and sustainable. 
 
They have not acknowledged any responsibility for the part that 
they have played in the Saskatchewan economic crisis that we 
are now experiencing, or in the total inadequacies of our health 
care system. They have shown little or no common sense in any 
of the decision or policy making. And the only thing that they 
seem to be able to make sustainable over the last eight years, is 
increased taxation and utility rates. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP government has 
betrayed their tax paying citizens time and time again, and they 
have sold out their farms just as inexcusably as our federal 
government. 
 
They tore up the GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) 
contracts, and unlike any other province in this country, they did 
nothing to replace it. And now they seem quite surprised that our 
agriculture industry is experiencing a devastating crisis. 
 
Everyone in rural Saskatchewan could see and understand what 
was happening, but our government didn’t seem to know. And if 
they are now going to say that they did know, then why weren’t 
they doing anything about it until they see the results of the 
election. 
 



194 Saskatchewan Hansard December 14, 1999 

Where is the long-term safety net programs that they promised our 
farmers a lot of years ago. Perhaps our farmers should go to their 
banks and their creditors and tell them not to worry about their 
payments because our government’s assured us, it’s a brand new 
day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the policies and the philosophy of the NDP 
government are stripping the productive people in this province of 
their rights and abilities to set goals and to achieve them. It has 
deprived the people of their confidence to have faith in the future 
and to reach for a dream. 
 
When is this government going to actually hear the Saskatchewan 
people and realize that they have what it takes to succeed. They 
do not need to be controlled. 
 
Why do businesses and individuals tend not to invest in 
Saskatchewan? Why is Alberta a have province and 
Saskatchewan a have-not province? Could it possibly be 
because of an NDP government? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the philosophy of assisting the unfortunate by 
taking from the productive to create equality sounds so very 
idealistic. But this philosophy will only work with common 
sense and with balance. 
 
A small child can figure out that first you must create the 
environment that will encourage the productive sector to 
flourish and grow before you can spend a great deal on social 
programs for the non-productive. 
 
We’ve all heard the old saying that if you give a man a fish, you 
feed him for a day, and if you teach him how to fish, you feed 
him for a lifetime. But the line that should be added to the 
beginning of that statement is, first, you must do whatever it 
takes to encourage your fisherman to stay around and help you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our NDP government hasn’t seemed to have 
learned this. They have clung to the idealistic philosophy that 
all people should be economically equal. And it’s quite 
acceptable to them if that’s equality in poverty. Unless of 
course they’re dealing with their own hacks and flacks. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the Throne 
states that our NDP government has acquired new eyes and a 
new vision. After eight years of their old eyes and their old 
vision, I question if this can possibly be true. 
 
I thank the people of the Watrous constituency for their support 
and their trust in me during the past election. I pledge to do 
everything in my power to be worthy of this. I wish them, the 
members of this Assembly, and all of the Saskatchewan people, 
the merriest of Christmases and all the best in the year 2000. 
 
I cannot go back to my constituency with the message, “it’s a 
brand new day,” when in fact they need to hear, we have brand 
new ideas. 
 
So therefore I support the amendment put forward by the 
member from the Rosetown-Biggar constituency. Thank you. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Let me begin by 
congratulating all the members of the legislature who were 
successful in the September election. Like myself, many of the 
members in this legislature are brand new and I want to add an 
extra congratulations to them. This is not an easy place to get 
to. There are few who enjoy such a privilege. 
 
For every one of us who were honoured to be elected by our 
constituents, there were two or three others that were not 
successful. But I think everyone who let his name stand in this 
election should be thanked for taking the challenge in running 
for election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Peters: — I also want to take this opportunity to thank 
those, all those people who were supportive of me during my 
election. Without them, I could not be standing here today. And 
that’s my family, my wife Shirley, our son and daughter-in-law 
and three granddaughters who think it’s great that grandfather is 
here. 
 
And most importantly, I would like to thank the good people of 
my constituency for putting their faith in me and the 
Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Peters: — I am honoured to be standing here with a party 
that received the most votes in the election. We had the most 
votes because we had the best plan. In fact, we were the only 
party with a plan of any kind and I still think we are. 
 
During the election campaign, while the NDP were running 
around name-calling and getting down in the mud, the 
Saskatchewan Party put forward a solid alternative to the people 
of this province. And though we came up a few seats short in 
the final standing, I believe the people of Saskatchewan spoke 
out loud and strong on September 16, 1999. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Peters: — They said they were tired of the way the NDP 
were doing things and they voted for change. Unfortunately, 
Mr. Speaker, the decision by the current Minister of Education 
to ice his own party and join the NDP basically overturned the 
results of the election and restored the NDP majority, at least 
for now. 
 
In any event, my vow to the people of Battleford-Cut Knife and 
to the people of Saskatchewan is to raise the issues that are of 
concern to them and hold this government accountable at every 
turn, just as the Saskatchewan Party has been doing since 
August 8, 1997 when that party was formed and history was 
made. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the constituency I represent is Battleford-Cut 
Knife. It is a constituency with neither completely rural or 
completely urban. I am lucky enough to represent small towns 
and farms throughout the constituency, however, I have the 
urban setting of Battleford. A constituency like this allows me 



December 14, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 195 

to hear from people with different perspectives, and look 
forward to this opportunity for years to come. 
 
Like all members of large, rural component in their 
constituency, the farm crisis is, of course, number one priority 
in my area right now. That is why I felt it was so important the 
other day, when we had all the farm leaders in this place, to 
discuss the issue. My only regret is that it did not occur two 
months ago when the Saskatchewan Party first suggested it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Peters: — Had such a gathering taken place prior to the trip 
to Ottawa, I believe it would have carried a lot more weight 
with the federal Liberals. But of course, politics being what 
they are, and the government dismissed our suggestion out of 
hand until just the other day. I’m glad they finally saw merit in 
this type of meeting. It’s a shame it had to be delayed so long, 
so they wouldn’t have to look like they actually were taking 
suggestions from the opposition seriously. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I am sure the Premier will soon get very used 
to taking our suggestions very seriously indeed, if he is serious 
about his new co-operative approach to government. If he had 
taken this approach prior to September 16, the ranks on that 
side of the legislature might not be so thin, Mr. Speaker. Had 
the Premier and the government been willing to listen prior to 
the election, the farm crisis might not have been quite so 
surprising to them. 
 
In fact, the problem we are now seeing was first raised in this 
legislature in May of 1998 — a year and a half ago. While it 
had not become clear at that point how deep the looming crisis 
was going to be, there were troubling signs on the horizon. But 
what did the government’s . . . or what was the government’s 
response at this time? Did they pick up the phone and begin to 
lobby the federal government? No. Did they put contingencies 
in place to manage, help the situation? No. Instead, they turned 
their back on the situation and accused the Saskatchewan Party 
of being alarmists. 
 
Three months later, when all the premiers met in Saskatoon, our 
Premier did not even see fit to put agriculture on the agenda. 
Less than one year ago, the recently retired minister of 
Agriculture, the former member from Watrous, declared that the 
agricultural crisis was over, which goes far into explaining why 
he is the former member from Watrous. 
 
The provincial government’s lack of understanding about 
agricultural situation is one of the main reasons I decided to run 
in this election. Another reason I ran was the government’s 
treatment of local governments in Saskatchewan. 
 
As a long-time RM (rural municipality) councillor and as a 
SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) 
board of director for many years, I saw the contempt with 
which the NDP treated local government and local leaders. All 
the while provincial government was crying about off-loads 
from Ottawa, they were doing exactly the same thing to local 
governments. They were doing the same thing to local school 
divisions. As a direct result, the people have seen their property 
taxes rise dramatically, no more than the farmers who this 
government now says they’re wanting to help. 

Mr. Speaker, the Battleford-Cut Knife constituency is also 
home to much history of our province. The Battlefords played a 
key role in the early development of the place we now know as 
Saskatchewan. In fact, prior to 1883 the Territorial legislature 
stood in what is now my constituency. In fact, that building is 
still there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many in my area who say . . . are very 
concerned that the old Government House may not be long for 
this world. It has become somewhat rundown and there are 
those who would like to see it destroyed and a replica built. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if we were to lose Government House to the 
bulldozer, it would be a tragedy. There is so much history in 
this building, I can’t believe that we can do nothing to save it. 
 
As Canadians and as residents of this great province, our history 
is a blink of an eye compared to the European or Asian 
countries but it doesn’t give us the licence to take our past for 
granted. We must do all we can to preserve it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are other issues in my constituency of prime 
importance. Like those in most areas of the province, the 
highways in Battleford-Cut Knife are simply not good enough 
for the people who have to drive on them. It’s beginning to hurt 
us economically. 
 
Let me give you an example. Highways 14 and 20 near Unity 
are in desperate need of attention. This just happens to be the 
centre of several large grain terminals and a salt plant. The 
traffic count on this highway is incredible. Unfortunately, they 
are little more than goat paths with no shoulders and a 
crumbling surface. 
 
The old traffic count done by the Department of Highways prior 
to construction of these terminals said the average daily traffic 
count on these highways was between 900 and 1,000 vehicles. 
The town of Unity did its own count not that long ago and their 
figures are startling. In just one day, 3,615 vehicles used the 
highways. This included 327 semis, 313 straight trucks, 25 
motorhomes, 2,950 cars and half-tons. 
 
(1530) 
 
 Mr. Speaker, this road simply cannot sustain the amount of 
traffic that uses it, and I will be pressuring the government and 
the new Minister of Highways to do something about it. And I 
should warn him that three of the last four people who held the 
Highways portfolio were retired by their voters on September 
16. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I talk about my constituency, I should 
mention it seems it has gotten much larger since the end of 
September. My phone suddenly started ringing off the hook 
from people just across the river in North Battleford. It seems 
many in this city and constituency were a little shocked and 
dismayed that their own MLA decided to join the NDP 
government when they had elected him to oppose that very 
same government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Peters: — Just the other day a group of people told me that 



196 Saskatchewan Hansard December 14, 1999 

this government is planning to build a new liquor board store in 
North Battleford even though the current store is perfectly fine. 
These people did not like the idea that the government has 
money for new liquor board stores but not for farmers, not for 
hospitals, and not for highways. 
 
Normally he would have taken this kind of complaint to his 
own MLA, the member from North Battleford, but he decided it 
would have absolutely no effect since that same member now 
sits with a party that prefers liquor board stores to highways or 
hospitals. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, prior to the election whenever I caught 
a glimpse of the legislature on television, I often heard the 
Premier talking about backroom deals, dead-of-night deals, and 
how he would never be part of such an arrangement. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, he not only is part of the backroom deals, 
dead-of-the-night deal, he’s cornered the market. 
 
In this Throne Speech, when the government talks about a new 
start, a new approach to government, I personally don’t believe 
it’s going to happen, Mr. Speaker, not with the deal making 
we’ve seen in the legislature since September. Mr. Speaker, this 
government’s deathbed confession is not going to hold water 
with the people of Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, I’ll be 
speaking up for those people in this province who spoke out for 
real change on September 16, not this witches’ brew of 
coalition we see before us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I look forward to many good debates in this 
legislature and I am proud to be a member of the Assembly. I 
am proud to be the new MLA for Battleford-Cut Knife and I 
will be voting in favour of the amended motion made by the 
MLA from Rosetown-Biggar. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s indeed a great 
honour and a responsibility to stand here again replying to the 
Speech from the Throne on behalf of the people from 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
A lot of water has gone under the bridge since the first time I 
spoke to the Speech from the Throne after the 1995 election. In 
fact, Mr. Speaker, so much water has gone under the bridge it 
has caused major flood damages on the other side of the House. 
There’s been some whole constituencies washed away and they 
all came over here. 
 
And I think that the government over there realizes that there is 
a big problem over there. They look like they’ve been victims 
of a flood damage and they’re looking around saying, I wonder 
what happened. I sure didn’t know this was going to happen. 
And they’re also wondering how they can prevent another 
flood. And they also want to know how they can rebuild after 
this one. 
 
Well I have some bad news for them, Mr. Speaker. They can’t 
prevent the next flood and they can’t do any rebuilding. They 
tried to buy and sell some cheap help right after the coalition, 
but I can guarantee you that that won’t even help. And I know 
they can’t bring themselves to ask is why it’s not working. So, 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll just have to tell you. 

It’s not working because neither the government or their 
new-found allies have the tools to do the job. The tools are a 
plan and a vision for the future. A plan and a vision which has 
to be accepted by the majority of the people, not 40 per cent of 
the people. It has to be firm and realistic and it has to be flexible 
so that if conditions change the vision can be adjusted to accept 
the new-found realities. 
 
In the past eight years we’ve watched this government stick to 
one idea after another even if they were misguided or downright 
reprehensible. We watched this government pull our beautiful 
and bountiful province into another dark depression during a 
time of economic boom for other provinces. 
 
The provinces around us grew with breakneck speed. At the 
same time Statistics Canada has given us an award for having 
the citizens who get the most impaired driving per thousand of 
any place in Canada. I think you’re driving us all to drink. 
 
At the same time we hold the dubious distinction of having the 
highest crime rate in Canada, the second highest taxes in 
Canada. Regina leads the nation with the number of violent 
crimes and the number of murders per capita. Saskatchewan has 
the highest number of sexual offences per capita in Canada. 
And we are the only province that started giving less money to 
charities last year than any province in Canada, and that’s not 
the Saskatchewan people. It’s because they’ve been forced into 
having to use their money to keep themselves alive; they can’t 
do the donations they used to do. 
 
Saskatchewan government won’t release figures on youth 
incarceration crimes but in the last figures that were received, 
we had the dubious distinction of having the highest rate of 
youth crime and highest rate of incarceration of young people in 
all of Canada. 
 
The plan this government brought forward in 1991 didn’t work. 
I predicted the stubbornness and arrogance of this government 
that’s determined to stick to an unworkable plan will be its 
downfall. The Speech from the Throne gave cautious optimism 
to some of our citizens who needed some kind of thread of hope 
for the future. But those of us who have heard this government 
talk about working with and listening to people know that it’s 
nothing more than lip service. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is some optimism in this room but it’s on 
this side of the House. It’s sitting with the members over here 
— 25 of us, soon to be 27 of us — who really do have a vision 
for the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank the 
constituents of Kelvington-Wadena for placing a trust in my 
ability to represent them in this constituency . . . in this 
legislature again. But less than six months ago, many of the . . . 
my esteemed colleagues from across the floor spent a 
tremendous amount of time and energy attempting to convince 
me that my constituents were dissatisfied with my efforts on 
their behalf. In fact, Mr. Speaker, I believe the last hon. member 
from Watrous, as well as the last hon. member from Carrot 
River, were the most adamant that I would not be the 
representative for Kelvington-Wadena after the next election. I 



December 14, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 197 

believe their reasoning was that I was out of touch, and that I 
didn’t represent their wishes, and that being part of the 
Saskatchewan Party was supposedly an insult to my 
constituents. 
 
Well I’m here to tell you, Mr. Speaker, that they were very 
wrong in all aspects. The people of Kelvington-Wadena, just 
like the people of Watrous and Carrot River Valley and 23 other 
constituencies wanted a representative that knew what was 
happening, knew that big changes had to be made, and most 
importantly knew that the time for smoke and mirrors was over. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve listened to various members in this House 
describing their constituencies, and I might be just a little bit 
biased but I still believe my constituency is the best province 
. . . place in the province to live. Many of the members have 
heard me brag about the entrepreneurial spirits in my 
constituency, and they’ve asked me what made my area the 
leader of the pack when it comes to the number of industrial 
jobs per capita. Everyone has heard me talk about companies 
like Schulte and Bourgualt and Doepkers and Westland that 
employ hundreds of people that are bucking the urbanization 
trend of this government. 
 
We have heard some of the very . . . we have some of the very 
best farmland in this province, some of the most beautiful lakes, 
and some of the finest timber and saw mills in the province. 
 
We have buffalo, and llama, and elk, and ostrich farms. We 
have game farms and hog farms and beef farms, and even a few 
dairy farms. We have outfitters and a world-renown bird 
habitat, the Quill plains wetland at Wadena. 
 
The northeast terminal at Wadena was one of the very first 
farmer-owned inland terminals. We have the first high-put 
through terminals, jointly owned by the Alberta and Manitoba 
Wheat Pools and local farmers. And we also have a new 
agronomy centre for the co-ops between Spalding and Naicam. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the list of attractions goes on and on. And I trust 
the members opposite realize that all of this is happening in 
spite of this government. In spite of high utility rates, in spite of 
the worst roads in the whole province, in spite of the fact this 
government has introduced enough regulations to choke a 
horse. 
 
We have one other obstacle to overcome out in 
Kelvington-Wadena, and actually to overcome in most of the 
constituencies on this side of the House. It was a little memo 
sent out on August 8, 1994 by the Minister of Economic 
Development to their caucus with the most telling statement this 
government has ever made. It read, and I quote, “There was, 
and still is, no intention to provide a grand strategy for rural 
Saskatchewan.” 
 
That’s the kind of information that the Minister of Economic 
Development sent out talking about rural Saskatchewan. Can 
you imagine what would have happened in 1992 if the 
government had included rural Saskatchewan in their plan for 
the future? We may even be a have province instead of a 
have-not province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are a number of issues that the people of 

Kelvington-Wadena want me to address in the next year or so. 
I’m sorry, Mr. Speaker, but regardless of what the Throne 
Speech said I don’t believe the next election will be in four 
years, I believe it’s going to be a lot sooner than that. But in the 
meantime, Mr. Speaker, there are some huge issues that will 
have to be addressed if the love-in this government described in 
the Throne Speech is going to work. 
 
First of all, agriculture. Farmers need help today, not in the 
spring budget, not when the federal government gets around to 
it, but right now, Mr. Speaker. Do you realize that in a recent 
study undertaken by the University of Saskatchewan there is . . . 
on farm families which have teenagers of the age ready to go 
into farming, there is only 5.6 per cent of the male and only .5 
per cent of the females intending to go into farming. And do 
you know why? Because their parents are discouraging them 
from following in their parents’ footsteps. Some of them have 
even told me that they consider it child abuse to allow their 
children to go into farming. 
 
Mr. Speaker, taxation issue. There must be an immediate 
reduction of personal income tax to allow our citizens a chance 
to improve their own bottom line not the government’s bottom 
line. 
 
Education, there has to be an immediate change to the education 
funding to place more of the responsibility on the back of the 
government instead of just landowners. There has to be an 
immediate attention given to the special needs children, the 
ones that are falling through the cracks in our education system. 
We can’t just say it’s just a small problem. 
 
More money has to be spent on roads instead of on government 
aircraft. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — A review of our health care system by an 
outside auditor, not a hand-picked flunky. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I moved into Regina a couple of weeks ago, 
I looked up to see who my MLA would be in that area and I 
understand it’s now the member from Regina Northeast. So I 
listened with interest to his Throne Speech and he talked about 
the health care issues, and he said that he thought from his 
survey that there really wasn’t a health care problems; that there 
all a figment of the imagination of the opposition members. 
That was his words. There is no real health care problems. 
 
Well, maybe, maybe the member, after he had been here for 
more than two weeks, will get his staff to get a list, but if he 
would like a list from the members on this side we will be glad 
to give them to you. 
 
In the meantime, I would like to tell you of a couple of my 
constituents have been waiting for hip replacements for two 
years. And another one who has been told they have to wait for 
two years for a psychological testing for a child with a learning 
disability; a constituent who has MS (multiple sclerosis) but 
does not meet the criteria for Betaseron; a young constituent 
with a family who lost her husband to cancer and received an 
ambulance bill for over a thousand dollars, even though she had 
been assured by doctors and nurses that the bills would be 



198 Saskatchewan Hansard December 14, 1999 

covered by this government. 
 
We have a constituent who received an ambulance bill for a 
thousand dollars when she had to be transferred from the local 
hospital to the city hospital for the birth of her child. She had 
Blue Cross. She thought she had no problem, but nobody told 
her that part of the fine print was that you have to have Blue 
Cross for eight months before the child is born. She was 15 
days short of eight months and it cost her a thousand dollars. 
These are just a few of the health concerns I’m hearing from my 
constituents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since it’s nearly Christmas, I want to remind you 
that there are other needs in this province and maybe we could 
put them on the Christmas list for the people of this province. 
 
There are concerns around the issue of fetal alcohol syndrome. 
There has to be more money spent for education for this so that 
we go . . . so that people will learn about it before they get into 
the doctor’s office — they learn about it in the school system 
before. 
 
We need an independent review of the no-fault insurance 
system to create a system that is a combination of no-fault and 
tort so that we have fairness to everyone. 
 
(1545) 
 
We need to provide funding for midwives so women have a 
choice of having the delivery of their babies and something that 
will be covered. We need financial recognition of the problems 
around autism. We need help for rural women who are bearing 
the brunt of caring for elderly because of cutbacks to health care 
and lack of resources in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
In the meantime, with all the work that has to be done, I think 
it’s important that we just let the government take the dollars 
and hopefully they’ll start spending them correctly. 
 
I do want to congratulate all the members in the House for their 
election victory. I want to wish them and their families a very 
Merry Christmas. I want to wish my constituents a Merry 
Christmas and everyone in the province that’s watching. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the Throne has been presented 
and I believe it’s nothing more than the political rhetoric we’ve 
been hearing for the last eight years. This government doesn’t 
know how to fix the flood damage it caused in this province, so 
I will not be supporting the Speech to the Throne. But I will be 
supporting the amendment brought forward by our leader. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it is a particular pleasure and honour for me to enter 
into this debate and the first Speech from the Throne on the first 
sitting of the twenty-fourth legislature. 
 
And I would like to begin, Mr. Speaker, by offering some 
words of congratulations and some words of thanks. First of all, 
I would like to congratulate the mover and the seconder of the 
motion that is before us. The mover, the seconder, the hon. 

member for Moose Jaw Wakamow, my colleague from Moose 
Jaw, who . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, who led the debate, I think, in 
fine form and with a sense of political passion and competency 
that I predict the House will come to see as a regular event. 
Most importantly, and not only has the hon. member from 
Moose Jaw Wakamow established herself in this House very 
quickly, but back home she’s a political force to reckoned with 
already. 
 
And I have enjoyed 13 years serving in the city of Moose Jaw 
with the former member, Lorne Calvert, as the hon. member 
with whom I served. I enjoyed that immensely and I look 
forward to serving the people of Moose Jaw for some time 
forward, along together with the hon. member for Moose Jaw 
Wakamow. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to add my words of congratulations to 
the hon. member for Saskatoon Sutherland who represented his 
constituents proud as he also joined in the fine honour that is 
extended to a new member typically, in being the mover and the 
seconder of the Speech from the Throne. And I look forward to 
hearing much more from him and enjoying not only his political 
passion as well, but also his sense of humour in this House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to also extend my words of 
congratulations to all hon. members who have taken their seats 
in the House, to colleagues and friends on both sides of the 
House who have returned, and especially to offer words of 
congratulations to those who are here for the first time. 
 
All hon. members, regardless of the side of the House on which 
they sit, I think can anticipate that they are undertaking what’ll 
be an exciting time in their lives, and we’ve heard that referred 
to many times here. 
 
It is truly an honourable calling and a special privilege that 
democracy has extended to them, and I wish them success in 
their political careers although I would wish that it would be 
enjoyed in proportions approximately equal to what we have in 
the House today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to extend words of congratulations to 
you. Last week, on Monday morning, you participated in an 
age-old tradition as you participated in the tradition of dragging 
the Speaker or feigning dragging the Speaker to the chair. And I 
think it’s important for all of us to note that that is something 
that’s a tradition that has not come lightly. It has been repeated 
in every House in this nation since the beginning of 
Confederation. And it is done for good reason — to respect the 
responsibilities that you have undertaken. 
 
I think many of us will know that it is a tradition that began 
over 600 years ago, back in the 1300s, in the Houses in 
Westminster. When at that time, to serve as Speaker of the 
House was quite literally a life-threatening occupation. As in 
those days, Mr. Speaker, the Speaker was chosen by the 
reigning monarch of the day to oversee the debate, as you still 
do today, but then to be the one to report to the advice of the 
appointed members, in those days, to the monarch. 



December 14, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 199 

And on occasion when reporting advice that the monarch was 
not too pleased to receive, the poor old Speaker, well, it was “to 
kill the messenger” to put it bluntly, Mr. Speaker. And all too 
frequently, a Speaker had his head chopped off for delivering 
advice that the monarch didn’t want to hear. 
 
And it is out of respect for that proud tradition and that 
important role of the Speaker that you engaged in that age-old 
tradition. And I want to say to you, Mr. Speaker, that as you 
have taken your place in the Speaker’s Chair in this House, I 
think it is representative of the fact that all of us in this House 
do recognize you as a man of integrity, and your time in this 
House that has been your reputation. And I want to say to you 
personally, that I will be proud to have you as the representative 
of the full Legislative Assembly in this twenty-fourth 
legislature of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to add my words of 
appreciation to His Honour, the Hon. Jack Wiebe, Lieutenant 
Governor of Saskatchewan, not only for his presentation of his 
speech, but more particularly than that, to His Honour and to Mrs. 
Wiebe for the superb five and a half years of representation of Her 
Majesty that they have given to the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. and Mrs. Wiebe have made it a priority, during their term as 
Lieutenant Governor of Saskatchewan, to place the knowledge of 
our young people in particularly, but of all the citizens of 
Saskatchewan, to come to understand the importance of 
parliamentary democracy; and within that, the place of the 
monarch in this system of parliamentary democracy that has 
served us so well. 
 
They have served us with distinction, with much personal charm, 
and with a great sense of humour. And I want to express my 
personal appreciation to His Honour and Mrs. Wiebe for their 
service to the province of Saskatchewan; and to wish them well in 
their retirement from this very important post. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I also want to extend my words 
of thanks to the good people of Moose Jaw North who have given 
me the special honour of serving for a fourth term. That has not 
been the tradition of that constituency, and I recognize it is a very, 
very special privilege that I enjoy. And I would also say, Mr. 
Speaker, I am one who would say this, I am proud to call myself a 
politician. And I am particularly proud to be a politician who 
represents the people of Moose Jaw North for the fourth 
consecutive term. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Moose Jaw is a happening place. As I get around the 
province of Saskatchewan and I hear people’s comments about 
what’s going on in this province, they tell me that there are lots of 
good things happening in lots of places. And it is with special 
attention to the city of Moose Jaw, that I find myself frequently 
feeling proud. 
 
Many will know that there is a growing tourism industry in Moose 
Jaw that has been spurred on by the development of the Temple 
Gardens Mineral Spa. And associated with that, the murals that 
depict not only Moose Jaw but, more importantly, Saskatchewan 

history — the tunnels filled with a great deal of history and 
mythology entertainingly mixed together, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And also we have in our downtown of Moose Jaw, the oldest — 
in fact the only intact — original Main Street in any city in 
Western Canada, and this is a community which has come to 
appreciate the significant of heritage buildings. 
 
In fact you know, Mr. Speaker, when I first came to the city of 
Moose Jaw back in 1973, I heard many people at that time say, 
you know, one of the problems of this community is that all it’s 
got is, they said in those days, old buildings and old people. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, you know what they’ve discovered is that 
they discovered that those old buildings are in fact heritage 
buildings and those elderly people are in fact people with 
reliable, disposable income. And, Mr. Speaker, as a result of 
that, I’m proud to say, that my city has come to appreciate the 
heritage that it has and is celebrating that. 
 
And I would like to add to that and to extend my appreciation to 
the minister responsible for Liquor and Gaming Authority. 
Members may have recognized recently on provincial and even 
national news, I’m pleased to say, that the anchor of Main 
Street, the downtown CP (Canadian Pacific) station has just 
been converted to the finest-looking liquor store in all of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’ve had constituents, in fact I have had two or three 
constituents tell me that they’ve been into the new liquor store 
two or three times and they don’t even approve of drinking. Mr. 
Speaker, it is a wonderful heritage building and we’re pleased 
to have that as part of our anchor on Main Street. And thanks to 
the province for assisting with that project. 
 
In the city of Moose Jaw as well, Mr. Speaker, together with the 
hon. member for Swift Current, we will shortly be celebrating, 
I’m sure, another piece, a good piece, of news about the future 
and enhancement of the health services to the people in our 
constituencies as we will begin operating a new portable CAT 
(computerized axial tomography) scan and it will serve the 
people of the Moose Jaw/Thunder Creek Health District as well 
as the Swift Current Health District and some others in a pilot 
project that I anticipate and predict will serve the province of 
Saskatchewan well. 
 
I want to compliment the health districts of both Moose 
Jaw/Thunder Creek as well as Swift Current and the other three 
districts for their co-operative effort that made this enhancement 
in analysis necessary for a good analysis of medical needs 
possible in making that happen. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, I want to acknowledge that along with my 
responsibilities has come the responsibility of minister 
responsible for Wakamow Valley Authority and to say that is a 
feature of the city of Moose Jaw about which I’m particularly 
proud. The Wakamow Valley Authority oversees an area in the 
city — it’s one of Saskatchewan’s beautiful urban parks — that 
celebrates an historically significant point in the travelling 
across the prairies of our First Nations people. It’s a beautiful 
part of the city, a beautiful part of the province, and I want to 
commend all of the large number of volunteers who are helping 
to build this wonderful tourist attraction and beautiful 
community site, and also, at the same time, to thank the hon. 



200 Saskatchewan Hansard December 14, 1999 

member for Moose Jaw Wakamow who has agreed to assist me 
in participating with that. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, Moose Jaw is a great community to live, to 
grow up, to attend school, to get a higher education, to work, 
and to retire. It is populated by people who are, quite frankly, 
the salt of the earth. Hard-working, honest, caring, I think is 
typically a description of the people of Moose Jaw. 
 
I’m very proud to say that about 15 years ago or so across the 
nation there was a measurement taken about the level of 
volunteerism. And in fact in communities in the 25 to 50,000 
population category, it was in fact proven that in all of Canada 
the highest number of volunteers were from the city of Moose 
Jaw. It’s a city where people care about one another and I think 
many of us will describe it as a big small town. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker it is with a special feeling in the most 
positive sense of humility that I say thank you to the people of 
Moose Jaw for electing me for the fourth time, and in each of 
those elections with a majority in excess of 50 per cent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s been something in 
excess of four years since I’ve last had the opportunity to bring 
remarks from the floor of the House. And as it says in the 
Speech from the Throne, Mr. Speaker, it is a brand new day. 
And so in a political sense of the word perhaps it’s appropriate 
for me to lift the cone of silence, Mr. Speaker, and to bring 
some remarks reflecting my pride in what’s happening on this 
side of the House. 
 
And let me begin, Mr. Speaker, by saying this: I am proud to be 
a New Democrat; I am proud to be a part of this coalition 
government that I believe will significantly lead the people of 
Saskatchewan into the new millennium, a new day, Mr. 
Speaker, a day of hope and with positive optimism for the 
future for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Now, Mr. Speaker, sometimes these days 
people are inclined to talk about marching bravely into the new 
millennium. In fact a friend of mine the other day phrased it this 
way. He got their “mords wixed” up, so to speak, and said that 
they thought about marching bravely into the new linoleum. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure that that was necessarily 
relevant to the debate before us, but I do know this — I know 
this — that statement is about as bright as those who said after 
the election, and we’ve heard it in the debate here, that the 
people of Saskatchewan voted for a minority government. They 
are equally bright, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As I went through, as I went through the election, I know this: 
not everybody in my constituency voted for me. We all know 
that. Not everyone in our constituencies voted for us. 
 
But I’ll tell you this. Every Saskatchewan Party supporter in my 
constituency I ran into said I’m voting for a Saskatchewan Party 
majority government. Every Liberal supporter in my riding that 
I talked to said I’m voting for a Liberal majority government. 

Mr. Speaker, every New Democrat that I talked to in my riding 
said I’m voting for a New Democrat majority government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not a single person in my riding — and I hazard a 
guess that not a single person in the riding of every member of 
this House — stood up and said when I go out to the polls, I’m 
voting for a minority government. I suspect, Mr. Speaker, not a 
single person made that statement because that is not what the 
people of Saskatchewan wanted, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1600) 
 
And I point out, Mr. Speaker, I point out when I look at the 
members on this side of the House, my colleagues on this side 
of the House, that we have members on this side of the House 
whose supporters voted for them to be part of a majority 
government. In fact, when I look across the way, I see members 
of the Saskatchewan Party whose supporters, when they voted 
for them, voted for them to be part of a majority government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what I point out is this, is that the people of 
Saskatchewan when they went out to the polls on September 16, 
40 per cent of them said they want those folks to be part of a 
majority government, 60 per cent said they wanted these folks 
to be part of a majority government. And, Mr. Speaker, this is a 
majority government that will lead Saskatchewan into the new 
millennium. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Speaker, 100 per cent, 100 per 
cent of the people of Saskatchewan said they wanted a majority 
government; 60 per cent of them said they wanted this majority 
government. It’s a coalition government and I’m proud to be 
part of it. 
 
And why did they say that, Mr. Speaker? Why did they say 
that? They said that because they wanted the same thing that 
Saskatchewan people have wanted in every election — the 24 
elections that we’ve had in the history of Saskatchewan — they 
said they wanted a government that would bring stability and 
progress to the province of Saskatchewan not political gains. It 
would bring stability and progress, and, Mr. Speaker, that’s 
what they will get from this government is stability and 
progress into the new century. 
 
And how will they . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well now, the 
hon. member, the hon. member on the other sides shouts, Mr. 
Speaker, that he has his own view of what brings stability. And 
I find it kind of interesting, Mr. Speaker, when I’ve listened to 
the questions and the shouts that have gone back and forth since 
the sitting has begun, the questions have not concentrated on — 
oh, we’ve heard the occasional reference — but they’ve not 
concentrated on the issues that the people of Saskatchewan are 
looking for us to respond to. What they have focused on is the 
fact that there are hurt feelings about the coalition government, 
Mr. Speaker, and that there is a coalition government that will 
work to bring stability and progress. That’s what the . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . oh no, the hon. member, the hon. 
member, if he was wanting to be part of bringing stability and 
progress would be making constructive suggestions, Mr. 
Speaker, and not shouting from his seat. 
 



December 14, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 201 

But what we see, Mr. Speaker, in this Speech from the Throne, 
is we see a plan. We see a plan to bring stability and progress 
into this new century, a brand new day for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s fair to say, I think it’s fair to say, 
I think . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . oh, Mr. Speaker, now all of 
a sudden the hon. members are inspired and they want to get in 
and express their new ideas and we hope that they will. 
 
When I talked to the newspaper in my own constituency, Mr. 
Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, please. Once again this is a 
maiden speech in the House, so I’d appreciate it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Speaker, when I talked to the 
media in my own constituency the day of the Speech from the 
Throne, they said: you know, you know the opposition is saying 
that you stole some of their ideas. That’s what they said. That 
was the accusation. I said, Mr. Speaker, if the opposition likes 
the idea that the government has put forward, I expect when it 
comes to the vote that they will be voting with the government 
— that’s part of stability and future progress for the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I’d encourage the hon. 
members to come forward with as many good, positive, 
progressive ideas for the future of Saskatchewan and to 
contribute to the building of a new future. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, you know . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . now the hon. member over there says that this is 
the scary part. You know, Mr. Speaker, you know I thought 
about this for a while and there is something that is truly scary. 
I have heard this phrase used on occasion as I have sat and 
listened, and they have said that the New Democrat government 
had a near-death experience they said. 
 
Well, you know, Mr. Speaker, in a political sense perhaps 
there’s some truth to that, and what did the government do? It 
responded by listening and by committing itself to consulting 
and moving forward together with the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
But you know, Mr. Speaker, there is something that is truly 
frightening. There is something that is truly frightening and that 
is that the members opposite, when it comes to forming 
government, had a near-life experience. And, Mr. Speaker, that 
prospect is truly frightening to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, when I 
look at the Speech from the Throne — and I hate to do that 
during this debate because this hasn’t been done all that long, 
all that often, Mr. Speaker — but when I look at the Speech 
from the Throne, what does it say to me? And you know, we’ve 
often heard the presentation of budgets referred to a pocketbook 
budget. But you know what, Mr. Speaker? When I look at this 
Speech from the Throne, what it says to me is this is a 
pocketbook Speech from the Throne — a pocketbook Speech 

from the Throne. This is a Speech from the Throne that lays out 
an agenda, a very, very enthusiastic agenda, Mr. Speaker; an 
agenda that addresses the real needs of real Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
And when I look at that, Mr. Speaker, on this brand new day, a 
new approach to politics. What do we end up saying here, Mr. 
Speaker? Well, here’s what we end up saying, here are some of 
the priorities. 
 
Helping families make ends meet, helping families make ends 
meet. Mr. Speaker, how do we talk about doing that? In the 
Speech from the Throne it refers to two critical things in order 
to help make ends meet. 
 
One is a new updated economic development strategy entitled 
Partnership for Prosperity that my hon. colleague, the Minister 
for Economic Development and Co-operation, will be talking 
about more over the months ahead; and an approach to the 
Saskatchewan economy which will grow the economy to assist 
Saskatchewan people to enjoy the prosperity that’s available . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . The rewards and employment, as my 
hon. colleague says, Mr. Speaker. Helping families make ends 
meet. 
 
But the other thing as well, Mr. Speaker, is that this Speech 
from the Throne pledges to the people of Saskatchewan to keep 
one of the New Democrat commitments in the election and 
there is, in fact, as the hon. members will recognize, there is a 
proposal before the people of Saskatchewan just now that the 
government will be reviewing. I’m sure my hon. friends on the 
opposite side, Mr. Speaker, will look at as well. 
 
The personal income tax review commission has put forth an 
agenda, which is a way, which is a way for reducing the income 
tax paid by Saskatchewan people, restructuring the income that 
the government will receive in order to deliver the programs 
that families need and want, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so it is — it is — in this very first sitting of the 
twenty-fourth legislature that this government comes to this 
House, Mr. Speaker, and pledges to keep one of its most 
important election commitments to reduce the income tax for 
Saskatchewan working people and, Mr. Speaker, this 
government will deliver. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — And, Mr. Speaker, in the Speech from the 
Throne it says that this is a government that will be fighting for 
rural families. And if my hon. friends opposite would like to 
join in that fight and be a part of that, then that is most 
welcome. And in fact I think one of the most encouraging signs 
for the people of Saskatchewan who watch what goes on in 
these Chambers . . . for some time, one of the most encouraging 
signs was to see what happened here on Tuesday, a week ago, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
As we adjusted the rules of the broadcasting of proceedings and 
allowed, Mr. Speaker, for the first time to happen in this room, 
that people of Saskatchewan focused on a very, very important 
issue — I suggest the single most important issue facing 
Saskatchewan today — to come to the floor, and to engage in 



202 Saskatchewan Hansard December 14, 1999 

dialogue with members on both sides of the House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was very, very proud that members on both sides 
of the House received those people well, and then in fact I 
think, passed unanimously a resolution calling for the only real 
solution to the problem that is most confronting us here in 
Saskatchewan. And that is to assist with our trade inequities for 
grains here in the province of Saskatchewan and to seek the 
very necessary support of our Government in Canada to put our 
farmers on equal footing with the farmers of the United States 
and Europe. And, Mr. Speaker, we will act on that together. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, there is . . . I’ve heard hon. members say 
opposite that there’s also an important role for the provincial 
government to take. And I say, Mr. Speaker, that’s true, that’s 
true. And in fact, when you look into the Speech from the 
Throne, Mr. Speaker, hon. members will recognize that the 
provincial government is committing itself in this Speech from 
the Throne to pursue reductions in crop insurance costs, 
enhanced coverage, to introduce an input monitoring program, 
to extend provincial leasebacks by three years, and ensure that 
existing programs continue to be available for Saskatchewan 
farmers. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, those are things that will take more flesh 
in detail as they come forward in the weeks and the months to 
come, and the Speech from the Throne that’ll take us into the 
spring session of the legislature. 
 
And also, Mr. Speaker, from my point of view, it is also 
important that in the Speech from the Throne the government 
pledges a bright future for our young people. And in that 
context we really talk about, with greatest emphasis, on two 
things, both having to do with education. 
 
One, of course, is the support for education in the K to 12 
system, and the support for the schools and the funding that’s 
necessary to ensure the continuation of a high quality of K to 12 
education, preparing our young people for their adult futures. 
 
As well as that, Mr. Speaker, hon. members will recognize in 
the Speech from the Throne there was a commitment to make 
post-secondary education more accessible for Saskatchewan 
families. And, Mr. Speaker, if I may be able to take just a few 
minutes to refer to, in some more detail, about the 
post-secondary plan and the post-secondary and skills training 
picture as it provides opportunity and support for Saskatchewan 
families. 
 
If I can put my own place in that into a bit of a context, Mr. 
Speaker. Many of the members will recognize that I have a 
painting hanging in my office — it’s been in my previous 
office, and this one, for some time — that belonged to my 
grandmother. And, Mr. Speaker, my grandmother grew up in 
Webb, Saskatchewan, and she was one of those people who 
throughout her lifetime said over and over again that she 
considered to serve in public office to be one of the most noble 
and honourable callings that any of us could possibly have. 
 
And I remember as a young lad going to visit with my 
grandmother and looking at the painting that hung on her wall 
of the . . . It’s an old painting of the Parliament Buildings of 
Canada. Only my grandmother would have that as the feature 

work of art in her living room, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I remember her talking about this fellow, Woody, she 
would speak about taking care of when she was a younger gal. 
And she talked with enthusiasm about Woody and what he did 
and he was part of a large family; and she said in fact nine boys 
in the family, they formed their own ball team, and they’d get 
out on those Saskatchewan sports days and play ball and fight 
and win. But she always spoke with a special reverence for 
Woody. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, as I grew older I came to understand that the 
Woody that my grandmother referred to was none other than 
the longest-serving minister of Education in the history of 
Saskatchewan, and later in his career, premier of Saskatchewan, 
Woodrow Lloyd. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve sat in my office these last few weeks, 
sometimes late at night, and glanced at that painting that I have 
hanging in the office, I’ve thought how humbling it is, and how 
proud I am to be able to serve my province in a capacity similar 
to that enjoyed and brought to this province by the very, very 
famous Woodrow Lloyd, who was a man revered by my 
grandmother. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me say in this House, and officially on the 
record, something that I’ve said twice before. When I, in 1986, 
straight across the floor, gave my first speech in this House, I 
pledged at that time to serve as the member from Moose Jaw in 
a way that would make my grandmother feel proud. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1996, when I had the honour extended to me by 
the members of the House to occupy the seat that you now 
have, at that time I said to the members that I committed myself 
to serve the members of this House and my province in a way 
that would make my grandmother feel proud. And, Mr. 
Speaker, when I . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, as I stand here in this my first 
speech in the twenty-fourth legislature, I commit to the 
members of this House and to the people of Saskatchewan that 
in Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training, let me express 
my commitment in the most profound way I possibly can, and 
that is to say that I will serve my province in a way that I hope 
will make my grandmother feel proud. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, as I’ve come to know some of 
the people in the Department of Post-Secondary Education and 
Skills Training, I’ve come to know that it is a good department 
and it is staffed with good and professional people, 
professionally committed to serving the good people of 
Saskatchewan; and to recognize that the Department of 
Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training more than 
anything else, if you want to summarize it into a single phrase, 
is in the future business. 
 
(1615) 
 
This is the arm of the provincial government, Mr. Speaker, 



December 14, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 203 

which has the responsibility of providing leadership and 
facilitating the resources that are necessary to assist our citizens 
in building their own futures. And we live at a time, Mr. 
Speaker — we all recognize this — in which it has become an 
absolute necessity for the large majority of our people, young 
people who are hoping to make careers and support families, to 
not only have some post-secondary education and skills 
training, but in fact through their careers, to retrain and retrain 
and retrain again. 
 
And so it is, I think, Mr. Speaker, a very important function of 
the province of Saskatchewan and Post-Secondary Education 
and Skills Training, and it’s one that will continue to grow with 
time. 
 
There are a number of facets that have come together and I can 
just list very quickly some of those, the most obvious I think, 
the one that’ll come to everyone’s mind — our two universities 
here in the province of Saskatchewan. And I’m proud to say, 
Mr. Speaker, that we have two high-quality universities in this 
province, universities which provide a high quality of 
education, and both of which are enhancing their research 
capacities and their relationships in an academic sense. Mr. 
Speaker, they have continued, they have served our province 
well — one for nearly a century, one for a quarter-century, Mr. 
Speaker — and they will continue to serve our people well, I 
predict. 
 
And we have that enhanced, Mr. Speaker, with our four SIAST 
(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology) 
campuses in the four largest communities in the province. And I 
think it’s kind of indicative to know the effectiveness of the 
SIAST programs, Mr. Speaker, as they assist our citizens to 
respond to their wishes, to help them shape their careers and to 
support their families, and to do that in a positive kind of way. 
 
A recent review, Mr. Speaker, of 1998 graduates from SIAST 
pointed out that nearly 90 per cent, Mr. Speaker, of those 
graduates were working. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to say 
that of those graduates who are working, those 90 per cent, 97 
per cent of them were working right here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — So I think it’s fair to say, Mr. Speaker, that 
our two largest post-secondary institutions are serving our people 
well. They are supported in a very important way by the regional 
colleges, which have as their mandate to bring training in a whole 
number of ways, including of course the academic credit, to the 
rural and to the northern parts of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have had opportunity to visit some of those 
campuses to meet with a good number of the board members, the 
citizens who are bringing leadership and direction to our regional 
colleges. And I think that too is in good hands. 
 
We have, and very importantly in this province, given our 
demographics of our population, Mr. Speaker, we have some 
aboriginally administered post-secondary education institutions 
who continue to serve their people well and to increase the number 
of graduates. That is complemented by a good system of private 
vocational schools who are very, very responsive at responding to 
the marketplace and to making that link between skills that are 

necessary and good training, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That is enhanced as well by just a recently rejuvenated 
apprenticeship and a trade certification commission that is led, Mr. 
Speaker, I am proud to say and they are proud to say, by the 
industry. And when they say the industry, they’re not just talking 
about the employers, but they are talking about the employers and 
the skilled tradesmen and women themselves, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And finally, and very, very importantly, as a result of the transfer 
from the federal government to provincial jurisdiction for labour 
market development and planning, we have 20 career and 
employment service offices that are scattered around, strategically 
around the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And these offices, Mr. Speaker, serve as an excellent resource for 
any Saskatchewan citizen who is looking for information about 
training opportunities or career development or career choice, and 
including for themselves, as well as a resource for employers who 
are wanting to become familiar with the training resources 
available and to seek skilled employees for their places of 
business. 
 
And so what we have in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, in those 20 
career and employment services offices, are places that are 
one-stop shopping so to speak, for those who are looking for 
employment or looking for employees, who are looking for 
training or who are looking for people to be trained, and to provide 
good, solid advice to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am proud to say the department as well, that what it 
has done is in recent times, has been working diligently in the 
development of a strategic plan. And that brings me, Mr. Speaker, 
finally to one of the commitments in the Speech from the 
Throne, which is to implement comprehensive program and 
government accountability. And what does that mean, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
Well in the case of the Post-Secondary Education and Skills 
Training department, Mr. Speaker, what it means is this — is 
that I anticipate that we will come forward in the spring with a 
very detailed strategic plan as a result of a high level of 
consultation with all the educational partners in the province of 
Saskatchewan, that will let them know where is their 
government going, what are our goals and objectives and how 
do we plan to get there. And that is a very inclusive, very 
inclusive process. 
 
Now the hon. member opposite, Mr. Speaker, he wants to inject 
a little partisan politics and he says, out. But I tell you, Mr. 
Speaker, when the Department of Post-Secondary Education 
and Skills Training is working with the partners of education in 
Saskatchewan, they are definitely in. They’re part of the plan, 
and working together with them, we will be building that 
positive future for the people of Saskatchewan that I referred to 
earlier. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — So, Mr. Speaker, I expect to come forward, 
as I say, in the spring session, members will be hearing about 
the plan, and . . . the plan . . . the plan — that’s right. And I am 
very encouraged, Mr. Speaker, by the enthusiasm I hear from 



204 Saskatchewan Hansard December 14, 1999 

the hon. members opposite. And I will look forward to their 
input in the plan as well. 
 
But there’s just one final item I’d like to address before taking 
my place, Mr. Speaker, and . . . this is the final, final one. And 
that, Mr. Speaker, is the consultation that all hon. members will 
be familiar with, related to the matter of financial access to 
post-secondary education and skills training for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, when I look back to that election that the 
hon. members opposite like to moan and groan about, what I 
noted is that there were two — there were two parties in the 
election, Mr. Speaker, that made financial access to 
post-secondary education a priority. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to say that both of those partners 
are sitting on this side of the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I say we’ve generated a 
little interest here again — generated a little interest. And I’m 
glad to see that, because we will be looking forward to input 
from all the people of Saskatchewan including the hon. 
members opposite. Mr. Speaker, if they can come up with a 
good idea, I intend to use that in the interest of the people of 
Saskatchewan — if they do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But let me say this — let me say this, first of all. I think what 
happened in the course of the election is that the people of 
Saskatchewan in a very significant way said, financial access to 
post-secondary education has always been an important value to 
the people of Saskatchewan, and it continues to be that. You’re 
right on the mark. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, when they looked at the particular 
agendas for achieving that put forward by the New Democrats 
and the Liberals, I think there was . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Well the hon. member, the hon. member, Mr. Speaker . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Now, now, Mr. Speaker, the hon. 
member says he had a little difficulty understanding it. He said 
he had a hard time understanding it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I want you to know, Mr. Speaker, what I want you to know 
is that in my view the proposals made by the New Democrats 
and the Liberals in the election met with something less than 
wild enthusiasm. It was something less. 
 
Will the hon. member . . . I think the hon. member will agree 
with me on that point. Well he’s not disagreeing, Mr. Speaker. 
We’re making progress. In the absence of disagreement, Mr. 
Speaker, we will assume agreement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, so what we have decided is this. It is much more 
important to do it right than to do it fast. And so we have said, 
Mr. Speaker, we recognize and appreciate that the people of 
Saskatchewan . . . we recognize that the people of 
Saskatchewan have said that financial access to post-secondary 
education and skills training is important. And we will consult 
with the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there will be three criteria, three criteria that I will 

be looking for, together with my colleague, the Minister of 
Education, my coalition partner. There are three criteria in the 
advice that people of Saskatchewan give to us that I'll be 
looking for to bring to this House in the spring. 
 
We’ll be looking for a solution to improve the financial access 
to post-secondary education, Mr. Speaker, that number one, 
meets the real financial needs of the students of Saskatchewan; 
number two, it supports quality post-secondary education; and 
number three, it meets the test of fiscal prudence by the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is my commitment. And in the spring of 2000, 
that is the plan that this government will bring to this legislature 
on the matter of financial access. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
An Hon. Member: — We look forward to seeing that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member, I 
believe the Education critic, or the former Education critic, the 
Deputy Leader of the Saskatchewan Party, he is already 
enthusiastic. He is shouting across. He wants to know details. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I say to him, he’s going to have to wait until 
we’ve had a chance to talk to the people of Saskatchewan, 
because we will take their advice, but we will take the 
leadership of the solution to this issue, Mr. Speaker, from the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — And I know, I know, that if he truly feels it, 
and I suspect he might, that he will be the first on his feet to say 
it was a job well done and let’s hear it for the future of the 
people of Saskatchewan. I’m sure we can count on that. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I think the time draws near to 
wrap it up and . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . no, no, no, no. As 
much as the hon. members opposite would like to have more 
advice as to what’s coming, they’re just simply going to have to 
wait, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And what I would like to say is that I do feel enthusiastic about 
being part of this brand new day for the people of 
Saskatchewan; about a day that is based on a commitment to the 
well-being of the people of this province; to building in a 
future, Mr. Speaker, where families in this province can look 
forward with optimism and enthusiasm and to feel good that 
this is a good place to raise a family. This is a good place to 
work and to retire, Mr. Speaker. That this is a good place to 
live. 
 
And so with that in mind and also respecting, Mr. Speaker, the 
spirit of the season that is before us and that I recognize in the 
faces of the hon. members opposite and around, I want to, Mr. 
Speaker, conclude by wishing all of the members of the House, 
the very peaceful Christmas. I hope that for each of them in 
their homes and in their hearts, Mr. Speaker, peace will be a 
common experience not only at Christmastime, but through the 
new year. Mr. Speaker, I stand here confident that when we 
wake up on January 1, the power will still be on, the sun will 



December 14, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 205 

still be coming up in the East and going down in the West, and I 
wish for all hon. members a wonderful celebration with their 
families at this Christmastime. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, I take my place repeating what I 
said when I began, that I will be voting in favour of the motion 
moved by the hon. member for Moose Jaw Wakamow, 
seconded by the hon. member for Saskatoon Sutherland. Mr. 
Speaker, I am enthusiastic about a brand new day, and I will be 
voting in favour of the motion before us. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Leave to introduce a 
guest. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Jones: — I wish to acknowledge the presence of a 
colleague of mine from Saskatoon, one whom I hope will soon 
take her place back in this House. Pat Lorje is here with us this 
afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Ms. Higgins, seconded by Mr. 
Addley, and the proposed amendment thereto moved by Mr. 
Hermanson. 
 
The division bells rang from 4:30 p.m. until 4:38 p.m. 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 23 
 

Hermanson Elhard Heppner 
Julé Krawetz Draude 
Boyd Gantefoer Toth 
Peters Eagles Bakken 
Bjornerud D’Autremont McMorris 
Weekes Brkich Harpauer 
Wiberg Hart Allchurch 
Stewart Kwiatkowski  
 

Nays — 29 
 
Romanow Trew Hagel 
Van Mulligen MacKinnon Lingenfelter 
Melenchuk Cline Atkinson 
Goulet Lautermilch Thomson 
Kasperski Serby Belanger 
Nilson Crofford Kowalsky 
Sonntag Hamilton Prebble 
Jones Yates Higgins 

Harper Axworthy Junor 
Wartman Addley  
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, by leave to introduce 
guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, a short time ago a 
group of beef producers from the province came together to 
form the Saskatchewan Beef Industry Committee and they’re 
with us today in your gallery. And I’d just like them to stand as 
I introduce them. I just say to members of the Assembly, we 
had an opportunity to have a very good meeting with the beef 
industry and I know we all wish them well. 
 
But here today, Brian Weedon, president of the Saskatchewan 
Stock Growers Association; Dennis Lepp, president of the 
Saskatchewan Cattle Feeders Association; Brad Wilderman, the 
general manager of Poundmaker; Maurice Kraut, the beef 
coordinator/consultant with the beef committee; Myles 
Anderson; Bob Stewart with the Sask. Stock Growers 
Association; Harry Seidlitz with Heartland Livestock; as well as 
Myles Anderson, chairman of the Beef Industries Committee. 
And I think Myles probably departed before . . . oh no, there he 
is. 
 
I want to say to all of them, this is a very, very important 
industry in our province. Thank you for all the hard work and I 
know members will want to welcome them here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With leave for the 
introduction of guests as well. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
join with the Minister of Agriculture and welcome the members 
of the beef industry to the Assembly here this afternoon. 
 
As you know, Mr. Speaker, it’s an extremely important part of 
the industry. Many of us on the Saskatchewan Party side of the 
official opposition have tremendous representation from the 
ranch community and the farm community; and we certainly 
welcome people representing that industry to the Assembly here 
this afternoon and would want to join with the Minister of 
Agriculture in welcoming them as well. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Ms. Higgins, seconded by Mr. 
Addley. 



206 Saskatchewan Hansard December 14, 1999 

Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, it now being near the time of 
5, I would move the adjournment of the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Speaker: — I would just like to once again wish 
everybody a very pleasant evening. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:43 p.m. 
 
 



 

 


