





























































Hansard: May 05, 1999


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1067 
 May 5, 1999 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present a petition on 
behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan seriously concerned about 
the state of our highway system. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call on federal and provincial 
governments to dedicate a significantly greater portion of 
fuel tax revenues toward road maintenance and 
construction so Saskatchewan residents may have a safe 
highway system that meets their needs. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will every pray. 
 

And the signatures on these petitions are from Regina, from 
Assiniboia, from Arborfield, and from many other small 
communities from around the province. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, again this afternoon I present 
petitions from residents of the northwest requesting that the 
dangerous and unsafe congestion at the entrance to the city of 
North Battleford be alleviated by moving the junction of 
Highways 40 and 16. 
 
Your petitioners this afternoon come from North Battleford, 
Sonningdale, Battleford, Glaslyn, Cochin, and Meota. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
bring forward petitions in regards to a regional hospital in Swift 
Current and the need for it. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call upon the NDP 
government to provide funding in this budget to have the 
Swift Current Regional Hospital equipped and staffed as a 
speciality care hospital, and to immediately provide 
funding for purchase and operation of both imaging 
equipment and a renal dialysis centre. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed the petition are from 
Swift Current, Hazlet, Val Marie, Abbey, Glenbain, Neville, 
Morse, Hodgeville, Shaunavon, Ferland. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 
petitions on behalf of citizens that are concerned for the plight 
of our farmers in this province. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to call upon provincial and 
federal governments to immediately take steps to end 
unfair world subsidies and provide farmers with prompt 
relief from declining incomes and act as watchdogs against 
rising input costs which are harming the rural economy. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, those who’ve signed these petitions come from 
throughout the Thunder Creek constituency, as well as all over 
the province. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased today to 
rise again in this House to present a petition on behalf of the 
people of this province. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call on federal and provincial 
governments to dedicate a greater portion of fuel tax 
revenues toward road maintenance and construction so that 
Saskatchewan residents may have a safe highway system 
that meets their needs and that they so deserve. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition has been signed by the good folks 
from Alida, Carnduff, and Estevan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
privilege once again to rise on behalf of citizens who are 
concerned with the education of some of our most vulnerable in 
Saskatchewan. And I’ll read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide essential funding and ensure the delivery of 
scientifically proven diagnostic assessment and 
programming for children with learning disorders and 
disabilities in order that they have an access to an 
education that meets their needs and allows them to reach 
their full potential. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The people who have signed this petition today, Mr. Speaker, 
are from Waskesiu, from Christopher Lake, Saskatoon, and 
Prince Albert, and I’m pleased to present this petition on their 
behalf. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the petitions presented at the last 
sitting have been reviewed and found to be in order. Pursuant to 
rule 12(7) these petitions are hereby received. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on Friday next move first reading of a Bill, The Romanow 
Road Act, an Act to rename provincial Highway 339; 



1068 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1999 

I also give notice that I shall on Friday next move first reading 
of a Bill, The Romanow Road Act No. 2, an Act to rename 
provincial Highway 363; 
 
As well I give notice that I shall on Friday next move first 
reading of a Bill, The Romanow Road Act No. 16, an Act to 
rename provincial Highway No. 43; 
 
I give notice that I shall on Friday next move first reading of a 
Bill, The Romanow Road Act No. 17, an Act to rename 
provincial Highway No. 202; 
 
And as well I give notice that I shall on Friday next move first 
reading of a Bill, The Romanow Road Act No. 18, an Act to 
rename provincial Highway No. 301. 
 
I so present. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

The Speaker: — Hon. members, earlier today at Government 
House, tribute was paid to 26 Saskatchewan recipients of 
national and provincial honours. Twenty-five of these recipients 
and their guests are seated in the Speaker’s gallery this 
afternoon, and we want to recognize them in the Legislative 
Chamber here today. 
 
In just a moment I’ll invite the Premier, then the Leader of the 
Opposition, and Leader of the Third Party to make a few brief 
remarks, and then invite members of the Legislative Assembly 
to take the opportunity to introduce their constituents. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, as you’ve pointed out this morning, it was our 
pleasure, those of us who had the opportunity to be there, to 
speak, and to recognize Saskatchewan citizens who have 
received some of the highest honours of our province and our 
nation. The highest honours that we can bestow and they are in 
the Speaker’s gallery, as you have pointed out. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this morning in my brief remarks — I hope they 
were brief — I tried to point out that it’s important that we note 
that we ask the Crown to give these honours and awards on 
behalf of a grateful province and a grateful country. We ask the 
Crown to present the Order of Canada and the Saskatchewan 
Order of Merit to recognize what I described as heroic 
achievement and dedication across a wide range of endeavours: 
medicine, civic administration, research, fine art, community 
service amongst some of the fine endeavours. 
 
We also, as the Crown, present the Order of Military Merit to 
members of the Canadian Forces who have demonstrated 
leadership and achievement often including going into harm’s 
way as peacekeepers in the international community. And we 
ask the Crown as well to present bravery decorations to people 
who have risked their lives to help people who needed their 
help. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this morning we heard the MLAs (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly), as we will in a moment, introduce 
individually these very, very fine and very special people, and 
when they did so this morning at Government House they 
briefly described their achievements. And I can tell my 

colleagues who were not present and those who’ll be watching 
this on our cable network television that for me in any event — 
I think that our colleagues will find this as well — the 
achievements are very impressive and how moved we all were 
to hear the stories of dedication, of commitment, and of 
downright heroism in a case of the acts of bravery. 
 
May I say these are going to be stories which are role models 
for not only us but future Saskatchewan and Canadian people. 
 
So I describe these people as real heroes whether they had one 
shining moment of extreme bravery or whether their heroism 
was in their perseverance and dedication to their work. They are 
nonetheless real heroes. And for that reason it is entirely good 
and right that we recognize them and their efforts right here in 
this Legislative Assembly. 
 
We’ve thanked each of them with the honours and awards 
they’ve received and we now honour and thank them again in 
the home of democracy in Saskatchewan, the Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. and congratulations to all our 
recipients. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it is indeed an honour and a privi . . . privilege . . . 
Wow that was a tough one — there must have been more in the 
water than the ice cubes! 
 
No indeed, Mr. Speaker, it is a tremendous honour to recognize 
along with the Premier and the Leader of the Third Party the 
tremendous accomplishments of these individuals. As I stated 
this morning, we in Saskatchewan are blessed by the fact that 
we have so many people in this province who are willing to 
give of themselves, whether it be through time, through effort, 
or indeed as the Premier has indicated through heroic bravery 
incidents. 
 
We are very, very grateful to these individuals for the fact that 
they have committed so much to the province of Saskatchewan 
and to the nation as a whole. When we recognize our national 
award winners and we recognize the recipients of the Order of 
Military Merit or the bravery recognition decorations, we 
recognize people who have contributed so much to the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to say on behalf of the official opposition, 
congratulations, we are truly blessed to have you as our 
recipients this year. And it is a pleasure to recognize and to 
honour you. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, today at Government House, I had 
the privilege, the sincere privilege, to offer the toast recognizing 
the 26 Saskatchewan recipients of national and provincial 
honours. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as has been mentioned, many of them are here this 
afternoon in your gallery. Those men and women have earned 



May 5, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 1069 

some of the highest awards this country can give to recognize 
those who work and act to make Canada and this province a 
better place to live. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the actions and works of the recipients should 
stand as an inspiration to all of us to strive to help all those we 
can. After all, Mr. Speaker, in the end that is what the awards 
are all about — the recognition of those who help make 
everyone’s life better. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the recipients here today and to all those 
countless others that act and work to help others — I 
congratulate you. And I thank you for helping to make 
Saskatchewan, to make Canada a better place to live. 
 
As I said earlier, it is indeed humbling to have the privilege of 
participating in recognition of people who extend themselves 
for the betterment above and beyond the call of duty for our 
country, for our province, and for their fellow man. 
 
Ladies and gentlemen, I want to, on behalf of the Liberal 
caucus, once again congratulate each and every one of you for 
all your efforts. And I thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — In just a few seconds I’ll call on members of 
the Legislative Assembly to individually introduce honours’ 
recipients from your constituencies. And at that time I would 
ask honours’ recipients, when being introduced, if you would 
stand while being introduced, and then remain standing through 
the applause that I know that you’ll receive. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to 
introduce to the Assembly, Dr. John Gerrard, Officer of the 
Order of Canada. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
member for Saskatoon Sutherland, it is my pleasure to 
introduce to the Assembly, Dr. Ali Rajput, Officer of the Order 
of Canada, and Member of the Saskatchewan Order of Merit. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Lorje: — And while I’m on my feet, on behalf of the 
member for Saskatoon Northwest, it is my pleasure to introduce 
to the Assembly, Mr. Clifford Wright, Officer of the Order of 
Canada. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to introduce 
to the Assembly, Miss Freda Ahenakew, Member of the Order 
of Canada. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is 
indeed my pleasure to introduce to the Assembly, Mr. Angus 
Campbell, Member of the Order of Canada, Member of the 
Saskatchewan Order of Merit. 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s my pleasure to introduce to the Assembly, Mr. William 
Perehudoff, Member of the Order of Canada, Member of the 
Saskatchewan Order of Merit. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Again, Mr. Speaker, it is a pleasure, an 
equal pleasure, to introduce Mrs. Gladys Rose, widow of the 
late Mr. Gerald Rose, Member of the Order of Canada. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce 
Miss Carole Sanderson, Member of the Order of Canada, 
Member of the Saskatchewan Order of Merit. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce to 
the Assembly, Chief Warrant Officer Robert Frosst, Member of 
the Order of Military Merit. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Mr. Speaker, it is a pleasure and a privilege for 
me to introduce to the House, Master Warrant Officer Graham 
Goodrum, Member of the Order of Military Merit. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to 
introduce to the Assembly, Ms. Isabelle Butters, Member of the 
Saskatchewan Order of Merit, Member of the Order of Canada. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to introduce to the 
Assembly, Dr. Constantine Campbell, Member of the 
Saskatchewan Order of Merit, Member of the Order of Canada. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased 
today to introduce to you Mr. John Green. He is a Member of 
the Order of Canada and a member of the Saskatchewan Order 
of Merit. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, to introduce to you and the 
Assembly, Mr. Stacey Millham, of Stockholm, recipient of the 
Medal of Bravery. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure to 
introduce to the Assembly, Mr. Darrel Morin, recipient of the 
Medal of Bravery. 
 



1070 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1999 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Hon. members, it is my pleasure to 
introduce from my constituency, Constable Randy Armitage, 
recipient of the Medal of Bravery. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — And also from my constituency, Constable 
Todd Booth, recipient of the Medal of Bravery. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure for 
me to introduce to the Assembly, Corporal Marc Girard, 
recipient of the Medal of Bravery. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Hon. members, it is also my pleasure to 
introduce from my constituency, Mr. Gordon Knox, recipient of 
the Medal of Bravery. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — And also from my constituency, firefighter 
George Paterson, recipient of the Medal of Bravery. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — And I would like to also introduce Mr. 
William Reiman, recipient of the Medal of Bravery. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel — And in addition, to introduce to you 
Constable Norman Renwick, recipient of the Medal of Bravery. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, from the other Moose Jaw 
constituency, I am pleased to introduce to our House today, Mr. 
Dale Santa, recipient of the Medal of Bravery. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — And also, pleased to introduce to the 
Assembly, Constable Thomas Savage, recipient of the Medal of 
Bravery. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — And finally, of our honours’ recipients, I 
introduce to you from my constituency, Constable Anthony 
Tirebuck, recipient of the Medal of Bravery. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Hon. members, introductions of other guests. 
 
Mr. Jess: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the east gallery we 
have a group of students from Delisle Elementary School. I 
would ask you and all other members to welcome the students, 

including Kyle, who is in the chair here by the main entrance. 
 
This group is made up of 37 students, 11 chaperones, and 3 
teachers — Mr. Keesey, Mrs. Williams, and Mrs. Konecnik. 
And I will be pleased to meet with this group at 2:30 for 
pictures and refreshments in room 255. Please help me 
welcome them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we just 
had introductions from very . . . of some very esteemed people 
in Saskatchewan: Members of the Order of Canada, the Order 
of Military Merit, the Saskatchewan Order of Merit, and people 
who have received a bravery decoration. 
 
I would like to though, Mr. Speaker, introduce to you a group of 
very special people who made all these awards and decorations 
possible. I am referring to the family, friends, and spouses of all 
our award recipients. And I would ask them all to rise so that 
this Assembly may honour them as well. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
introduce to you and to members of the Assembly, a group of 
66 grade 5 students from McLurg School in my constituency of 
Regina Sherwood. I’m here to welcome them this afternoon. I’ll 
be meeting with them a little later at 2:30 as well. 
 
And I’d just like to welcome their teachers, Carol Grant, Debbie 
Kivela, Barb Slywka, and their chaperones, Val Kiraly and 
Sandy Zelinksi. I hope you have a good visit and we’ll see you 
soon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In that gallery we 
have a number of students from northern Saskatchewan. 
They’re here with the class of the Dumont Technical Institute. 
 
And I want to just quickly rattle off a few of their names. 
There’s Roy Montgrand, Priscilla Wolverine, Collette 
Sylvestre, Clara Janvier, Brenda Sylvestre, Leonard Sylvestre, 
and Florence Piche. And they’re here to watch the Assembly for 
a few hours today. And they’re also accompanied here by their 
instructors, Cecile O’Neil and Roger J. Morin. 
 
And I think I’m forgetting one of them. I’m not sure if this is 
correct, but the one I’m forgetting I will buy lunch for this 
evening. And I want to welcome all these fine people that come 
all the way from La Loche to visit the Assembly here today. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, today is International Midwives Day and, as 
people in the Assembly will know, a few days ago we 
introduced an Act respecting midwives in the province of 
Saskatchewan, and of course we’re hoping that we can pass that 
legislation this afternoon. 



May 5, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 1071 

But in the east gallery is a group of predominantly women — 
along with their children — who are called Friends of 
Midwives. And these women have lobbied actively the 
provincial government, and no doubt the opposition, for a 
number of years in the hopes that we could have legislated 
midwifery in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I’d like to introduce the women who are in attendance this 
afternoon, and I’d ask them to stand: Eileen McKenzie, 
Maryanne Zuzak, Carol Thompson, Sylvie Roy, Rita 
Richardson, Laura Forrester, Michelle Sanche, Karen Herriot, 
and June Friesen. 
 
I’d ask all members of the Legislative Assembly to welcome 
these wonderful advocates for midwifery in the province. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 
the Minister of Health in welcoming the women, the Friends of 
Midwives, and I notice some of the midwives here today as 
well, into the gallery. We are looking forward to passing this 
Bill today so that midwifery can go on as one of the important 
parts of being a woman and of having children in this province. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Speaker, I want to introduce a friend 
from the constituency but before I do, I want to also add my 
greetings and thank yous to all of those who have been 
honoured here today and those who’ve accompanied them and 
been their partners and friends in the lives that they have lived 
to so well . . . service all. 
 
In the west gallery is a friend from my community at home and 
the school district in which I used to be the trustee, Susan 
Stanek, and she is a wonderful, committed volunteer in the 
community — farmer, and a mother of one of my ministerial 
assistants who is also a very competent and exceedingly good 
servant of the public. 
 
So I ask you to introduce Susan Stanek . . . to welcome Susan 
Stanek. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is my 
pleasure to rise on behalf of the Saskatchewan Party in 
recognition of Emergency Preparedness Week. Over the past 
couple of weeks there has been news reports indicate . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I believe the hon. member is 
making a statement? Yes. I haven’t called for that yet. We’re 
still in introduction of guests. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There’s four 
people I want to acknowledge so I’ll just efficiently do it all at 
once. And that would be from the Women’s Secretariat and part 
of the honours family group today, Denise Savage, who is the 
most excellent person in the Women’s Secretariat. And she’s 
here with her mother Gladys Savage Gorrill, and they would 
stand and be recognized. 
 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — And I want to also acknowledge the 
midwives, many who have actively lobbied me from my 
constituency, and congratulate them on the baby steps that we 
have taken today toward full midwifery service in the province. 
 
Also it’s a real pleasure to recognize Calvin Racette in the west 
gallery, who has been very involved in the identification and 
preservation of Metis artistic and cultural arts and artifacts, but 
as long-time teacher and principal as well. And if he would 
stand and be recognized. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — And Willy Hodgson from Moose Jaw, 
who was a wonderful support to my daughter in a difficult time. 
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, finally again from Moose Jaw, 
seated in the back pew of the west gallery is the next MLA from 
Moose Jaw Wakamow, Debbie Higgins. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

International Midwives Day 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to rise on behalf 
of the official opposition in recognition of International 
Midwives Day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, midwives offer a special kind of care and 
education to an expecting mother who makes a birth a 
wonderful experience instead of just a process. Expecting 
mothers are made aware of childbirth choices, of the advantages 
of eating properly during pregnancy, counselling on dealing 
with postpartum syndromes, and many . . . a host of many other 
issues. 
 
Midwives believe that every individual has a right to safe, 
satisfying health care with respect for human dignity and 
cultural variations. They also feel that the normal process of 
pregnancy and birth can be enhanced through education, health 
care, and supportive intervention. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the midwifery process is focused on the needs of 
the individual and the family for physical care, emotional and 
social support. 
 
I would like to commend the midwifery association of 
Saskatchewan on their efforts on making this a reality in our 
province and I look forward to the next step in the process, 
which will be to have a financial provincial support for births 
attended by midwives. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



1072 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1999 

Building Permits on Rise in Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Here I am again with 
more good news about Saskatchewan provided by those NDP 
(New Democratic Party) hacks at Statistics Canada. They must 
be working for us because they keep twisting their numbers to 
back us up when we say things are on the hop here. 
 
This time it’s building permits. They’re up. They’re way up in 
Saskatchewan. Total building permit values, residential and 
non-residential, increased by 60 per cent in March over the 
previous month. 
 
The national average was only 18.7. Manitoba’s increase was 
28.4. And get this, Mr. Speaker, Alberta’s jumped by a 
whopping 11.1. 
 
That’s just one month, you say. Well let’s look at the year. 
March to March, Saskatchewan’s rate increased by 14 per cent. 
Manitoba, on the other hand, declined by 19.3; and Alberta, that 
great province to the West, dropped by 4 per cent. 
 
One more statistic, this year to date January to March, 
Saskatchewan’s total building permit value increased by 11.3 
per cent over last year. Manitoba’s declined by 1.7; Alberta’s 
by 9.2 per cent. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, somebody may be building in Alberta, 
but they’re doing it without a permit. 
 
But in Saskatchewan we’ve always been more law-abiding than 
in freedom-loving Alberta where the air is free but the health 
premiums cost $840 a year. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

School Program for Children With Cerebral Palsy 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Many 
members may be aware of a parent-initiated program for 
children with cerebral palsy called Conductive Education 
operating at Estey School in Saskatoon. 
 
This program started on March 1 and will conclude at the end 
of this month. The program which is new, has attracted children 
with cerebral palsy from all over our province. And this 
program has been very strongly endorsed by parents because it 
teaches children the basic skills that they need in everyday life. 
 
There’s been some financial support from the Department of 
Education through basic policy funding, but most of this 
funding, Mr. Speaker, has been borne by the parents. Three 
founding families have found themselves $40,000 in debt 
because of financing this program for their three children and 
the 18 other children who have come from around 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Since this program involves our children, the province’s 
children, Mr. Speaker, it would be most appropriate for the 
department to ensure that this pilot project receives the support 
that it deserves. By doing so the organizing families, the moms 
and dads, are not left with crippling debt, and Saskatchewan 
children with cerebral palsy will be allowed to experience this 

new and innovative program. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

New Doctors in Twin Rivers Health District 
 
Ms. Stanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The enthusiasm of 
the member from Swift Current is contagious. I have two pieces 
of good news from Lloydminster constituency. First it rained 
last week. I think it was rain. It’s been so long, Mr. Speaker, 
that I forgot what rain looked like. We need more of course but 
it’s a good start. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I am happy to report that since December the 
Twin Rivers Health District in my area has attracted five new 
doctors. Four of them live in my hometown of Maidstone but 
they all work around the district. These doctors are a very 
welcome addition to our communities. And I want to welcome 
them by name on behalf of my constituents. 
 
Dr. J.J. Pretorius arrived in December of last year. Dr. Annette 
Viljoen came in January, as did Dr. Gavin Van De Venter. Dr. 
Hilda Peplar and my doctor, Dr. Katherine Meyer, completed 
the list, having set up practice last month. 
 
Putting funding into rural doctor recruitment did work. And I 
want to . . . I’m thankful that as a government we listened to our 
rural district health boards. 
 
Total resident physicians in the Twin Rivers Health District is 
now nine. A warm welcome to our new doctors, and they tell 
me that they are enjoying rural Saskatchewan and the folks who 
live there. I don’t blame them. I love rural Saskatchewan too. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Battlefords Business Excellence Awards 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last evening I was 
pleased to be present at the Sixth Annual Battlefords Business 
Excellence Awards. This prestigious event is presented by the 
Battlefords Chamber of Commerce, the city of North 
Battleford, and the town of Battleford. 
 
It honours business excellence in the following categories: the 
Heritage Award which was given to Ulmer Chev Olds after 83 
years of history in the Battlefords; the Property Appearance to 
the North Battleford Dairy Queen; New Business to the Garden 
Market IGA, Community Involvement to Battleford Furniture, 
Young Entrepreneur to Rae Ann Remeshylo-Barclay; Customer 
Service to Mark’s Work Wearhouse, and Business of the Year 
to Battleford Furniture. 
 
Each winner was presented with a replica antique desk specially 
created by master craftsman Stan Wychopen from Battleford. 
 
This event is an evening of celebration of business excellence, 
and I would like to congratulate the participants, the sponsors 
— SaskTel, Battlefords Credit Union, Royal Bank, SGI, 
SaskEnergy, SaskPower, and Whirlpool Ltd. 
 



May 5, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 1073 

Congratulations for another successful BBEX (Battlefords 
Business Excellence Awards). It was a very upbeat mood, Mr. 
Speaker. In fact they even applauded the Deputy Premier. 
 

SGI Donates Uncut Eyeglass Lenses 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Monday our 
Minister responsible for Crown Investments Corporation helped 
SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) make an unusual, a 
valuable, and a very worthwhile and lasting contribution to the 
Third World. 
 
SGI presented $22,800 worth of uncut eye glasses to Operation 
Eyesight Universal. It’s an organization that distributes 
eyeglasses in the Third World to needy recipients. 
 
SGI came by these lenses as a result of a waterline rupture at 
Prairie Opthalmics in Saskatoon. The lenses were soaked but 
far from ruined. They just could no longer be sold as new. And 
SGI stepped in and found a way, Mr. Speaker, to put those 
lenses to great use. 
 
Operation Eyesight Universal is a charitable organization that 
distributes glasses to many people. It also runs projects to 
restore eyesight to the poor and to prevent blindness in children. 
 
It’s moving to see firsthand the evidence of Saskatchewan’s 
common sense, caring, and sharing efforts, on behalf of so 
many people whose needs are all too often not met. God bless 
the great people at SGI that made this happen. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

School Safety Patrol Week 
 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
very happy to rise today on behalf of the Saskatchewan Party in 
recognition of School Safety Patrol Week. Mr. Speaker, safety 
patrollers are a familiar sight around any school ground, with 
their reflective vests, stop sign paddles, and the well-known 
sound of their whistles. They stand on guard and they are on a 
mission to keep their fellow students safe. 
 
There are many reasons why kids become safety patrollers, but 
most importantly, Mr. Speaker, it gives them a sense of purpose 
and that they are contributing to the well-being of the students 
and their communities. 
 
For sixty years school patrollers have helped students get to and 
from school safely. I would like to congratulate all of the safety 
patrollers who, regardless of inclement weather, are out at their 
post ensuring the safety of their fellow students. 
 
On behalf of the official opposition, I would like to wish all of 
the patrollers the best of luck, and enjoy your weekend of 
activities at this year’s jamboree. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskEnergy Natural Gas Network in Rosetown 
 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Speaker, there’s even more good 
news from rural Saskatchewan today. In addition to beating the 

pants off Alberta and watching the rain fall where it hasn’t 
fallen for a long time, I want to celebrate a small event that 
happened in Rosetown when the Deputy Premier came and 
joined us for the opening of a new partnership. He was there to 
celebrate the opening of a SaskEnergy natural gas network 
location in Rosetown with an open house at M. E. Cook and 
Son, Ltd. 
 
The SaskEnergy network was formed in June of 1998 and now 
has 64 members province-wide. Members are independent 
natural gas retailers and contractors who offer services like 
natural gas appliance and equipment sales, installations and 
in-store financing for these items. This will make it easier for 
customers to enjoy the advantages of natural gas service. Ron 
Hay is the owner of the new location and says being part of the 
network gives his customers more choice and flexibility. 
 
I want to congratulate Ron Hay and his staff on becoming an 
important part of the SaskEnergy natural gas network. They’re 
certainly showing their commitment to bringing enhanced 
customer service to the people of rural Saskatchewan around 
Rosetown. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Lake Diefenbaker Potato Corporation 
 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today my question is for the minister for Sask Water or his 
designate. Mr. Minister, the $8 million you lost on the Lake 
Diefenbaker Potato deal means this year’s $8 million budget is 
shot. The surplus is gone. It means the NDP is now running a 
deficit and it’s hard to say how much more money the NDP has 
poured into this ill-fated potato adventure. 
 
First it was your hare-brained scheme to buy a Third World 
power company in Guyana, and whoops, $4 million down the 
tube, Mr. Speaker. Then you forgot to read the Channel Lake 
sales contract before you signed it and Saskatchewan taxpayers 
were out another $15 million. Now you’ve blown $8 million or 
more, Mr. Speaker, more on a company you knew was in 
serious financial difficulty. Some reports say the NDP has 
invested as much as $23 million into a potato storage operation 
in the Lake Diefenbaker area. 
 
Is that true, Mr. Minister? How much money has the NDP 
invested through SPUDCO (Saskatchewan Potato Utility 
Development Company) in potato storage facilities? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to put some 
facts on the table here about this particular issue. And I know 
the members opposite have difficulty with that but let’s start 
with some facts. 
 
The Lake Diefenbaker operation was an independent operation 
with local and outside investors. It wasn’t the Government of 
Saskatchewan involved alone. It was a partnership. The federal 
government was there through Farm Credit Corporation. The 
province was there. The private sector was there through the 



1074 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1999 

Royal Bank. 
 
And I think the reason that all of these partners were working 
together was to diversify the Saskatchewan economy, to take 
advantage of the fact that there was irrigated land there and that 
we should be adding more value to that land. 
 
And I will say to the member opposite, we will continue to 
work with local people and with other partners like the federal 
government to diversify the economy of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Madam 
Minister, we saw what happened when you got involved in the 
hog industry. The bottom fell out. Many investors lost their 
shirts that had been in there for years. Now we see exactly the 
same thing in the potato industry, Madam Minister. Because of 
expensive, overly high cost of buildings that you put up out 
there, you help drive the potato market out of business out 
there. 
 
Madam Minister, yesterday the minister said that Lake 
Diefenbaker Potato company failed because of depressed seed 
potato prices. Did it ever occur to your government that it’s 
interference in the market that caused the price to drop in the 
first place? 
 
Madam Minister, you fuelled the big expansion on the 
production side of the potato industry, then you dumped the . . . 
(inaudible) . . . potato production on the market at once. What 
did the NDP think was going to happen? Potato prices dropped 
like a rock. 
 
Madam Minister, will you admit the NDP contributed to the 
drop in potato prices by flooding the market? And will you 
admit the NDP’s mismanagement of the potato industry has 
devastated many small investors and farmers in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, what these members 
don’t know about economic development is absolutely 
frightening. Just think about this logic for a minute. 
Saskatchewan produces a lot of oil as well. So does that mean if 
we open a few extra oil wells in the province, the price of oil is 
going to tumble? Saskatchewan is a major partner . . . a major 
producer of grain products. Does that mean if we seed some 
extra grain in this province, the price of grain is going to 
tumble? 
 
These members don’t even realize that we in this province are 
building an economy that can compete on a global basis. We’re 
into a global marketplace. We’re building a new Saskatchewan 
that can compete in the global marketplace. These folks are 
going to take us back to some weird and wonderful other world. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Madam 
Minister, I pray that you stay clear of the oil business or they’ll 
be probably going under with your record. 
 
Madam Minister, potato growers in the Lake Diefenbaker area 
are worried about today’s future. Thanks to the NDP’s bungling 

many families are wondering how they’re going to pay next 
month’s bills. Many local investors have lost thousands and 
thousands of dollars and they’re wondering about what will 
happen to the potato storage facilities that you’ve built over the 
last few years. 
 
Madam Minister, what is the status of the other potato 
operations in the Lake Diefenbaker area? Now that your 
government has devastated the potato industry, what plans have 
you made for the existing potato storage facilities? What can 
you tell hundreds of small investors and broken farm families 
that have bet their life savings on broken NDP promises? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, to the member 
opposite. Of course anybody in this province who ventures into 
business and has difficulty, we sympathize with. So to that 
extent we sympathize with what has happened here. 
 
We have made a commitment. We are working in this 
government with local investors, local communities — the 
federal government is a partner — to diversify the 
Saskatchewan economy. 
 
And I want to say to the members opposite, what exactly are 
they going to do with this economy? They don’t want to go into 
potatoes; they’re not into hogs. I looked at their supposed 
economic development plan — not one word about forestry, 
where we got more than half a billion dollars of private sector 
investment. What exactly is their plan? 
 
We’re going to diversify this economy, we’re going to work 
with local folks, we’re going to work with the federal 
government, and we’re going to create jobs for Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Highway Maintenance 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my question today is 
for the Minister of Highways. Madam Minister, last fall the 
Saskatchewan Party launched our worst highway in 
Saskatchewan contest, and there was a lot of interest in the 
contest. In fact we’ve received over 300 entries and 105 
different stretches of highway were nominated. Mr. Speaker, 
that’s a lot of bad highways. 
 
Madam Minister, today we are announcing the three finalists. 
The three highways which received the most votes are: 
Highway No. 56 from Indian Head to Katepwa; Highway No. 8 
from Moosomin to Storthoaks; and Highway 349 from Junction 
6 to Junction 38. 
 
Madam Minister, last year we invited you to be a judge in our 
worst highway contest, and we again extend that offer. Madam 
Minister, will you join the member from Cannington and 
myself next week as we go judging which of these three 
highways is the worst highway in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think as the 
Minister of Highways and Transportation, I have been the judge 
of the highways in this province. And that’s why, one of the 
reasons our whole government has made a commitment of $2.5 



May 5, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 1075 

billion over 10 years . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — . . . to invest in our highways and 
transportation system. That’s why, since we’ve had balanced 
budgets, we’ve been able to increase funding into Highways 
and Transportation. 
 
So we’ve recognized the need for more dollars into our 
highway system; we’ve recognized the need for good planning; 
we’ve recognized the need for partnerships, which we have at 
the municipal-provincial, which we’re still calling on the 
federal government to come in with funding for the highway 
system too. So I recognize the needs of our highway system in 
this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, a further question to the Minister of 
Highways. Well, Madam Minister, we’re sorry that you won’t 
be joining us or don’t want to join us as we go and judge these 
highways. I guess I can understand that, though. You’re 
probably going to be at home trying to save your seat. After all 
I think, Mr. Speaker, the Madam Minister can find a number of 
worst highways in her own constituency. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Madam Minister, though, we do have 
another individual who has agreed — a road builder — who has 
agreed to come and join us in this judging contest. 
 
Madam Minister, we’ve had eight years to fix the highways — 
you’ve had eight years — they’ve gotten worse and worse, and 
your time is nearly up. I guess it’s going to be up to the 
Saskatchewan Party to fix the highways . . . (inaudible) . . . 
Madam Minister, will you now admit that your NDP 
government policy has destroyed the highway system in this 
province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Like I said, we 
put a plan together with more dollars and good planning. And 
actually the highway that was identified the most on their 
contest, that’s the highway that we’re fixing and doing a 
tremendous amount of work on this very year. The other two, 
the other two highways in which they have mentioned, we’re 
continuing to put dollars there also. 
 
But I think the people of this province if they want to judge the 
worst pothole, they know very well the worst pothole — it was 
the debt that these Tories built as they sold off the highway 
equipment, ran deficit after deficit, $2 million a day on interest 
payments. They cut the fuel tax. 
 
And it’s kind of interesting, we talk about the fuel tax . . . gave 
away the equipment, cut the fuel tax so I don’t think the people 
of Saskatchewan are going to back to their plan for fixing the 
roads because they know they’re the ones that created the 
potholes in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Agriculture Income Disaster Assistance Program 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Agriculture. Mr. Minister, the 
evidence continues to pile up that your AIDA (Agricultural 
Income Disaster Assistance) program is failing Saskatchewan 
farmers. The Canadian Federation of Independent Business 
recently polled its agri-business members on your NDP 
government’s AIDA program, and do you know what these 
business people said? You guessed it — they said your program 
stinks. 
 
Mr. Minister, in fact only one in eight agri-business people said 
that your AIDA program is going to do anything to help 
Saskatchewan farmers. And information out of Ottawa says it’s 
so bad that only 500 farmers have even bothered to apply. 
 
Your NDP farm policy is failing farmers, is failing the 
businesses that they patronize, and it’s failing the workers that 
work in agri-business. Mr. Minister, when are you going to not 
take the advice of all your backbench hacks and listen to the 
business community and scrap this AIDA program? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I think we should inject a few more facts into this. The 
numbers that he says one in eight, well of the 2,300 people that 
were polled — and I agree that there’s a problem with this 
program and that’s not a surprise —but 18 per cent of the 
people replied, so he’s trying to insinuate that this goes right 
across the piece. 
 
Now the point to be made here, Mr. Speaker, is this: we all 
know this program isn’t a great program; we all know why we 
went into it. Let me read something though. This says that 
government should never — skill-testing question — 
government should never become involved directly in business 
through grants, loans, or direct investments. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Who said that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Saskatchewan Party resolution — 
Tories. Tory resolutions. They are up here criticizing AIDA 
when their policy says: don’t give them anything. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Polling by Crown Corporations 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, two 
sure signs that an election is near is that the cabinet rats have all 
left or are leaving the sinking ship, and the NDP crank up the 
spending on friends and insiders. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it appears that the NDP have made polling a 
SaskEnergy priority. According to a freedom of information 
request by the Liberals, SaskEnergy spent $22,400 to CanWest 
Opinion in 1996. One year later the public opinion budget 
jumped by almost 200 per cent. Once again, a year closer to the 
election — double the amount. For 1998, this trend could show 
probably another 3 or 400 per cent but you won’t give us those 
numbers. 



1076 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1999 

Mr. Speaker, in the Liberal’s plan — Priorities 1999 — we say 
that we’ll get these priorities right. Saskatchewan people don’t 
want more NDP propaganda. Instead of money on hacks and 
flacks, we put money toward students, health care, highways, 
and saving rural Saskatchewan grain elevators. 
 
To the Premier, to the Premier — when are you going to stop 
using taxpayers’ money for public relations and rewarding your 
NDP hacks and flacks, and start dealing with the people’s 
priority of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I understand why the 
member from Wood River is so agitated today after a very 
successful nomination for the NDP in Shaunavon where Robert 
Anderson . . . where one of his good friends and former 
supporters, Robert Anderson, ran and was successful in getting 
the NDP nomination. He has been irritable ever since. 
 
But I want to say to the member opposite, when it comes to 
SaskEnergy, what you have to know is that your caucus and the 
official opposition party — the Tories — have been pushing for 
opening up to competition for our Crown corporations, and 
SaskEnergy is now involved in full competition. 
 
And in order to be competitive — knowing what the client 
wants and needs — market research is extremely important. I 
want to say as well that the new program of getting together 
with an alliance with 64 private sector companies throughout 
Saskatchewan, and doing the market research, and preparing for 
competition is hugely important. 
 
I know the member opposite doesn’t like that because he would 
prefer that the Crown corporations would fail, but advertising 
and market research will become more important, not less, as 
we move into full competition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Speaker, you would think that a 
Crown monopoly like SaskPower wouldn’t have to spend 
thousands of dollars on opinion research. What would a Crown 
monopoly like SaskPower ask? Are the rates too high? Well of 
course the people of this province think the rates are too high. 
 
You see, Mr. Speaker, according to a freedom of information 
request obtained by our caucus reveals that in 1996, SaskPower 
used the firm of Anderson/Fast to conduct market research 
polling worth 4,200 bucks. A year later that polling went up by 
1,700 per cent to 75,000 — 1,700 per cent. That’s quite a jump. 
 
It’s amazing no matter if it’s SaskPower’s 50 per cent increase 
in public relations, Phoenix Advertising 50 per cent increase in 
their advertising revenue from SOCO (Saskatchewan 
Opportunities Corporation), or the $200,000 increase to 
Phoenix received from SaskEnergy. 
 
The closer we get to an election, the more the NDP spends on 
polling firms, hacks, and flacks. You don’t need to spend 
75,000 bucks to find out power rates are too high. 
 
My question to the Premier: you attack these old Devine Tories 
for the way they ripped off . . . 
 

The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. The hon. member 
has been extremely lengthy in his preamble and I . . . Order. 
Order, order. Order. And . . . Order. I’ll ask the hon. member 
now to go directly to his question. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Premier, you attacked the Devine 
Tories for the way they ripped off Saskatchewan taxpayers. 
You run the same kind of government. When are you going to 
get your priorities straight, the priorities of the people of this 
province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I say to the member 
opposite that we now have full competition in SaskTel and, as 
you know, that the vast majority of advertising for the whole 
government, for the whole government, is in SaskTel and 
largely to do with competition. I think we now spend $11 
million in SaskTel on advertising which is the equivalent of all 
the rest of the Crowns and all government departments. And the 
reason we do that is because advertising — in order to keep 93 
per cent of the people supporting SaskTel — is usually 
important. 
 
You can’t have it both ways. You can’t have it both ways. You 
can’t say, open up to competition — and we’ve opened up to 
competition — and then say, by the way don’t advertise. So I 
tell you, my friend, there will be more marketing done by the 
Crowns because your attempt to do in the Crown corporations 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair is having some difficulty being 
able to hear the answer being provided because the hon. 
member who asked the question was commenting constantly 
while the answer was being provided. And the Chair . . . Order. 
And the Chair . . . Order. And the Chair asks for co-operation of 
all members of the House on both sides. 
 
Does the Deputy Premier wish to conclude his answer? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I just wanted to say to 
the member opposite that he knows full well that the federal 
government operates many Crown corporations, many Crown 
corporations. I would ask the member to check with Mr. 
Goodale to see how much Farm Credit Corporation spends on 
advertising or market research and he will know full well that 
Crown corporations, like any corporations, in order to meet the 
needs of the consumers, need to do market research and 
advertising. 
 

Highway Maintenance and Branch Line Abandonment 
 

Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The highways in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, are crumbling and the NDP is 
doing nothing. No. 2 Highway from Findlater to Watrous is 
breaking up and the NDP won’t even help keep the rail line that 
runs parallel to it. The NDP has said as well that the cost of 
road repair will rise dramatically if a rail line goes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Highway 42, 44, and 15 are a disaster and yet the 
NDP ignore the fact that the CP (Canadian Pacific) line from 



May 5, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 1077 

Broderick to Moose Jaw is under review. If this rail line is 
abandoned, then highways like No. 19 will completely 
disintegrate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Madam Minister, when are you going to step up to 
the plate and come up with a real transportation plan for 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Speaker, I am glad to have the 
opportunity to speak to this because we do have a plan, as I was 
saying earlier here. We’ve got dollars that were committed over 
10 years — the $2.5 billion — and also the plan of good 
planning, which is certainly part of working with 
municipalities, working with producers. We have a short line 
advisory unit. We’re doing a lot on the branch line 
abandonment issue in which really as a province, we don’t have 
the jurisdiction. 
 
It seems very interesting to me as we work with communities in 
this province, trying to save branch lines, trying to have short 
lines be viable, the government that has the jurisdiction actually 
starts with a big L — Liberal. And actually as of today, we’re 
making calls again to some federal MPs (Member of 
Parliament), the Minister of Transportation, on lines that are 
very important to this province, whether that’s P.A. (Prince 
Albert) to Birch Hills or some of the lines that the member just 
opposite said. 
 
Because what they are putting forward on branch line 
abandonment when we’re . . . When there’s a review and Estey 
even identified the difficulties at the federal level and which 
needs to be fixed, we should have that moratorium on branch 
line abandonment. I haven’t heard the members opposite ask for 
it. They’ve got their federal cousins in Ottawa. Where are the 
Liberals at? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Highway Accident at Balcarres 
 

Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, On Saturday, May 1, a young lady 
travelling east on No. 10 Highway was signalling a left turn into 
a service station at Balcarres. A vehicle travelling in the same 
direction hit her car from behind, causing very serious injuries 
to occupants of both vehicles. 
 
My point is going to be with this question, is the inaction of the 
government opposite in attending to some very serious 
situations that people have brought to their attention and they 
don’t listen. 
 
In November, I alerted the minister of potential dangers on that 
highway through Balcarres. The town had requested on 
previous occasions to have a speed limit. The minister replied to 
me that her officials would do more studies, do more counts this 
summer, and on and on. 
 
Six people have died in car accidents in that particular area over 
the years. Madam Minister, what are you waiting for? We don’t 
need to have any more studies. People have lived there for years 
that have seen what’s happening. 

There’s additional B-train traffic, heavy truck traffic, vehicular 
traffic; summer traffic is coming along. Why don’t you act 
immediately? What are you going to do? Wait until somebody 
gets killed on that stretch again? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1430) 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Speaker, we are always concerned 
about accidents. And when there is an accident we always do 
review the circumstance of the highway conditions and the 
review of safety on that type of issue. 
 
I did receive a letter from the member opposite and we have 
already acted on that in that the review that has taken place. We 
have existing traffic accident data. They’re pulling some of that 
together and there will be a meeting set up with the town of 
Balcarres and others in that area in the next four to six weeks. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

High-Speed Chases 
 

Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 
the Minister of Justice. Mr. Minister, earlier this year a driver 
fleeing police caused the senseless and tragic deaths of a 
Rosetown couple. 
 
Not every high-speed chase results in tragedy but every 
high-speed chase has the potential for tragedy. Some people 
look at trying to outrun the police as a game. It’s not a game. It 
is a dangerous, deadly activity, and government needs to send a 
clear message that it will not be tolerated. 
 
Mr. Minister, today I will be introducing legislation that will 
ensure mandatory jail time for anyone who leads police on a 
high-speed chase. The Saskatchewan Party Bill would impose a 
minimum sentence of three months for first-time offenders. Mr. 
Minister, will you support that legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to high-speed 
chases, this would certainly involve the criminal justice system 
and amendments to the Criminal Code. And I don’t know 
whether the legislation the member is referring to would be a 
matter for provincial jurisdiction or federal jurisdiction. But 
certainly this government will listen to the suggestions that the 
opposition has because this is a very serious matter that we need 
to take very seriously. 
 
And we haven’t seen the legislation the member is proposing 
but certainly we will look at the legislation and obtain advice 
from the law officers of the Crown with respect to what is a 
matter that is serious. And we share the member’s concern 
about this matter. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you again, Mr. Speaker. Well I would 
hope that the Justice department of this government would 
know where it belongs. It is a traffic offence and we’re going to 
keep it that way and we’re going to deal with it. 
 



1078 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1999 

But the question is, why doesn’t Saskatchewan take a 
leadership role this time? You were slow to act on the issue of 
child prostitution. You are slow to act on the issue of high speed 
chases. How many more senseless tragedies have to occur 
before you consider this an issue? 
 
Will you support the Saskatchewan Party Bill calling for zero 
tolerance for those who try to outrun the police? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, if we do recognize indeed as 
the member says that these are serious matters, then I’m sure 
the member would agree that at times we need to invoke the 
Criminal Code of Canada, Mr. Speaker, because that is how you 
deal with serious crimes and serious matters. 
 
We will continue to take the advice of the law officers of the 
Crown as to how to take these matters most seriously, which I 
would suggest with respect to the member, it is sometimes more 
appropriate to invoke the Criminal Code of Canada rather than 
provincial traffic laws. 
 
Having said that, if there are appropriate instances where a 
provincial law should be amended, we will certainly take the 
advice of the members opposite, examine what they propose 
with respect to the provincial traffic laws, and have a look at it, 
Mr. Speaker. Because we very much share the view of the 
member that these are serious matters and we need to do 
everything we can to prevent such occurrences from happening 
in the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 203 — The Education and Health Tax 
Amendment Act, 1999 

 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
move that Bill No. 203, The Education and Health Tax 
Amendment Act, 1999 be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 207 — The Highway Traffic 
Amendment Act, 1999 

 
Mr. Heppner: — Yes, I would like to move the first reading of 
Bill No. 207, The Highway Traffic Amendment Act, 1999 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to 
introduce, by leave of the Assembly, a motion of condolence. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

CONDOLENCES 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At the end 
of my remarks I’ll move, seconded by the Leader of the 
Opposition, my colleague the member from Canora-Pelly, a 

motion now that leave has been granted, a motion which in 
effect says this: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of this Assembly and 
expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 
made to his community, his constituency, and to the 
province. 
 
William Z. Neudorf, who passed away this morning, was 
a member of this Legislative Assembly from 1986 until 
1995, representing the constituency of Rosthern for the 
Progressive Conservative Party. 
 
Mr. Neudorf was born on January 1, 1940 in Neuanlage 
and received his early schooling in Hague, Saskatchewan. 
He continued his education at the University of 
Saskatchewan, convocating with bachelor degrees in arts 
and science and in education. 
 
On July 18, 1964, Mr. Neudorf married Alma Sawatzky 
and together they had four children. 
 
In his private life, Bill Neudorf was first a teacher and later 
a farmer. His association with schools in the Saskatchewan 
Valley area extended over 20 years and included terms on 
the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation provincial area 
bargaining team and as chairman of the PTA 
(parent-teacher association). 
 
Then in 1979 he purchased a small hog farm. The farm 
became the focus of his attentions as he expanded it to 
encompass a 315 sow-farrow-to-finish operation. 

 
Mr. Neudorf’s concern for the well-being of others in his 
community was evidenced by his participation in a variety 
of organizations. He served as a municipal councillor in the 
rural municipality of Rosthern, as the fire chief for the 
village of Hague, as president of the Saskatchewan Valley 
Hockey League, and as the vice-chairman of the 
Saskatchewan Pork Producers Marketing Board. The 
Hague Mennonite Conference Church also benefited from 
Mr. Neudorf’s membership and his tenures on the 
executive and as a Sunday school teacher. 
 
Mr. Neudorf was first elected to the Saskatchewan 
Legislature, as I said, in 1986. He successfully retained the 
constituency in the 1991 general election before retiring 
from political life in 1995. During his two terms in office, 
Mr. Neudorf sat on both sides of the Assembly and also in 
cabinet, where he held the Social Services portfolio from 
October 3, 1989 until November 1, 1991. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in recording its own deep sense of loss and 
bereavement, this Assembly expresses its most sincere 
sympathy with members of the bereaved family. 
 

That is the substance of the motion which I shall so move, and 
I’m kind of doing it in an awkward fashion, but let me close 
with a few personal comments. 
 
I didn’t get to know Bill Neudorf as well as I would’ve liked to. 
When I returned to the House in 1986 and when he was first 



May 5, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 1079 

elected in 1986, it so happened that in 1987 I assumed the 
leadership of the opposition of the party of the day, and a lot of 
time was in the House and a lot of time was outside the House. 
But in my dealings and relationships with Bill Neudorf, one got 
the impression — as the record of the motion indicates — of a 
very deeply religious man who held very strong principles and 
strong values and ideals. And certainly a person who had a 
genuine interest in people, as the record of activity in the 
community shows. 
 
I liked Bill Neudorf. He was a good debater; he was an 
above-board debater. Sometimes in this House we all — or 
most of us, I’ll put it that way — tend to sometimes slip into a 
form of debate which doesn’t elevate the Chamber, but I don’t 
really recall an incident where Bill did anything except speak in 
very civil, decent terms and tones. 
 
It’s not that he didn’t believe passionately in ideas and his ideas 
and in his particular point of view — he certainly felt that. But 
he did it in a way which I think brought a lot of grace and a lot 
of general benefit to the Assembly and to the eyes of the public 
as far as this Assembly is concerned. 
 
At age 59 it’s a tragic loss of a person who had many more 
years yet to contribute to his community. Our heartfelt 
sympathies have to go to the families, his children, wife, 
friends, colleagues — this was a person who really was a very 
distinguished Saskatchewan resident. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s a sad day, and by leave of the Assembly, 
seconded by the Leader of the Opposition, I so move this 
motion. Thank you very much. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
certainly a pleasure to stand in this Assembly — if I can say it’s 
a pleasure — to say a few words in memory of Mr. Neudorf, a 
very close and personal friend and a colleague in this Assembly. 
 
Bill and I were elected first in 1986, and I remember meeting 
Bill for the first time, and when Bill walked into caucus his 
stature alone just caught our attention. And Bill was the type of 
person that while as the Premier acknowledged he could be 
very quiet at times, he could also become very boisterous. It 
reminds me of some of the members in this Assembly and past 
members as well. 
 
Mr. Neudorf and I actually boarded together for a number of 
years — we rented a 2-bedroom suite. I can remember the first 
time when Bill and I after we had been in a . . . renting a house 
from a pastor in town I knew and they had indicated that they 
were selling their house and we’d have to find other lodging. 
And I talked to an elderly lady who had invited us to come to 
her home and she had indicated to me and she said, you know 
I’ve had so many boarders for so many years I’m not exactly 
sure if I want more boarders. But she said I tell you what, you 
come on over and we’ll see how it works out. 
 
Bill . . . I’ll call him Bill, actually arrived at the suite before I 
did and he was sitting downstairs and I arrived at the suite and 
we were chatting away for a few minutes before we called it an 
evening and a knock on the basement suite door and our 
landlady came in and said, “There’s some bread in the fridge 
but I forgot to bring you a toaster. You may want to toast your 

bread and have a piece of toast at night.” And, Mr. Speaker, that 
ended up . . . today that’s the member from — the current 
member from Rosthern continue and I continue to reside in that 
suite. 
 
Mr. Neudorf had a real love for his family. He had a love for 
this Assembly. He enjoyed debate and he enjoyed his family 
with a passion. I can recall him talking of the exploits of his 
sons, both in hockey and in baseball, and how proud he was of 
his daughters. 
 
When it comes to the debate in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, 
we’ll all remember, especially in his years as the opposition 
House Leader, jumping to his feet, “Mr. Speaker, point of 
order!” and he’d be flipping through the Beauchesne’s to find 
out exactly the right context he should be addressing that point 
of order in. And certainly, Mr. Speaker, I think we all enjoyed 
his accomplishments in the Assembly and the way he conducted 
himself in the debate. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, last Thursday I took a moment to go and 
visit Bill. And as I was driving to Saskatoon it was my intent to 
visit him at home. But I thought, boy, I’d better call home. I 
called the house and there wasn’t an answer. That surprised me 
a little bit, but knowing that Bill wasn’t very well, I decided I’d 
better do some checking and I happened to get a hold of his son 
and was informed that as of noon last Thursday he had been 
admitted to the palliative care ward of the Saskatoon St. Paul’s 
Hospital. 
 
(1445) 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it was . . . To walk into that room, and we 
had become close friends, and just to see the gleam in his eye as 
I walked in the room, and having had those moments to cherish 
and to sit together and discuss it. And that time as well, Mr. 
Speaker, Bill said to me, he said, you know, as much as I enjoy 
the time I’ve had with my family since leaving politics, he said, 
I still miss that Assembly. He said, I wish I could still walk 
down to the Assembly and sit on the floor and tell every one of 
the members how to run that place, and tell the Speaker, and 
just inform them how much I enjoyed the debate and would like 
to be there. And he asked me to pass that on and I pass it on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while we’re well aware of the debate in this 
Assembly and well aware of how Mr. Neudorf appreciated his 
family, there’s a few little funny things that come to my 
attention as well. 
 
Like the time when caucus, we were sitting there in caucus one 
morning and Mr. Neudorf came in and explained the exploits of 
rescuing his tractor after it had gone into that massive dugout 
that he had created. And putting on his scuba gear and hooking 
on the cables to pull his tractor and manure spreader back out of 
the dugout. 
 
Or the time when he was leaving the Assembly on a Friday 
afternoon and as he was on his way home to his community and 
farm, he gets a call that his hog operation is on fire. And his 
quick call into caucus and said, can you get a hold of the 
Department of the Environment? I need a water bomber right 
now. 
 



1080 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1999 

As he was driving home, he called his wife and he said, I’ve 
located a water bomber, they’re going to be coming over shortly 
to put a fire retardant on the fire. And kept them informed by 
his cell phone and finally he said, there’s a bomber within two 
minutes, get everybody out of the way. 
 
And just chatting to people afterwards, they said it was an 
awesome sight. All of a sudden, all these people dispersing as 
this bomber comes floating in, dropping the fire retardant that 
actually controlled the blaze. 
 
Those are the types of things that Mr. Neudorf enjoyed. He just 
enjoyed . . . he was a man of action. He demanded taking 
action. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we in this Assembly and those of us who had the 
privilege of sitting here when Mr. Neudorf was a member will 
appreciate his involvement, his passion for the Legislative 
Assembly, his commitment to his constituents and to his family. 
 
On behalf of the Saskatchewan Party and myself, I’d like to 
extend to his wife, Alma; their oldest son, Dean and his wife, 
Brenda, daughter, Latrissa, and son, Cody; son, Duane and his 
wife, Carissa; daughter, Cheryl and son, Tony, and daughter, 
Cindy, our deepest regrets and sympathy. Our prayers are with 
you at this time in your lives. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I also consider it an honour to 
speak briefly at this time. I grew up close and in similar 
communities to Bill Neudorf, and in that part of the country, the 
valley area, he’s affectionately known by everyone only as Bill 
Z. Bill and I taught in the same school. We hunted together. 
 
We have represented the same constituency in this Assembly, 
something, as has been mentioned before, he was extremely 
proud of for the time that he served his people, as I said, in this 
Assembly. He did everything with zest and with a lot of 
enthusiasm. And I would like to add in sending my and my 
constituency’s sympathy to the bereaved family. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for allowing me to 
express our condolences on behalf of the Liberal caucus. While 
I did not have the pleasure of sharing the legislature with Mr. 
Neudorf, I did see him in action from time to time on the 
television. And I have heard from his colleagues and friends, 
and it was very, very evident that he was in fact a very sincere 
and thoughtful man. 
 
His contributions to this Assembly and to his communities will 
be remembered for a long time because they were very, very 
numerous. He was a man of varied interests and talent, and yet I 
am told, his greatest aspiration was to honesty and integrity. 
Those who knew him refer to him as a kind and sincere person 
who will be missed in his community by all who know him. 
 
On behalf of my colleagues, my staff, and our families, and I’m 
sure, on everyone that saw Mr. Neudorf in action, knew him, 
our sincerest condolences to his family. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. What a very sad 
loss of a passionate, dynamic, capable, and determined person. I 
had the opportunity to get to know Bill, mostly because of — 
not just the workings of the House and how fascinated I was as 

a new member in 1991 and ’92 especially to see him as such a 
competent House Leader in action — but mostly because of the 
work that we did on different standing committees. 
 
Probably the most popular and intense one was the Standing 
Committee on Rules and Procedures. Much took place on that 
committee, Mr. Speaker, which was chaired by the former 
Speaker. We met for many, many hours, and some of the 
changes that came about as result — such changes as having 
member statements in this Assembly, limiting bell ringing — 
all of those things came about as a result of very intelligent 
discourse and a lot of fascinating debate. 
 
We had really wonderful discussions, but the moments that I 
remember most are Bill’s amazing smile and his great laugh. If 
there is such a thing — and I believe there is — Bill Neudorf 
was a terrific partisan. He was also a very proud father, a very 
proud family man and husband, and an extremely proud 
grandparent as we’ve seen evidenced in this very Assembly 
when his three-year-old granddaughter sat in the east gallery 
and he stood to tell everyone that she knew all of her alphabet 
as well as all of her numbers. There was no mistaking whose 
granddaughter this was, Mr. Speaker, because she had a head of 
just curly, curly hair — just like her grandpa did. 
 
I wish to simply add my condolences to those that have been so 
eloquently expressed by other members of the Assembly, but I 
also wish to provide to the family, a quote from Isaiah, which 
has given me much, much solace in times of sorrow and which I 
prefer to share with others in time of similar need. And it is: 
“See, I shall not forget you. I have carved you in the palm of 
my hand.” 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a privilege to join 
with other members in speaking to the passing of a good friend, 
Bill, who I served with during his total period here in the 
Assembly. And when the member from Moosomin called me 
this morning, I was on an aircraft to Yorkton, and I was 
shocked by the call and obviously disappointed and distressed 
as we are when we lose a friend. 
 
But I began to think about what it is about this place that makes 
it at one level so wonderful and at one level so terrible. But I 
think what Bill speaks to when he talks about coming back to 
this place is all about friendship. 
 
There really is a camaraderie and family that builds up not only 
within your own caucus, but within members at large that no 
one who has not served here can ever possibly understand. And 
I say that sincerely to all members, my own members of my 
caucus but to members opposite, that over the years there’s just 
a level of friendship that builds between members that really 
make us an interesting family. 
 
And Bill and I shared many, many common interests. And I 
remember the times when he was House Leader and I was 
House Leader on the other side, both in opposition and in 
government, the one thing you always knew about Bill Neudorf 
is that his word was his bond. 
 
And I don’t say this in any negative way to anyone else who 
was active as House leader. But when you make arrangements 
for House business, what you always knew when you dealt with 



May 5, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 1081 

Bill, that once he said something, whether it was written down 
or wasn’t written down, you could just count on his word as 
being the gospel. 
 
I remember very well the issue of the tractor in the dugout. I 
remember it very, very well. Because somehow we got a hold 
of a picture that appeared in the local newspaper of only the 
exhaust pipe of this wonderful big tractor sticking out of the 
dugout, and I don’t recall totally, but I think a picture of 
somebody in a scuba-diving suit getting ready to go and try to 
retrieve the tractor. 
 
Well anyway during question period, whenever it got tough, 
whether Bill was on the opposition side or the government side 
and you were under siege from Bill, one way you knew you 
could break the sequence is ask him, heckle him across the floor 
— Bill, why did you drive your tractor in the dugout? 
 
And Bill would inevitably start laughing. And he would have a 
difficult time then getting the questions going again, and you 
knew you would escape that day’s newspaper story if you could 
just get going on the tractor. 
 
Well I just want to say that Bill was extremely in favour of 
discipline at one hand, but extremely caring at another. And he 
was an interesting individual because he cared so much for 
people. 
 
And I just say that when he became Minister of Social Services, 
I think that we were all surprised at his ability to express the 
caring side of his personality. And I have here a clipping from 
The StarPhoenix of October 6, ’89, where he talks about his 
role in social services, and I quote when he says . . . he said: 
 

He intends to discuss the issue immediately with V.D. 
Martin, the new minister of families, talking about the 
issue of hunger.” 
 

And I quote, and he said: 
 

We can’t close our eyes to it (talking about hunger) 
certainly not. We are going to be taking a very, very close 
look at it in an effort to discover solutions.” 

 
And that one of the themes that he carried on was the issue of 
child hunger and the need to take better care, not only of our 
own kids, but kids in general. And that theme has developed, I 
think, into a wonderful theme throughout our province. 
 
And I just want to say through this medium to the family of Bill 
that he will be sincerely missed. And on behalf of my family, 
from Louise and I and our kids, to Bill’s family, and on behalf 
of our caucus, sincere sympathy and condolences to the family. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Speaker, I want to add my words of 
condolence to those of others to the family of Bill Neudorf 
today. This is the first time that I’ve had the tragedy of losing a 
colleague from the legislature, and while Bill and I had quite 
different views on politics, we had other common roots. 
 
We come from the same faith and church background, and we 
had to remind each other of that from time to time when we 
weren’t feeling as charitable as we ought towards each other. 

We also have a common root in farming and the hog business. 
And that brought an interesting reflection to my life when I 
became Minister of the Environment on the day when he picked 
up his cellphone and asked for a water bomber. Because that 
wasn’t a common request, and it was a little bit difficult to 
explain to the public afterwards. But I think that was Bill, a man 
of quick thinking and quick action, and . . . So the water 
bomber, rightly or wrongly, was ordered and it did its job and 
got back home and the fire went out and everybody was 
grateful, and . . . very much a reflection of who Bill was in 
terms of being a man of action. 
 
I’ve had the chance since Bill has left the legislature to meet 
him in other circumstances. My son has played for the Rosthern 
senior hockey team and his sons have played for the Hague 
senior hockey team, so a number of times in the last number of 
years we’ve had a chance to visit. 
 
I became aware of his illness this winter and Bill and I have had 
more than one good visit about his life here and about the life in 
the community, and all I can say is that Bill reflected in the . . . 
in every one of the engagements I had with him the spirit that 
others have said here — a man of great commitment and great 
charity, and a man whose efforts in the community will be 
missed now that his time is over. And I want to add my 
condolences to his family, thank you. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, again I ask leave of the 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — This is regarding the transmission? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I move seconded by the 
Leader of the Opposition, the member from Canora-Pelly, by 
leave of the Assembly: 
 

That the resolution just passed, together with the transcript 
of oral tributes to the memory of the deceased, be 
communicated to the bereaved family on behalf of this 
Assembly by Mr. Speaker. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
(1500) 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 44  The Midwifery Act 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I’ll begin by inviting the Minister of 
Health to introduce her official. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’m joined today 
by Drew Johnston, senior health professions analyst in the 
policy and planning branch, from the Department of Health. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Minister, Mr. 
Johnston, I’m delighted to see this Bill brought forward today. 



1082 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1999 

Myself and my caucus have been meeting with the midwives 
over the last couple of years and I’ve assured them that we are 
supportive. I didn’t realize that this was going to be a large Bill 
and it was going to start a new, I believe it’s called a college. 
And we’ll leave it in the hands of the government to know that 
this is the best way to proceed with it. 
 
I have a couple of questions starting with the number of people 
living in Saskatchewan right now who’d be currently qualified 
to call themselves midwives under this Act. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — There are four practising midwives in 
the province of Saskatchewan. In addition there may be a 
further six that would qualify to become midwives, and a 
further six may be obstetrical nurses. 
 
Ms. Draude: — How many of the provinces right now do 
allow midwifery? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Quebec, Ontario, Manitoba, and British 
Columbia. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Can you tell us what medical training or 
training in general midwives will require to carry on their duties 
in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — In Ontario there’s a four-year program; 
I believe it’s at McMaster in Hamilton. In fact I believe the 
Department of Health is providing a bursary for one 
Saskatchewan resident that is engaged in the program in 
midwifery at McMaster. 
 
We in the province are going to be looking, I gather, at all of 
the competencies that are necessary for midwifery. And it may 
be a combination of competencies from other jurisdictions or 
other countries, along with training and nursing. 
 
So all of this will have to be assessed and I know that that’s 
what the college is going to be engaged in. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Do you foresee training in midwifery in 
Saskatchewan at some time in the near future? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I understand that the western provinces 
are discussing the formation of a program not unlike — for 
example, Saskatchewan has a program of veterinary medicine 
where people from the west come to that program. In addition 
some of our citizens go to Manitoba or Alberta for speech and 
language therapy or occupational therapy. So it will be 
determined in the future where a program might be housed in 
the western provinces. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you very much, Madam Minister. Of 
course we’re all hoping that that will happen in Saskatchewan 
and if there’s something that we can do to make that happen, I 
imagine they will be. Can you . . . will midwives be required to 
carry an equivalent to a malpractice insurance like a physician 
has? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Yes they will. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Can you give me a general idea of what a 
midwife will charge for their services. 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I understand that the charge currently 
varies between 800 and $1,300. 
 
Ms. Draude: — I’m not sure what the cost of the service that a 
midwife provides, that is now provided by a doctor would be 
compared to what a midwife would charge. I would imagine 
you have that type of information. But is there thought given to 
saving the province money in the long run when you add the 
idea of wellness and the well-being of the mother and the child 
with the services of a midwife? Can the province save money 
by covering this under medicare? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — My understanding from other 
provinces that have legalized midwifery in their province that 
the experience inn other provinces indicates that midwifery 
adds to the overall cost of the health budget in that an individual 
may see a midwife but they may also see their family physician. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Probably in the beginning when it’s a new 
experience, it’s something new for mothers. It may, it may take 
a short time for people to understand that having a baby isn’t a 
process; it’s not a disease. It’s something that can be a very 
wonderful experience. And I wouldn’t think that it would be a 
long time before it became sort of a natural thing to do and 
would end up saving a lot of money. 
 
Has there been any studies done or any information received 
from places like England, where midwifery is a common thing, 
to show that it actually does save money? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I’m advised that in Ontario where the 
NDP introduced legalized midwifery, I believe, in the ’80s and 
midwifery, has been in operation in Ontario for several years 
now, that there is no indication that midwifery decreases the 
overall cost of the Health budget. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, well I guess about the only 
thing we can hope right now then is that there are enough 
women that use the services then they will understand that I 
believe it can save money. 
 
If you can . . . if you just add the direct cost of the hospital care 
when the baby is born, maybe that’s more money. But if you 
look at the overall costs when a mother is returning to see the 
doctor or baby’s coming back in because of a young mother 
maybe not being sure of procedures or the help that they can, 
they can get from a midwife, it’s probably difficult to look at all 
the costs. But I am confident that it probably would save 
money. 
 
Madam Minister, there’s one part of the Act that I talked to you 
about. And I brought it up because it alarmed me. And at the 
same time I did talk to some . . . one of the ladies on the 
midwife . . . I think it was their board or their group of women 
who looked at, at this Act — that is section 23 of the Act that 
has caused some concern when the section refers to invasive 
procedures. 
 
Can you tell me what the authorized procedures are that are 
outlined in this Act? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The bylaws will contain the details of 
the kind of invasive procedures or services that will be 



May 5, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 1083 

available. And invasive procedures that are envisaged are 
consistent with other provinces. 
 
They will involve inserting or removing an instrument, device, 
hand or finger beyond the narrowing of the body orifices during 
pregnancy, labour, and the postpartum period; taking blood 
samples from newborns by skin pricking, or from women from 
veins or by skin pricking. In addition, there could be the 
performing of episiotomies, amniotomies and repairing 
episiotomies and lacerations, not involving the anus, or the anal 
sphincter, rectum, urethra and paraurethral areas. So I hope 
that’s enough detail for you. 
 
I can assure you that there is no intention to perform abortions. 
Just so you’re clear, there’s no intention to perform abortions. 
And that is something that falls within the college of physicians 
and surgeons. This kind of procedure won’t be within the 
purview of the midwife. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, I was very, very sure that the 
. . . not only the government but that the midwives did not want 
this to fall under this Act. It’s something that I’m . . . I know a 
hundred per cent sure that we’re not looking at it. But I am just 
wondering if there’s some reason why we should . . . shouldn’t 
put in the amendment that I have forwarded to you talking 
about the termination of a pregnancy just to safeguard not only 
the government but to safeguard the midwives. Because we . . . 
I look at this procedure as something that is a great step forward 
for midwives. I believe firmly that it’s going to be good for 
everyone. 
 
And if we can put in just to underline and to give security to 
everybody that there is not going to be something that will 
sometime down the road by somebody that’s not connected 
with anything today, be able to look at this Act and say, well, I 
did this and I think it’s okay under the Act. And I’m just . . . I 
ask you to look at it and to consider it; it’s something that I 
believe could be good for all of us, and I’ll just leave it in your 
hands for now. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you. It’s not within a scope of 
practice for midwives. It’s not within the scope of practice for a 
registered nurse. This kind of a clause would not be found 
within The Registered Nurses Act. So I understand your 
concern, but I can assure you that this would create a precedent, 
we’d have to then look at putting this kind of a clause in other 
professional pieces of legislation. 
 
So I think that what we need to do here is just put on the record, 
the legislative record in Hansard, that the scope of practice for 
midwives will not include the termination of any pregnancy. 
 
(1515) 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, I think that I’m going to, 
when this clause comes, I’m going to bring up the amendment 
and it’ll be up to you to do whatever you want to with it. I 
would feel more secure, I think our caucus would feel more 
secure, if it was voted on. And maybe even by the mere fact that 
it was talked about, it will make sure that everyone is aware of 
what is and isn’t allowed. 
 
So right now I have no further questions, and I thank you very 

much. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would 
welcome Madam Minister and her officials this afternoon, and I 
would ask her to kindly address us on the debate of home 
delivery versus hospital delivery. I understand that home 
delivery is not part of the anticipated service here, and I would 
like her to just address us as to what are the principles involved, 
what are the issues involved, and why the government has come 
down on the side they have. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — This Act does envision home birth, and 
how home births will be handled will be contained within the 
draft bylaws that will go along with this legislation. 
 
Home births aren’t envisioned if there is multiple gestation, 
breech presentation, pre-term labour prior to 37 weeks of 
pregnancy, or post-term pregnancy of more than 42 weeks and 
that means 14 days past the estimated due date. So there will be 
a number of procedures that will be necessary in order for a 
birth to take place outside a hospital setting. And when I say 
outside of a hospital setting, I’m talking about at home. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — So then if I understand the minister right, if it 
is a low-risk pregnancy, the mother and midwife will have the 
option of requesting a home delivery. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — You’re correct. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — There is also of course the funding issue, 
Madam Minister. And while the practice of midwifery is being 
legalized, it of course is not being included as a basic insured 
service under our health plan. And you have already indicated 
to the member for Kelvington-Wadena that experience in other 
provinces is that midwifery tends to be an add-on as opposed to 
in place of other medical services in time of pregnancy. 
 
But I want to ask the minister if, insofar as she’s able to foretell, 
is the decision not to ensure this service a final one or is it a 
case that you want to start the midwifery profession in this 
province, say give it a couple of years, see how it goes, and then 
make a final determination as to whether it ought to be a basic 
insured service or otherwise? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — That’s correct. As I indicated, Quebec, 
Ontario, Manitoba, Alberta, and British Columbia have all 
legalized midwifery. And Ontario, Manitoba, and British 
Columbia either fund or intend to fund midwifery. We have 
certainly not closed the door to the notion of midwifery being 
an insured service under medicare. We want to see how it goes 
basically; how many people are interested in having the services 
of a midwife. 
 
I suspect that it will be quite popular. It certainly was a popular 
notion for women of my generation, and I understand that there 
are many younger people that are interested in having a midwife 
attend their birth and be involved in pre-natal care and 
post-natal care. But we have not at all closed the door to the 
notion of midwifery being an insured service for people in this 
province. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Back to the question of midwifery service 
being either an add-on or a replacement. May I ask the minister 



1084 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1999 

what her officials and the medical experts are saying in regard 
. . . is it possible at an early stage of pregnancy to confirm that 
this is a low-risk pregnancy that would maybe thereafter require 
less or no visits to the doctor? Or is the feeling that it would 
continue to be important, even where the services of a midwife 
are being engaged, that an expectant mother would continue to 
make regular doctor’s visits in addition to seeing the midwife? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — As I understand it, there are diagnostic 
tests that are done initially once the pregnancy is confirmed, as 
well there are diagnostic tests that are carried out during the 
duration of the pregnancy. And midwives are responsible 
people and know when there could be complications or there 
are complications. And we know that through the bylaw 
process, certainly, and through training and having experienced 
midwives, that they of course would not have a home birth if 
there were to be any kind of complications. 
 
So we’re quite encouraged by the work that’s been done with 
the midwives in the province of Saskatchewan, that home births 
will only be available to those people who have no 
complications during their pregnancy. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — And in conclusion if I may turn to the issue 
raised by the hon. member from Kelvington-Wadena, it’s my 
understanding that when a list of powers is given, then the 
absence of other references — in this case abortion — that the 
only assumption to be drawn from that would be that it’s not 
included. And to specifically state it is not included in fact 
would make it more confusing rather than more clear, just as 
. . . you know, the nursing profession Act doesn’t state they 
don’t do that. The dentist profession Act doesn’t state they 
don’t do that. 
 
Where there is a list of the things they are authorized to do, that 
is deemed to be an exhaustive list, and it certainly wouldn’t 
clarify anything to then create a negative list. Indeed, where you 
create a negative list, if you have not listed something on the 
negative list you might even get yourself into the position 
where it’s deemed to have been included by virtue of the fact 
that you have created a negative list, so that . . . My question of 
the minister is would her officials agree that a negative list 
would actually make the Bill less clear rather than more clear? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I’m advised by my official that it does 
in fact make the legislation more confusing, and what we want 
to do is have clear, concise legislation. And then obviously it’s 
important to have clear, concise bylaws and regulations that 
come out of legislation. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — And then finally, Mr. Chairman, your officials 
are satisfied that if there is a list of the powers and services 
granted by midwives, if something does not appear on that list, 
that settles that debate. It’s not one of the powers or services 
authorized. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Chairman, I indicated earlier the 
kinds of invasive procedures that were envisioned, and those 
will be the kind of invasive procedures that will be allowed 
once the bylaws are written. And so that will be the kind of 
scope of practice that midwives have. 
 
In addition, drug privileges similar to other provinces are being 

discussed with the Saskatchewan Pharmaceutical Association, 
and these drug privileges will be given as part of the provision 
of care for a midwife’s patient or client. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Minister, I just 
wanted to make a comment or two and to get your response to 
them. 
 
Madam Minister, invasive procedures are not really clarified in 
the Bill as it exists right now from what I understand. If they 
are, I think that’s good. But in order to make sure that there is 
distinctive clarity on what those procedures may or may not be, 
I think it’s incumbent upon the Assembly and to the benefit of 
everyone in the province to know clearly what those procedures 
may or may not be. And why we would not agree with the 
amendment from the member of Kelvington-Wadena is what’s 
not clear to me. 
 
It’s an invasive procedure that is now taking place in the 
province and throughout Canada, and I’m speaking of 
abortions. And I believe that in this case we need to distinctly 
and clearly place in the legislation that this procedure is not part 
of the invasive procedures that may be taking place. 
 
Rather than . . . or rather, contrary to your statement that it 
would add confusion, I believe that it would provide clarity. 
Could you comment on that, please? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Yes. I do just want to say this: that the 
kinds of invasive procedures that will be allowed will be 
contained in the bylaws and the regulations that go along with 
this Act. 
 
The member from North Battleford is quite correct. I’m advised 
by my official that what bylaws do is they indicate procedures 
that can be performed by a particular profession. If you are to 
place in legislation that that can’t be performed, what there may 
be is confusion because the scope of practice is clear. 
 
Under a scope of practice provision which is found in the 
registered nurses bylaws, in the licensed practical nurse bylaws, 
in other professional bylaws, it indicates those things that you 
can do as part of your scope of practice within your profession. 
 
If you start to put in those things you can’t do, or one thing that 
you can’t do, then the question becomes: well if you can’t do 
that, does that mean you can do other things that aren’t 
contained within the scope of practice. So for the . . . I think for 
clarity it’s important that we not cause confusion. 
 
And I can assure the Assembly and I can assure the public that 
midwives will not be performing therapeutic abortions. The 
only persons that can perform therapeutic abortions are 
physicians. That is within their particular scope of practice. It is 
not within the practice of midwives; it’s not within the practice 
of licensed practical nurses or registered nurses. 
 
And we have never done this for registered nurses, for instance. 
We have never said you can’t perform therapeutic abortions. 
They can’t perform therapeutic abortions because it’s not within 
their scope of practice. 
 
I guess my question would be, I don’t think it reasonable to 



May 5, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 1085 

treat midwives different than you would treat a registered nurse 
under their scope of practice, or a licensed practical nurse under 
their scope of practice. They cannot, under their scope of 
practice, perform therapeutic abortions. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 22 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 23 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chairman and Madam Minister, we’ve 
had a considerable discussion about this already, and I 
understand what you’re trying to do. And again I’m going to 
state that I have the utmost faith and belief in what you’re doing 
and in what the midwives are doing. 
 
But I . . . we made a number of phone calls to obstetricians, and 
they have said well, I suppose that could . . . that is considered 
an intrusive procedure. And the other thing that kind of bothers 
me is that this list of what people are allowed to do and not 
allowed to do is under regulations. 
 
And then as elected members of this Assembly, we know that 
regulations can be changed without the House actually having 
agreement on that. So sometime down the road maybe 
something would change but is not in my or your or the 
members of this House at this time . . . it’s not what we had 
wanted. 
 
(1530) 
 
So I’m just asking that this amendment, and I’ll read it to you. 
Under clause (3): 
 

(3) No person shall perform any practice pursuant to this 
Act for the purpose of terminating the pregnancy of any 
other individual. 

 
And I’m asking that be added. Amend clause 23 of the printed 
Bill by adding subsection 3 that I have just read. I so move. 
 
Amendment negatived on division. 
 
Clause 23 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 24 to 52 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Bill No. 25 — The Education Amendment Act, 1999/Loi de 

1999 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 
 
The Chair: — I invite the Minister of Education to introduce 
his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. My officials with 
me this afternoon, seated beside me is Mr. Craig Dotson, who’s 
the deputy minister; right behind Mr. Dotson is Mr. Michael 
Littlewood, who’s executive director of legislation and school 
administration; and directly behind me, Mr. Chair, is Mr. Tom 
Irvine, who is the Crown counsel, constitutional branch of the 
Department of Justice. 

Clause 1 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
Welcome, Mr. Minister, and to your officials again. 
 
We have a few questions, Mr. Minister, that require, I think, 
clarification in most instances. Again, on behalf of the official 
opposition, I want to thank you for allowing us to have some 
discussion on this Act yesterday. Your officials also provided 
us with some input and we really appreciate that. 
 
Mr. Minister, this Act basically contains three . . . I’ll refer to 
them as three separate areas: one dealing with the fiscal year 
and the changes for boards of education; the second one dealing 
with representation for reserves that are contained within school 
divisions; and the third issue of course is trying to establish, 
maybe clarify, what is current in whether or not people of the 
minority faith are in fact members of the minority faith, or are 
they supporters. And we’re looking for clarification there. 
 
I’ll first begin, Mr. Minister, with the fiscal year and a couple of 
questions that have popped up there. Mr. Minister, could you 
indicate, you know, for the people who may not understand 
how education is funded and how the government’s fiscal year 
operates differently, could you explain to the people of this 
province what is currently in place right now and what your 
government is proposing by way of changes to section 310? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Member. And 
what I might do is just highlight from some of the speaking 
notes that I put together after the second reading speech. And 
they’re really I think three bullets that I want to capture here 
that will be important. 
 
First of all, the government funds the operating grants on a 
fiscal year basis but pays currently on a calendar year basis. 
Accrual accounting makes this arrangement problematic for 
governments and further, school boards receive no grant 
payments until January and February . . . or for grant payments 
in January or February or March. And what happens of course 
is that then school boards need to borrow funds until the grant 
payments are made later in the spring which is the current 
process that we have right now. 
 
What the amendment will do — I expect this is the question 
that you’ll probably get to next — and what the amendment will 
do is will provide for the grant year and government fiscal year 
could be actually over the same period of time which would 
then be from April 1 until March 30. So really, taking that 
three-month period and rolling it back, boards of education will 
receive monthly grants each in the months of January to March 
instead of having to borrow and then wait for those grants to 
come through. 
 
Our estimate is that the new funding regime will save school 
boards, in our view, about $1.5 million per year in borrowing 
costs and it really will assist them with some of their own local 
financial planning, is the intent right around that piece of the 
amendment. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr, Minister. As I’ve 
indicated to this House and to you before very clearly, school 
divisions who have large amounts of tax arrears . . . Many 



1086 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1999 

school divisions are in a borrowing position as we speak right 
now, and as we’ve debated in this House in interim supply, 
we’ve only had one-twelfth allocation for boards of education 
or maybe even a little bit more than that. But indeed boards of 
education have experienced, probably since we are in the month 
of May, they may have experienced as much as 40 per cent of 
their annual cost. So I think boards of education are looking 
forward to that change. 
 
Mr. Minister, the confusing part to me, and I’m sure to many 
others, is that you’ve indicated you’re going to provide the 
grants on that fiscal basis of the calendar year. The question that 
pops to mind is of course, what’s going to happen for January, 
February, and March — obviously not this past year, and you’re 
saying I think it’s coming into effect next year. How will your 
government deal with the budgetary requirements of suddenly 
needing three-twelfths or one-quarter of the money in advance? 
 
And I guess, Mr. Minister, I’ve read section 370(15). I’ve read 
that over a number of times in terms of saying how the 
transitional grant will be applied. And I’d like you to clarify for 
myself and for others as to how that’s going to work. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — We’ve worked out this issue with SSTA 
(Saskatchewan School Trustees Association) and SASBO 
(Saskatchewan Association of School Business Officials) and if 
I might just read this portion as to how we’ll look after the 
period January to March. It might be useful, certainly for me, 
and hopefully will answer your question. 
 
The introduction of course, of your accrual accounting a few 
years ago, really meant that the accrual account had to be set up 
to deal with the fact that when school grants are announced in 
the budget, part of that amount will be paid with respect to the 
last three months of the previous government fiscal year. So 
with the establishment of the accrual accounting that decision 
was in May. 

 
The amount which has already been expended on the 
government’s books for this accrual accounting is sufficient 
enough to cover off the grant payment from January to March 
of the year 2000. So it will cover off that period. 
 
In other words, no additional money will be required in the 
budgetary process for us. It is simply a matter of paying out the 
money already in the accrual account. So through the accrual 
accounting process those three months will be covered off. 
Once the grant year has changed to coincide with the 
government’s own fiscal year, the accrual account will no 
longer be necessary. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, you’re indicating that that 
accrual accounting method will have, you know, developed 
sufficient fund I guess, to pay that. What amount do you see 
necessary to be able to handle that for January, February, and 
March of 2000? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — It will be, Mr. Chair, to the member, it 
would be about a quarter of the annual grant, so it will be about 
a hundred million dollars. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Good. Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. 
Mr. Minister, the second issue of importance I think to many 

boards of education in the province of Saskatchewan is dealing 
with representation from native reserves. 
 
Could you explain what is the current practice, if there is a 
native reserve that is within a school division and there is a 
need to have representation, what is the current process that’s in 
place and how will your amendment change that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I think with this particular amendment 
what we’re looking at is doing a number of things, or doing this 
specifically. What’s happened is that we had a request from the 
Saskatchewan Rivers School Division and the Muskoday First 
Nations, and they both approached the government through 
their school divisions asking us to amend the legislation to 
provide an additional option. So what this really does is 
provides an additional option for Aboriginal representation on 
school boards. 
 
And what we’ve done here is we’ve actually added a clause to 
the Act to allow the minister to include an Indian reserve within 
the school division in order to allow reserve residents to vote in 
the same way as all other school division residents rather than 
creating a separate subdivision which is what the Act currently 
today has. It has a subdivision for the reserve and then that 
individual selected from the reserve would then be represented 
on the school division. 
 
What we’re doing here of course is adding a clause which 
would then include the Indian reserve within the school division 
in order to allow the reserve, like any other individual then, to 
run for office and duly get elected. 
 
This option can be utilized only . . . and it will only be utilized 
in situations where the band and the board already have a 
tuition agreement and when the band and the board both agree 
on the arrangement. So you’d have to have consensus from both 
the band and the board on the process. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, in a 
situation today between a band and a school division, if there is 
a tuition agreement in place today, what is the relationship and 
how is representation handled in the current setting? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Member, if there is, if there is no 
tuition agreement today, then likely the band is looking after its 
own responsibilities in terms of education, and there wouldn’t 
be any representation then on the school division. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Well my question, Mr. Minister, was: if there 
is a tuition agreement right now, how is representation arranged 
with the reserve to ensure that there is some form of 
representation? Is it different than what you’re proposing? 
 
(1545) 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well what it is today is that, if there is a 
tuition agreement, then the band and the school division would 
apply for subdivision status. And so when they apply for 
subdivision status, then within the subdivision the First Nations 
people would have their election. And then whoever it is that 
they would select, that individual would then be the 
representative who would sit on the division board. What we’re 
doing . . . That’s the current practice today. 



May 5, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 1087 

What we’re doing of course is now adding or amending the Act 
to permit someone to run at large in the school division. And it 
comes about because the First Nations individuals have . . . or 
First Nations, Muskoday, has come forward through the 
Saskatchewan Rivers board and said we would like to have 
either option. But there must be a tuition agreement in place in 
order for that to happen, and so we’re amending this section of 
the Act to permit for somebody to run at large within the school 
division 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, all rural school divisions are 
under the ward system. And I know there’s been a number of 
school divisions that have spent a great deal of time redefining 
their boundaries, where they’ve had seven subdivisions and 
then they decided to change to five, and there was a need to 
redraw the boundaries and create new subdivisions. 
 
By your amendment now, will you be having in place a 
committee to review the creation of new subdivisions? Because 
now, as I understand what you’ve just said, you’re going to 
have the reserve not necessarily a subdivision in itself, but it’s 
now going to be encompassed. But then if the makeup of the 
particular school division is that there be seven representatives, 
how will you now restructure that new school division to 
contain seven subdivisions? Will you still not end up with 
almost the same thing, where the population of the reserve will 
determine that it is going to be primarily the subdivision? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member. This 
amendment doesn’t have any implications at all to any of the 
other boards across the province. 
 
Really what would, what would occur here is that in advance of 
the election, what would happen is that the reserve would be 
declaring the process in which they would want to use, whether 
they would . . . In the case of Muskoday, whether they would 
remain with the subdivision status that they have today, which 
in all likelihood wouldn’t happen because they’re the 
individuals who in fact are making the request for the at-large 
process. 
 
So in their case what they would do is they would, they would 
proceed with an election which would encompass the reserve 
within the school division. And at the end of the day the person 
whose name would be on the ballot would be involved in the 
election process like anyone else from that school division. 
 
Now as I’ve already stated, there must be a tuition agreement in 
place here in order for these options to be exercised — either 
the subdivision or the at large, which we’re recommending in 
the amendment. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you for that clarification, Mr. Minister. 
Mr. Minister, the other major portion of The Education Act, 
1995 amendments this time around deal with your explanation 
that there is a need to clarify an issue regarding the taxes of 
individuals in the province of Saskatchewan and where they are 
assigned. 
 
There’s been a lot of discussion, Mr. Minister, over the last 
number of years with many groups: the catholic school trustees 
association; the Saskatchewan School Trustees Association; 
individual communities. And I’m sure at every municipal 

office, municipal administrators have struggled with the urban 
Act, with the rural Act, and of course interpreting The 
Education Act, 1995. 
 
We know of course now that in terms of Saskatchewan we have 
an education system that has been determined long before the 
current education Act. We’re now referring back to of course 
ordinances of 1901 and the constitution of Saskatchewan of 
1905 and the like. 
 
Mr. Minister, I think what is of great interest to a lot of people 
in the province is to try to get an understanding of the 
conditions that exist now versus the conditions that you want to 
have, as you’ve indicated, clarified. 
 
And I guess, Mr. Minister, I’ll begin there by asking you to 
indicate to the people of Saskatchewan what you see as the laws 
that exist or precedent cases that exist that would indicate to the 
people of the city of Regina where we do have both a public 
and a separate system, to the people in Yorkton or to the people 
out in Englefeld where in fact there is now a separate system 
even though it’s of a different faith — what is the practice that 
is in place in law that would determine where taxes are 
assigned? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well thank you very much for the 
question, Mr. Member. As you well know, within the province 
of Saskatchewan we have a number of educational systems of 
which the Catholic and the Roman Catholic separate system and 
the public system exist. 
 
And rightly you’ve identified that over the years — and having 
had some experience, and you as the Saskatchewan school 
trustee president and I as a municipal councillor — from time to 
time there has been a bantering of thought about how it is that 
the municipal government in fact collects the taxes on behalf of 
the school division and the school division in fact then is 
responsible for administering the education system. And from 
time to time there’s discussion and debate about whether or not 
the municipal system actually adequately collects the taxes on 
behalf of school divisions. 
 
And today in Saskatchewan, if you’re a Roman Catholic 
taxpayer or you’re of the Roman Catholic faith and you own 
property in the province, the law requires that you would pay 
your taxes to that of the Roman Catholic school system. If 
you’re a public, a non-Catholic taxpayer in this province and 
you have children who are attending . . . or you’re paying taxes 
on a piece of property, that those taxes would then go to the 
public system. And constitutionally that is the requirement that 
we have today in Canada and certainly in this province. 
 
What’s happened here over the last several years is that there 
has been some discussion and actual debate about whether or 
not tax dollars are actually going to the appropriate 
jurisdictions. Because from time to time the question that’s 
being asked, when I arrive or somebody arrives, a home owner 
arrives, at the municipal office to declare where their taxes 
should go, the question usually asked is whether or not you’re a 
supporter of a particular faith. 
 
And sometimes what’s happened, of course, is that you might 
have an individual whose child who might be a Protestant or 



1088 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1999 

might be an individual who is non-Catholic who might be 
sending their children to a Catholic school because . . . for a 
variety of different reasons. And they may then when the 
question is asked, are you a supporter of the Catholic system, 
they might say, yes, by virtue of the fact that their child is 
attending a Catholic school system, where in fact it is an 
inappropriate designation of your tax. 
 
So today what we’re doing is we’re designing a form which 
would really ask a different question. And the question that 
would be asked today is: what faith do you support? And so 
today if you are a Catholic . . . if I were a Catholic individual in 
this province and I were to buy a piece of property, would show 
up at a municipal government office, then I would respond by 
saying that I’m of the Catholic faith and my taxes would then 
be directed to the appropriate school division. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I 
think when you mentioned faith and you said, you know, faith 
support, I think what you’re talking about is actually 
membership in that faith. Okay? And I just ask you to clarify 
that because I know people are indeed watching and will 
probably be reading in Hansard the terminology that you’ve 
used. And we want to make sure that your explanation is 
correct. 
 
Mr. Minister, if I’m a person in Saskatchewan and I’ve just 
heard what you’ve said — and I know what you’ve talked about 
in terms of the fact that the taxes will be determined by the 
membership of that minority religious faith — if I was to ask 
then of you, the minister, and say, Mr. Minister, can you refer 
me as a member of the public to a particular section of the 
urban Act, the rural municipal Act, The Education Act, where 
will it tell me that I must be a member of the minority religious 
faith and thus my taxes must be assigned to the faith . . . to that 
system if it is established regardless of my own individual 
philosophies that indeed it indicates in a statute that my taxation 
must be assigned to either the public system, if I am not a 
Catholic, or on the other side if I am Catholic and there is a 
minority separate system in place, my taxes must go there as 
you’ve indicated, where does that type of statute exist? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member, the section of 
The Education Act, 1995 in which the powers and duties of 
separate school divisions are stated and highlighted is in section 
53 of the Act. 
 
And in terms of precedents that have been established in the 
courts, one went to the Privy Council, which is the Bartz case; 
and another was decided by the Saskatchewan Court of Appeal 
and it’s spelled N-E-I-D-A — I would call it the Neida case, is 
how I would interpret that. So those are the two precedents as 
they relate to the provision of the section 53 of the Act. 
 
One other piece of information that I might share with the 
member is that I have here a letter dated January 19, 1999, 
which in fact was provided to me by the president of the 
Saskatchewan School Trustees Association, which I can 
provide a copy for you as well — I think it will be important for 
me to do that. And really it talks about some of the issues that 
make it important for us to proceed with the amendment. 
 
It’s from Deb Ward. I could read this into the record if you like. 

And I might just take a minute to do that. And this is how it 
reads: 
 

I have reviewed the proposal of the Department of 
Education to include a new provision in The Education 
Act, 1995 to give authority to the Minister of Education to 
require by regulation the use of municipalities of the tax 
designation form in those situations where taxes need to be 
directed to either the public or the separate school division. 
 
This matter has been considered by the Saskatchewan 
School Trustees Association and (the) Catholic Section of 
the Association on several occasions. It is our view that the 
tax designation form should conform more closely to the 
law. In this respect, we understand that it is the Minister’s 
intention to establish a form that directs taxes in 
accordance with the taxpayer’s response to the question, 
“Are you a member of the faith that established the 
separate school division?” (and) This change in the form 
would meet the expectations of the association. 
 
Further, it is our understanding that the Department of 
Education will consult closely with the association (and 
develop) . . . the tax designation form. 
 

Which in fact we have, and then it signs off by saying: 
 

I appreciate the opportunity to express the views of the 
Association in the proposed amendment to The Education 
Act, 1995. 

 
And I can provide a copy of this for you, Mr. Member. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Minister, I’m aware of the position of the Saskatchewan School 
Trustees Association, and in fact I’ve talked with a 
representative of the Catholic section of the province, Mr. 
Julian Paslawski who serves as their chief executive officer and 
indeed that’s the opinion that is held by the Catholic 
association. 
 
The bit of confusion that is out there, Mr. Minister, in I think 
the minds of many people is the example that you’ve cited 
where you’ve had individuals that you know of who, not 
through any wrongdoing of their own, have their students who 
may be attending a Catholic system or a public system if they 
are Catholic. I mean I’m not trying to identify one or the other, 
but inadvertently they have said we are a supporter of the 
system because we like what is happening there or if we have 
children going there. Or in the case of maybe, you know, people 
who don’t have students in place, they like a particular program 
that that system is delivering. And therefore they have said they 
are a supporter. 
 
(1600) 
 
The confusion may be eliminated if you are going to be looking 
at a prescribed form that says that if I am a taxpayer or if I’m a 
new owner of a piece of property in Regina, even though I 
haven’t lived here before and I buy a piece of property in the 
city of Regina, the question now if the prescribed form will 
come forward, will be, are you a member of the minority 
religious faith in Regina or are you not? Is that the type of form 



May 5, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 1089 

that you will be having put forward? 
 
And then the second part though still is confusing to some 
individuals who now look at it as not necessarily a collective 
right of that minority faith. They’re looking at it as an 
individual right and say, where in the Act or Acts does it say 
that I must pay my taxes to the system because I am a Catholic, 
or in the case, a non-Catholic? So two questions for you there, 
Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Chair, to the member. It’s our 
opinion that section 53 particularly (2) of the Act, really 
establishes where in fact you as the property owner today are 
expected to pay your property taxes whether you’re a Protestant 
or Catholic. 
 
And so what we think that within the Act there, it identifies 
that. And you’re absolutely correct when you say that today as a 
non-Catholic, for example, taxpayer, I could still send my 
children to a Catholic school if in fact the Catholic school 
permits that to happen. But my taxes would not flow to the 
Catholic school system. 
 
By law today that would not be the case, and vice versa. So 
we’re not changing the law here at all. There’s no change here 
to the law nor are we saying to the public that they have a 
different choice, that they have different choices to make today 
in terms of where they send their children. The choices remain 
the same. Although I have to say to you that the Catholic 
system does not have to accept a non-Catholic student. But in 
many instances they do. But as a non-Catholic, your taxes 
would continue to flow and . . . (inaudible) . . . continue to the 
public system. 
 
And so what we’re doing here, really, is developing a form — 
as you’ve rightly identified — where you’re going to be 
identifying whether or not you’re a member of the minority 
faith. So the form will be very explicit in asking that question, 
and hopefully then will reduce the confusion about who it is 
that you support because you’ll be really designating which 
faith you are a participant of. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I 
understand what you’re saying in trying to remove that 
confusion and simplify and clarify. But I’m wondering why 
when you have made the changes to The Education Act — and 
the amendments are numerous in terms of changing the word 
“supporter” to “taxpayer” — when I look at section 246 of the 
urban municipal Act and section 288 of the rural municipal Act, 
and I guess . . . you know, mostly we have been dealing with 
Catholic systems in urban municipalities, coterminous with 
urban municipalities. But we’re also now having that effect out 
there in rural Saskatchewan, and the example that I’ve indicated 
is the new Protestant separate division in Englefeld. 
 
The rural Act still uses the word “supporter.” And therefore are 
we not still leaving that unanswered question out there in many 
urban municipalities or rural municipalities that says that the 
administrator now is still going to be able to look at the Act and 
say, I am a supporter. And it still doesn’t clarify. Indeed, what 
you’re saying is the law, and the law says that if I am a member 
of the minority faith, I must state that. 
 

Why weren’t we looking at consequential amendments to the 
urban and rural Act as well to ensure that that is clarified as 
well? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. In our 
research from some discussions that we had last evening, what 
we did is had some of our legal people take a closer look at this, 
because you pose a very interesting question. And as we 
reviewed it and got our legal opinion on it, we’re told that the 
consequential amendments to the three municipal Acts really 
were not required. So that’s why the process has not moved to 
amending those three Acts. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Welcome, Mr. Minister, and to your officials. I 
appreciated the opportunity last night to discuss this portion of 
the Act or the amendment with you. And so today I have just 
have a couple of short questions. And I’m wanting to clarify 
when I’m assessing the amendment then; what it’s really doing 
is guaranteeing the concept of the minority not only can, but 
must support the school system that they believe in that they’re 
a member of. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — That’s correct — where the minority must. 
And it really is confirmation of the way in which the law today 
is written. So it just conforms . . . the form really conforms with 
what the law is. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, I know that there’s going to be 
further discussions about this at some time. And I guess the one 
thing that people are still saying to me is that the tax system in 
Saskatchewan that is the . . . at least 40 per cent of the funds 
comes from the General Revenue Fund and goes into both 
school divisions whether they’re public or separate. And so it is 
a publicly funded school system. And again for the taxpayers 
overall, that it comes into the funds publicly funded way. 
 
Then the people are saying, well, what is wrong with the 
concept of choosing. You have a choice of supporting . . . you 
have no choice of putting your money into the tax system for 
the schools, but you don’t have any choice of who you’re going 
support. 
 
So this idea of who am I . . . why are you taking away my 
choice in this country where we have our freedom of 
expression, a freedom of choice, a freedom of religion. This is 
actually limiting choices. And people are saying to me, we now 
have a province that is standing up and saying I’ll take your tax 
dollars but you don’t have any choice of which school system 
you’re going to support. 
 
I know that there’s lots of cases in this province where, as my 
colleague has said, where parents may choose to send their 
children to a school that is not of the same faith that they 
believe in because they like the program, they like the system 
that’s going on in that school. And they feel that if their 
children are going there then they should support it with their 
dollars so in fact that system can sustain itself. And I know we 
can get into the discussion about equalization and that type of 
thing. 
 
But really when we’re coming down to the bare bones of it is, 
where is choice left when we have these kind of prescribed 
forms that is going to take away an individual’s opportunity to 



1090 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1999 

choose? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I think what’s important, and I just want to 
sort of accentuate what the member has said, Mr. Chair, and 
that is that this is not a change to the Constitution of Canada, 
because the Constitution of Canada today guarantees minority 
faith — not only guarantees it but it protects it. And when I 
look at . . . and I have a section here of the Charter of Rights of 
Freedoms, and I’m quoting from section 29 where they’re really 
talking about here, and it says this: 
 

Nothing in this Charter abrogates or derogates from any 
rights or privileges guaranteed by or under the Constitution 
of Canada in respect of denominational, separate, or 
dissentient schools. 
 

So it isn’t the decision of the Saskatchewan Legislative 
Assembly for us to determine whether or not someone has a 
derogation of their right today in terms of where their children 
can attend school. 
 
The Constitution of Canada actually guarantees the minority 
faith and it also protects it. And what we’re doing today is 
we’re accepting that and putting into place a format that will 
conform with the legal expectations today of how in fact the 
property taxes are directed. 
 
Ms. Draude: — I just have one further comment, Mr. Minister, 
and I do thank you for your time and . . . (inaudible) . . . when it 
comes to explaining where you’re coming from in this whole 
issue. 
 
But I think there’s going to be . . . The question is, does the 
general public know? I know that you tell me and I believe that 
you have a request for not only from the SSTA but from 
municipalities who through our system have to collect taxes — 
property taxes and education tax — from landowners. 
 
So these people are asking . . . Do they all know? The boards 
know what’s happening. Does the individual taxpayers know? 
Do they know that by this there’s going to be changes and that 
they are going to be forced to . . . they’ll be required to fill out a 
form to say that this is the faith that I am supporting and that 
this . . . that I am a member of — not supporting — that I am a 
member of. 
 
And I think that when the general public learns of this, they 
may feel that they are again having some of their rights taken 
away, their choices taken away, and that it can be seen as 
control by government. And it’s a fear that I have that it will 
become a widespread problem with a lot of people in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Chair, to the member. I think 
you make an extremely important point, that what’s necessary 
today, once this Bill makes its way through the House, is that 
we communicate with not only the trustees in the province but 
also with municipal levels of government. And we do that 
collaboratively, where I think that not only the members on this 
side of the House but certainly through members on your side 
of the House as well, that we communicate this message clearly 
and concisely so that there isn’t confusion within the process. 
 

And it will be our undertaking to make sure that through the 
municipal levels of government, because they meet on a regular 
basis — not only their elected members but their administrative 
staff get together on a regular basis in the province — and it’ll 
be important for us to communicate this message to them and 
ensure that it gets communicated to all levels of municipal 
government across the province. 
 
And at the same time school trustees get together on a regular 
basis in this province, and we’ll make sure that this process is 
well identified and transmitted to those across the piece. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I know that the 
members of the Saskatchewan Party have asked a number of 
questions on this. However, frankly we are hearing more and 
more reports in the media and simply stories around the 
province that ratepayers who for any reason are mad about 
anything a school board has done, go down to town hall to 
reassign their taxes. 
 
And I realize that that is one of the things you’re attempting to 
address. But I still have to ask you, if this form really does deal 
with the situation that as I understand it, most people in 
Saskatchewan think they simply have an option. And what you 
have explained this afternoon is that short of actually changing 
one’s religion, we in fact do not have an option. 
 
But I would submit to you that most people in the province 
believe and have heard many stories to the effect that it is as 
simple as going down to city hall and saying, I’m mad about 
what the school board did on whatever, and I’m now changing 
from public to separate, or separate to public. 
 
And I would still like you to address that if you would, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well first, Mr. Chair, I want to say to the 
member, we’re not changing the law at all from what it has 
been since 1905. I mean constitutionally the law has remained 
the same. 
 
Now as I said to the official opposition, that you or I who have 
children in the school system today could always make a 
decision about where we want to send our kids if we have a 
separate and a public school system within our communities. 
Public school system you have for sure; if you have a separate 
school system we could make the choice about where we want 
to send out children. 
 
(1615) 
 
By and large under the letter of the law, we did not have a 
choice or do not have a choice about where our tax dollars flow 
— never did. And we’re not changing that today. And across 
the province in municipal government offices there were a 
variety of different forms that municipal offices would use 
asking you to declare whether or not or whom you support. 
 
And it was the question that they asked that was often the 
problem. Because if in fact I am a Protestant or a public school 
supporter, or I’m a Protestant individual and I choose to send 
my children to a Catholic school, and somebody would ask me, 
are you a supporter of the Catholic system, I might say I am a 



May 5, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 1091 

supporter of the Catholic system because my kids go there. But 
the reality is, is that my tax dollar does not necessarily flow in 
that direction, because I am not of the Catholic faith of which 
the constitution has established for us since 1905. 
 
So today we’re not changing the law at all. All we’re doing is 
providing what we think is a simpler form, one that asks the 
appropriate question today in terms of ensuring that the tax 
dollars really flows to the appropriate school division. 
 
Now I think what else is important here is that this is not a 
retroactive process. So if there are people within the system 
today whose tax dollar is flowing in a way in which it shouldn’t 
be, that will continue. But for all you property owners today, 
this form hopefully will address the issue more appropriately. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, we also as MLAs, I’m 
sure, all get calls and questions at municipal election time that 
people think that they should have the option of voting in 
whichever school board they choose to vote in. Does it follow 
from what the minister has said that we also really don’t have a 
free choice as to which school board elections we will 
participate in? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, the member is absolutely 
correct. You don’t have a choice, and the form is very clear. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Then I will just close with this and invite the 
minister to respond if he wishes. You have said, and I think 
legally you’re correct, that this is not a change in the law or the 
Constitution as it has existed from . . . well I was going to say 
the earliest days of the province, but I think before the creation 
of the province. 
 
However, the reality is de facto we do have a situation in many 
areas of the province where changing school support is as easy 
as going down to the municipal office. And I’m just wondering 
if you intend to do anything to tell the general public, and 
especially municipal offices, that redesignation was never 
supposed to be as easy or as automatic as frankly many 
ratepayers in this province have for a long time believed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well it’s my view that school boards will 
continue to communicate sort of the common message that has 
been communicated for years. 
 
I think that as the member from Kelvington-Wadena pointed 
out, that there needs to be a broad educational process today 
that makes its way into the levels of municipal government and 
to school trustees to ensure that this message is clearly 
communicated, that the form really only is conforming with 
what the law always has been, and that when ratepayers ask the 
question that they can clearly be articulated that they understand 
where in fact their designation is most appropriate. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 16 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 44 — The Midwifery Act 
 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — I move that the Bill now be read a 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
Bill No. 25 — The Education Amendment Act, 1999/Loi de 

1999 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 
 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I move that the Bill now be read a third time and 
passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Do I see the member for Athabasca on 
his feet? 
 
Mr. Belanger: — To ask for leave to introduce a guest. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Through you and to 
you, and to the members of the Assembly, I would like to 
introduce a guest in the Speaker’s gallery. And it would be not 
proper of me if I didn’t recognize his truly artistic, incredible 
athletic ability. I’d like to have the Assembly welcome a fellow 
athlete from northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Ted Flett. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Highways and Transportation 

Vote 16 
 

The Chair: — Before I call the first subvote, I invite the 
Minister of Highways to introduce her officials. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’d like to 
introduce my officials. To my immediate left is Barry Martin, 
the assistant deputy minister of operations division; to my 
immediate right is Bernie Churko, the senior executive director 
of grain, rail, and area planning, in policy and administration 
division; behind me to my right is George Samatinos, director 
of business services branch; and directly behind me is Terry 
Blomme, executive director of the southern region. 
 
Subvote (HI01) 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and good afternoon to 
the minister and her officials. Madam Minister, for my benefit 
— I don’t know if it’s being provided to other members across 
the floor — but do you have a project-ranking benefit-costs 
report that you produced fairly recently, that I might have a 
copy sent across to me? I haven’t got one here with me. 
 



1092 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1999 

Hon. Ms. Bradley: — The list that you’re talking about that we 
gave out last year, that one hasn’t been updated but we could 
provide you with that list again — the 1997 one — but we don’t 
have it here. And we could . . . Certainly the project list this 
year is just straight projects — that could be made available. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Minister, 
could you send a copy of that across to us right now then, the 
list of projects that you’ve just referred to? I don’t have that one 
on hand with me here at this time too. So if you wouldn’t mind 
sending that across. 
 
If you might — just while I’m getting that copy — if you might 
respond to the, just the simple matter of the number of damage 
claims to vehicles globally in this province, damages resulting 
from highway conditions. Have you got a global figure that you 
could provide to us here this afternoon? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Overall to answer that question, we’ve 
had about 216 claims. Those would include both surface 
condition claims and flying stone claims. And when you think 
about that we have over a million vehicles registered in this 
province and the number of trips that that’s the number of 
claims that we had. 
 
Oh, the dates would be from April 1, 1998 to February 15, 
1999. That’s when we had summarized that. We weren’t quite 
to the year-end. 
 
(1630) 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Well thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, 
Madam Minister, I’m looking at a document here that made 
reference to damage claims for the ’97-98 fiscal year. At that 
time it only totalled, I think, sum total was 105 claims. So I 
guess you can put it in perspective of how many vehicles we’ve 
got registered in the province and that it’s not that bad. But the 
fact is, that figure is well over double what I’m looking at here 
for the fiscal year of ’97-98. That’s hardly a record to be 
envious of. 
 
I know in my own riding I’ve had a number of individuals who 
have called, concerned about the damage done to their vehicle. 
Certainly a lot of rock on the glass type of damage. I know 
Highway 301 just recently — recent, within the past 10 days — 
there’s been some gravel, oil, pressed onto the surface. A lot of 
people have been calling saying that they’ve got rock damage to 
their windshields as a result. I know you can argue, well, 
everybody has to slow down. The driver that’s incurred the 
damage — fine, they may be taking the appropriate action; they 
may be responsible enough to slow down. But that oncoming 
traffic — that isn’t always the case, and I know there’s been 
some significant numbers of damages done as a result of that 
type of a surface application. 
 
Couldn’t there be a better means of repairing some of . . . what 
are potholes? And I guess a better way of describing some of 
where I saw that type of an application done is it’s kind of 
filling the trenches, so to speak, that have developed in some of 
these . . . what you would refer to as secondary highways, what 
I would maintain are actually primary routes for a lot of people 
— primary routes to marketplaces, primary routes to get their 
kids to school. This type of an application doesn’t seem to be 

serving the best purposes for all involved, given the amount of 
damage claims that I’m sure you will be obtaining as a result of 
what’s happening out there. 
 
If you could make some comments on that, Madam Minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — I think, to the member from Thunder 
Creek, that this method of seal coating is a very cost-effective 
way to do a lot of repair on our highways. And certainly when 
it’s under construction or when that repair work is being done, 
there is signage to slow down. And I know the concern that you 
have that some people don’t, but . . . When you say is there 
another cost-effective way? No, not really, because it would be 
a lot more expensive; we wouldn’t be able to repair as much 
highway. So I think this type of a seal coat is a very effective 
way in which to repair our highways; and we would just again, I 
guess, ask drivers too that when this work is being done — 
which I think is positive that the work is being done — that they 
need to slow down because during that repair time there is that 
. . . the concern that you raise about flying rocks or stones. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, Madam 
Minister, you refer to there isn’t a more cost-effective means of 
doing that type of repair but I don’t know — and correct me if 
I’m wrong — but I don’t think I used that terminology when I 
asked you isn’t there another way of effecting some repairs to 
some of these trenches that have developed in these highways, 
and may be cost effective to you but certainly not to the drivers 
that have to travel over these stretches of roads and incur these 
damages that they are incurring to their vehicles. 
 
So I guess if you could elaborate in terms of other means of 
repairing these types of roads and the serious conditions that 
have developed upon them. And also available to you — and I 
might toss this one into the mix as well — is certainly there’s 
more fuel tax revenues collected in this province than what 
you’re applying to the roads currently. 
 
So when you’re looking for . . . you’re referring to the most 
cost-effective means to effect these types of repairs, what’s 
wrong with tapping into a little bit more of those fuel tax 
revenues? And let’s get these patches or repairs done in a better 
way, in a way that actually repairs them on a more permanent 
basis rather than what is amounting to — and I’ve got letters 
before me here that refer to a lot of the work that’s done these 
days — as nothing more than temporary or band-aid type of 
applications on these highways. 
 
Just exactly how much of the tax — the fuel tax revenues that 
are generated in this province — how much of that in terms of a 
percentage or dollar figure is actually put back into the 
Department of Highways and then into our road system? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Okay, I’ll answer both of these questions 
here. First of all, when you say cost effective, I think that is still 
an important thing because if it’s cost effective you can do more 
repairs right across this province. 
 
If we went to what you’re calling a different kind of a 
treatment, we could spend 80,000 to $100,000 per kilometre 
instead of the kind of repair with the strengthening, with the 
type of granular repair that’s done there maybe at 2,000 to 
$3,000 per kilometre. 



May 5, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 1093 

I think too when you look at the total amount of claims, that the 
cost of what the vehicle damage claims are in the 
neighbourhood of around $55,000, just upgrading like the 
surface that you might be talking about at $80,000 a kilometre. I 
mean you do have to take cost-effectiveness into this because 1 
kilometre of an upgrade would be 80,000 to $100,000. 
 
When you say, how are we doing with our tax revenue — if we 
compare what we actually spend on highways and roads in the 
province within our own provincial Highways budget plus also 
the municipal part, and we take that in comparison to what we 
collect on fuel tax which is on-road fuel tax, we are putting 
back onto our highways and roads in this province about 80 per 
cent of the tax collected. 
 
When you think that at least 16 cents of every dollar that’s 
collected is paying interest on the debt, we are putting a 
significant percentage of our gas tax on highways and roads in 
this province. 
 
When we look at the federal government and the revenue that 
they’re getting, they’re only putting about 6 per cent back into 
transportation across this country; in which I would say as a 
provincial government in this province, we’re getting about 
zero per cent. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Well thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam 
Minister, you can talk cost-effectiveness all you want. I didn’t 
hear anything in there that refers to your consideration for 
driver safety and passenger safety on these highways. 
 
There have been incidences provided to you in this legislature, 
examples of people coming in here displaying the injuries 
they’ve received with rocks and stones coming through the 
windshields of their vehicles. 
 
At some point, how do you reconcile that, as a department, 
where you’re trading off people’s safety against the road system 
in the province in trying to provide a band-aid solution to as 
many kilometres as you can. Essentially a political gloss-over, 
and it’s at the expense of the safety of the driving public. 
 
Certainly there’s a lot of examples that have been presented 
where people’s safety has been drastically compromised. You 
can refer to only, you know, however many tens of thousands, 
50-some thousand dollars of damage claims. You don’t even 
see the tip of the iceberg. 
 
There’s so many people that travel these roads day by day, they 
incur vehicle damage on an ongoing, on a continuous basis. 
They’ve given up hope of ever trying to get any sort of a rebate 
from you or any kind of restitution from you or your 
department. They’ve just given up hope. 
 
There’s a lot of damage out there as I say, that’s going 
unreported due to the types of applications, the types of 
treatments that you’re applying to these roads. 
 
Another one, another example is how you repair your potholes. 
And you’ll dump a pile of asphalt in them, maybe you roll a 
truck over it — I don’t know what — but within a couple of 
days that patch has worked its way out. The pothole has become 
larger. It’s again . . . you can’t even refer to that as a band-aid 

solution. It’s just a matter of days until that type of treatment 
has lost any effectiveness. 
 
And in fact in many instances we’ve saw examples of where it’s 
actually created a worse highway traffic situation where the 
pothole, the size of the potholes increased and there’s little 
fragments of the asphalt strewn all around on the road, then 
again creating a driving hazard. 
 
So how do you square that circle of driver and passenger safety 
against always just the cost-effectiveness aspect that you relate 
to us this afternoon? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Okay, to the member opposite on that 
question. I think just the opposite interpretation should have 
been given to my answer — is that being able to repair more 
roads in this province in a very cost-effective way because you 
can do way more kilometres, is all about safety and keeping 
these roads safe for people to be driving on. If we did what the 
alternative was here, of you saying that we need a more 
expensive treatment and fix less roads, I don’t think that would 
be conscionable to the drivers of this province. This is all about 
having safe roads for the people. 
 
And I don’t know about your constituents, but I have met a lot 
of constituents right across this province, and actually several of 
yours also, in which I believe that they want to see these roads 
repaired and that the way that we do these repairs with this kind 
of a granular surfacing, is a very effective way to do them and it 
is a way in which we can keep our roads safe. 
 
The thing about potholes, the way that we repair our potholes, 
as they do in any other jurisdiction, is acceptable. Now 
sometimes there’s a treatment that’s done very quickly and that 
they have to come back afterwards to complete that. But every 
spring certainly there are some breaks in the highway, there are 
potholes in the highways, and we have to get out there and get 
those fixed as best as possible because the safety of our 
highways and roads is a priority for our department and for our 
government. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Well, Madam Minister, Mr. Chair. Madam 
Minister, there’s a lot of people out there who are saying, fix 
the roads; fix them properly. Fine, you can say we’re better off 
to stretch what is an ineffectual type of repair across the entire 
road system in the province. But what they’re saying is fix them 
right. 
 
And you mentioned you spoke with some of my constituents. 
Well here’s one here — Helen Whitfield of Briercrest. I don’t 
know if you’ve spoke to her, but this is the sort of thing that she 
says concerning our highway system, and it’s as a PS 
(postscript) on this letter to me. And I’ll quote from it: 
 

P.S. Concerning our Highway 339, I’d like to invite Mr. 
Romanow and some of his members to drive down our 
highway like we drive. 

 
These are people who day by day drive the roads that we’re 
talking about here this afternoon where you’ve effected this 
cost-effective means of repairing them, where you’ve put the 
little piles of asphalt into the potholes to have it worked out, 
where you’ve rolled the gravel and oil over stretches of the 



1094 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1999 

road. 
 
(1645) 
 
There’s a lot of problems that are directly related to impacting 
on the safety of drivers across this province that are not being 
addressed by the type of repairs that you’re effecting here. Fine, 
you can say we’re better to stretch it all the way across all of the 
road system. 
 
And essentially what you’re admitting to by saying that is 
you’re not providing any real degree of safety to anybody. 
Because what we’re saying is these rocks are flying all over the 
place — through people’s windshields. There’s pieces of 
asphalt that we’ve delivered to your office in fact, pieces of 
asphalt that are knocking vehicles off of the road. 
 
So what we’re saying is there has to be a better way of effecting 
repairs to roads, and at the same time to be doing a better job of 
rebuilding our highway system here in this province. 
 
And I’d like to know what the exact breakdown is. If you could 
explain to me one more time how you arrive at that 80 per cent 
of those revenues collected that go back into our road system. 
Because that one comes as a bit of surprise to a lot of people 
around this province when they hear that here this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — To the member from Thunder Creek, as 
I have said before, but I will say it here again too — that we are 
putting more dollars into our budget for highways and roads in 
this province. And over the last two years, we’ve had an 
increase of . . . well, two years ago $30 million; last year 
another $30 million; this year an additional $15 million. There 
is more money also went to municipal government for roads. 
 
And so we’ve recognized that we need to put more dollars in. 
And what we are doing . . . I mean the engineers and the people 
in our department I think do a very good job of keeping the 
highways, the roads in this province, repaired and fixed. 
 
Now if you have some suggestion that there are other ways in 
which . . . instead of this seal coat that we use, which is a very 
safe way of treating the roads and we can treat more kilometres 
by using that method. 
 
My understanding from your question before is that it was when 
the road was actually being repaired that sometimes people 
aren’t slowing down and that there’s rocks and damage during 
this repair. I believe people want their roads repaired. I think 
they want the holes in the road, the potholes fixed. And I 
believe we’re doing it in a very effective manner. 
 
Now if you have some suggestion that there is some other way 
. . . Our department works with engineers and people all across 
the world in knowing what’s the most beneficial way to keep 
your road structure in place, and I believe that we’re delivering 
that. Now if you say there’s a better way, maybe you can share 
that with us. 
 
I’d have one suggestion of a better way, is if we had more 
dollars. And I believe there needs to be federal dollars 
participating in Highways and Transportation in this province. 
And when you have federal policy that has impacted this 

province so tremendously on transportation and you’re getting 
zero cost sharing here in the province, I believe that that is one 
of the better ways, if we could talk to the federal Liberals and 
get some of those dollars also to come so we could be doing 
more work on our roads in this province. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. You asked for 
some suggestions on how you could do more. Why not put the 
full amount of the fuel tax into our roads and highway system? 
You’re using figures of 80 per cent. The fact of the matter is 
you’re playing games with some of those numbers. 
 
And I notice in a letter you sent to constituents of mine, Chris 
and Perry Gryde of Climax — now those are the people that 
sent their wheel in here and I raised it in the House that day, the 
wheel busted completely in half and squashed — and I would 
like to know how your department has arrived at some 
settlement, if you have, and what the settlement was. 
 
In fact your department has never gotten back to us on that 
issue. Hopefully you’ve done more than send out this letter 
from yourself to Chris and Perry Gryde. 
 
What is happening out there, and the highways that they’re 
driving on are in absolutely terrible, terrible shape. 
 
In our platform . . . You’re asking what should be done. In our 
platform we’re saying put 100 per cent of the fuel tax, and 
we’re basing that on your budget. 
 
So it’s a case of priorities. We’re coming up with our numbers 
based on your budget, and we’re saying we can put 100 per cent 
of the fuel tax in. You’re using figures of 80 per cent, and you 
know it’s not correct. It’s probably around 60 per cent and 
you’ve upped that, Madam Minister, from . . . it used to be at 
38, 39 per cent, as we recall from the CAA (Canadian 
Automobile Association) report that was put out a few years 
ago. A very embarrassing document for you and your 
government. 
 
So if you’re up around 60 per cent, you’re still, you’re still 
raking in millions and millions and millions of dollars of 
taxpayers’ dollars while you’re saying you’re putting them 
towards health and highways. The fact of the matter is, what 
you’re doing with those dollars is investing in foreign countries, 
power plants, TV stations in New Zealand. Sixty-two million 
bucks — that could’ve went a long ways to our highway 
system. 
 
It really comes down to being a case of priorities. Your 
priorities are wrong. The people have said it time and time 
again, Madam Minister. And so if you’re looking at . . . you 
know, you’re bragging up your own program, the two and a half 
billion over 10 years. You’re not fooling anybody. In fact 
you’ve got it in your letter here that you’ve got some 
commitment. 
 
I look at a news release that was done here not so long ago, I 
guess by the road builders, and they’re saying you’re $64 
million behind in your commitment in the first two years. Are 
you saying the road builders aren’t telling the truth? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Okay, there’s two or three questions 



May 5, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 1095 

there that I will address that you had brought forward. 
 
First of all, on getting priorities and on fuel tax and so on — I 
think the priorities of our government have been the priorities 
of the people of Saskatchewan, which is a balanced approach. 
With every balanced budget, take a third of that surplus to 
increase funding in areas of priorities, which we have done, 
which have been health, education, highways, which are the 
priorities of the people of this province. We also said to take a 
third of that surplus and be working on paying down the debt, 
which we have been able to do. And we’ve also taken a third to 
do some tax reductions, which we have delivered in every 
budget since we’ve had a balanced budget. 
 
So I believe we have met the priorities of the people in a 
balanced approach. We’ve recognized, by saying a $2.5 billion 
commitment which was in 1997, that we have to continue to 
increase our budget over the next 10 years to meet that $2.5 
billion commitment. I think no one said at the time that that 
would mean that you would take 2.5 billion, divide it by 10, and 
come up to 250 million for 10 years. You can get the average 
by just adding, ramping up your budget. 
 
And I will be able to send over a graph that will show ways in 
which we can meet that commitment, and we are doing that. 
And actually if we took on an average amount of increase up to 
a $2.5 billion commitment we would actually be ahead of what 
those average . . . we would actually — I’ll just wait a minute if 
you want to hear the answer — is that on that $2.5 billion 
commitment, if we took an average increment every year of 
how that we could meet that commitment on an average line 
ramping up, we would actually be above that average line. So 
we are going to live up to that commitment of dollars to 
highways and roads. 
 
We also, when we’re talking about the provincial sales tax, 
when we do the numbers we’re not fooling anybody. We have 
the numbers here in which we take the actual on-road fuel tax 
revenues and then add what we have in our provincial highways 
budget, which are also in the municipal budget for roads, put 
those together, take the average. It works out to close to 80 per 
cent, 78.9 per cent, somewhere in there. So we are making that 
commitment of putting more of our dollars onto highways and 
roads in this province. 
 
Now on the specific question when you were asking about the 
claim that is coming . . . that came from a constituent of yours 
on Highway No. 37, that is being processed. I understand there 
will be compensation paid on that. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Will they be compensated fully for their 
loss of the wheel and the time and any vehicles they had to rent 
in the meantime? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — To the member from Shaunavon . . . or 
Wood River, I’m sorry. I’m not sure of the actual dollars but 
that’s being worked on with the people that have brought that 
claim forward. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Actually you made mention . . . your own 
statement was well, we’re not fooling anybody. And I’d have to 
agree, you’re not fooling anybody about how much your 
commitment is. 

Why don’t you send over the graph and why don’t you show us 
what your long-term plan is? How much money you’re going to 
be spending in the next years — and surely you’ve done that 
budget — in the next years of your full commitment? We would 
like to know, as would the road builders, exactly where this is 
going to peak out. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — To the member opposite, we’re just 
sending the graph over. 
 
And over the . . . as we go through budget processes we are 
predicting our $2.5 billion. Now whether or not each year you 
have to constantly look at all of the revenues that are coming in 
to your province, all the circumstances, as you finalize a budget. 
And we have been ramping up that budget, and as we’ve had 
good years in the last two years we’ve even added dollars into 
our budget from what we had presented at budget time. 
 
So the commitment is there. But I think again we have to be 
totally fiscally responsible and we will be making that 
commitment and if there’s a year that we can add more that 
changes the graph a little bit. But at the end of the 10 years 
there will be a minimum of $2.5 billion being spent. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Madam Minister, if you weren’t prepared, 
your government wasn’t prepared to spend the amount of 
money on equal instalments, why did you have the road 
builders believe that you were? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — To the member opposite’s question on 
that: actually when we went to the $2.5 billion commitment and 
the meetings that we had with road builders, I mean one of the 
comments that had come right from the road builders at that 
point in time was they did not want to see a huge ramp up 
immediately. They said to take time ramping up the budget. 
 
And so certainly I’m sure the road builders this year would like 
to see more dollars in the highways and roads. As the 
government we would like to be putting more dollars in 
highways and roads, but again we have to balance all of the 
priorities that we are faced with. 
 
And so the commitment that we made . . . and the road builders 
were there at the time, at the beginning of that, and they 
certainly didn’t believe we would go up to 250 million and keep 
it flat for 10 years. They knew that. And for taxpayers’ dollars 
too, we wouldn’t want to have a huge increase like that because 
you can also bring in inflation and other costs to that. 
 
So that was . . . I think we listened very carefully and as we can 
afford to do it we will be putting more dollars into our 
Highways and Transportation budget. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Madam Minister, if anything I think you 
would have seen the people of this province and the road 
builders themselves expect that you would have front-end 
loaded more of this rather than play some game. Because quite 
frankly nobody dreams for a moment you’re going to be 
empowered to see any commitment that you’re making. 
 
And I’m going to just quote from this Murray Mandryk, 
Leader-Star News article: 
 



1096 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1999 

The Saskatchewan government is never going to meet its 
250 million a year commitment on highway spending at its 
present rate, says the past president of the province’s road 
builders’ association. And it is Saskatchewan construction 
firms who’ve spent millions of dollars on heavy equipment 
because they thought the government was serious about 
this commitment that are now paying the price. 

 
And it goes on to quote: 
 

“Our last government highways contract ended in June”, 
said Wayne Jorgensen of ASL Paving Ltd., a 
Saskatoon-based company that spent more than a million 
dollars on new equipment this year, including 430,000 on a 
new asphalt spreader because of the government’s 1997 
budget commitment to spend two and a half billion over 
the next 10 years on Saskatchewan highways. Everybody’s 
working for nothing right now, just to keep the employees 
on. 

 
You see, Madam Minister, here’s a company alone that has 
spent a huge, huge amount of money, over a million bucks, 
sitting back and listening to your commitment. 
 
And you’re saying that whatever dialogue that you had with the 
road builders, that they wouldn’t, if they’re going to spend a 
million bucks, that they wouldn’t know exactly what you 
meant. 
 
I think you led everyone on in this province with these 
commitments of yours. Everyone knows full well what you do 
at election time, going into elections. A lot of promises. The old 
saying about — how does that go — when everything is said 
and done, more gets said than gets done. And I think your 
department really gets that in spades. 
 
Having said that, I know we’ll have more to say on this on 
another day, Mr. Chair. I’d like you to recognize the clock. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:02 p.m. 
 
 



 

 


