





























































Hansard: April 13, 1999


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 527 
 April 13, 1999 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I have a petition to present on behalf of the 
Saskatchewan disenfranchised widows association. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to have the Workers’ 
Compensation Board Act amended whereby benefits and 
pensions are reinstated to disenfranchised widows and 
whereby all revoked pensions are reimbursed to them 
retroactively with interest to April 17, 1985. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition come from the city 
of Saskatoon. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have 
petitions to present today on behalf of the disenfranchised 
widows of Saskatchewan. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to have the Workers’ 
Compensation Board Act amended whereby benefits and 
pensions are reinstated to disenfranchised widows and 
whereby all revoked pensions are reimbursed to them 
retroactively with interest to April 17, 1985. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from Saskatoon, Stump 
Lake, Whitewood, Regina, and Estevan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to end 
its unfair tendering policies and immediately cancel the 
Crown Construction Tendering Agreement. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from the city of Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
citizens asking for review of parental rights in the province. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide a review process with respect to family 
intervention to ensure the rights of responsible families are 
not being violated. 
 

The signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, all from the 
community of Melfort. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker I rise today 
to present petitions on behalf of citizens of the province of 
Saskatchewan and the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to end 
its unfair tendering policies and immediately cancel the 
Crown Construction Tendering Agreement. 

 
The signators on this petition are from Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present a petition on 
behalf of the good citizens of Lemberg. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call on federal and provincial 
governments to dedicate a greater portion of fuel tax 
revenues toward road maintenance and construction so that 
Saskatchewan residents may have a safe, reliable, and 
effective highway system. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present petitions. 
The prayer of relief reads as follows: 
 

That your petitioners humbly pray your Hon. Assembly 
may be pleased to call upon provincial and federal 
governments to immediately take steps to end unfair world 
subsidies and provide farmers with prompt relief from 
declining incomes and act as watchdogs against rising 
input costs which are harming the rural economy. 

 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
happy to rise again today to present a petition in this House on 
behalf of people of this province. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call on federal and provincial 
governments to dedicate a significantly greater portion of 
fuel tax revenues toward road maintenance and 
construction so that Saskatchewan residents may have a 
safe highway system that meets their needs. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks at Cactus 
Lake, Macklin, Luseland, Denzil, and Kerrobert, Mr. Speaker. 



528 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 1999 

I so present. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
petitions on behalf of citizens that are concerned for the 
deteriorating state of our highway system. The prayer reads as 
follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call on federal and provincial 
governments to dedicate a significantly greater portion of 
fuel tax revenues toward road maintenance and 
construction so Saskatchewan residents may have a safe 
highway system that meets their needs. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, those who’ve signed these petitions come from all 
across the province. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today 
along with my colleague to bring forward petitions, and these 
ones are in regards to some problems with health care in the 
southwest part of the province. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call on the NDP government 
and the Southwest District Board to stop plans of laying off 
nurses and support staff, and be it further resolved that the 
NDP government provide necessary funding to properly 
staff our health facilities with front-line health care 
workers. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I have hundreds if not a few thousand signatures 
on these petitions. They’re from the Shaunavon, Eastend, 
Climax, Gull Lake, Frontier, Cadillac, Swift Current. It looks 
like they’re all throughout the southwest part of the province, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
pleased once again to rise on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan 
who are most concerned with the education of children with 
special learning needs. And I’ll read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide essential funding and ensure the delivery of 
scientifically proven, diagnostic assessment and 
programming for children with learning disabilities in 
order that they have an access to an education that meets 
their needs and allows them to reach their full potential. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
All of the people who have signed this petition this afternoon, 
Mr. Speaker, are from the Wahpeton Dakota Nation School. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have this morning, 

Mr. Speaker, a petition from the rural municipality of Old Post 
No. 43. And I’ll read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately start work on the rebuilding of our secondary 
highway system to provide for safe driving on what are 
becoming known as pothole roads, to enter into 
negotiations with SARM and SUMA for a longer term plan 
of rural road restitution reflecting future needs, and to 
provide safety for all drivers as the new trucking 
regulations change safety factors on these roads. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, these folks of course come from the area of Old 
Post, which is in reality the Wood Mountain community and 
Scout Lake and Lisieux and Wood Mountain in that area. It 
looks like everybody in the whole community must have come 
out to sign this one. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the petitions presented at the last 
sitting have been reviewed and found to be in order. Pursuant to 
rule 12(7) these petitions are hereby received. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills 

 
Clerk: — Mr. Johnson, as Chair of the Standing Committee on 
Private Members’ Bills, presents the eighth report of the 
committee relating to the petitions for private Bills, and the 
report is hereby tabled. 
 
Mr. Johnson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to move, 
seconded by the member from Saskatoon Northwest: 
 

That the eighth report of the Standing Committee on 
Private Members’ Bills be now concurred in. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 24 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: are there plans to close or 
reduce acute care services at St. Anthony's Hospital in 
Esterhazy; further, can the minister please detail what 
those plans are? 
 

Thank you. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that on 
day 20 I shall move first reading of a Bill, an Act to amend the 
vehicles Act, confiscation of John’s vehicles Act. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 24 ask the government the following question: 



April 13, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 529 

To the Minister of Health: what was the monthly acute 
average daily census for the Watrous Hospital broken out 
by month for the last 12 months? 
 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 24 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of SERM and any others that would like to 
contribute: is your government aware of the work being 
done by the Cypress Hills Research Steering Group; do 
you support their work; why does most of the funding for 
projects come from the Alberta government, the Alberta 
Research Council, the Alberta environment protection 
sources as well as the Alberta Conservation Association, 
National Soil and Water Conservation program; what 
percentage comes from Sask Parks; how is this amount 
determined; does your government support the three major 
projects on schedule for 1999; does your government 
support the riparian project that will be of major focus this 
year; are any of the research sites located on the 
Saskatchewan side of the Cypress Hills? 
 

I so submit. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, to you and of course to all of my colleagues in the 
House, I would like to introduce a very, very special guest who 
is seated in your gallery, His Excellency, the Ambassador of 
France to Canada, Monsieur Denis Bauchard. 
 
Bienvenu à Saskatchewan, Monsieur l’Ambassadeur. This is 
going to be a long introduction so you may want to sit down to 
rest for a moment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the ambassador has a very long and distinguished 
career of public service in the French government and in the 
diplomatic core. He has an academic and governmental 
background in economics and finance; and he took his expertise 
in that area into the French foreign service with postings in 
Beirut, at the United Nations, and as Minister of Plenipotentiary 
in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 
 
He served four years as ambassador to Jordan then returned to 
the ministry as assistant deputy minister and then executive 
assistant to the Minister of Foreign Affairs. He was 
subsequently appointed as ambassador on special assignment 
responsible for trans-Atlantic economic relationships before 
being appointed ambassador to Canada last year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people and the nation of France have long 
been our friends and our allies and I’m very pleased and proud 
to say that our relationship with France is still growing and 
growing. Prime Minister Jospin’s recent visit to Canada, itself a 
culmination of many ministerial visits, resulted in a 
France-Canada action program designed to expand co-operation 
between our nations in a wide variety of areas. 
 
It may not be known, Mr. Speaker, but France is our seventh 
largest trading partner and the fifth largest investor in Canada 
with more than $5 billion invested across our nation. Canadian 
investment in France totals almost $4 billion and more than 100 

Canadian companies operate over there in France. 
 
I’m especially pleased that French investment and French 
customers have found a welcome home right here in 
Saskatchewan. Saskatchewan exports to France totalled $320 
million from 1994 through 1998. And we look forward to 
growing that number as we seek out mutually beneficial 
partnerships, particularly in the field of ag-biotechnology. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are building many collaborative relationships 
with France’s world-renown biotech community. We hope to 
learn from them. And we are confident that we also have some 
ideas that we can share with them. 
 
I know that one major French company, Groupe Limagrain, has 
already established a presence at Innovation Place focusing on 
canola biotechnology. As well the mining company COGEMA, 
which is majority owned by the French people, is an important 
player in our economy in the North, and everywhere, and a very 
important employer in the North. 
 
And in addition to its contributions to our economy through 
operations, COGEMA also contributed $10.5 million to the 
multi-party training program which is an investment in our 
young people in the North in particular, and an expression of 
confidence in the future of our province and of our relationship. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that relationship between Saskatchewan and 
France is strong, and we look forward to building an even 
stronger relationship with France as we move forward together. 
 
Mr. Speaker, during his visit to Saskatchewan Ambassador 
Bauchard will be meeting with His Honour, the Lieutenant 
Governor; with you, sir, if he hasn’t already; with the Minister 
of Energy and Mines; and I’m very much looking forward to 
my meeting with him this afternoon. 
 
This afternoon, as well, His Excellency will inaugurate in the 
rotunda a French parliamentary display called Exposition Le 
Parlement français with a tea and reception to follow. My 
printed note said that he was going to do that tomorrow but I 
notice that your announcement says it’s today, Mr. Speaker, so I 
always follow your word. 
 
On Wednesday His Excellency travels to Saskatoon for visits to 
Cameco, COGEMA, and Innovation Place. 
 
And I hope and I trust that each step of his travels, His 
Excellency will meet with a warm and friendly welcome and 
that he will come to know the warmth and the openness of the 
Saskatchewan people as customers and investors — yes — but 
also as friends and as neighbours with many common interests 
in a rapidly changing world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in closing, as we meet here in this hallowed 
Chamber, the seat of democracy that we all cherish, it is entirely 
appropriate that we welcome today a representative of France 
whose own democracy has served its people for more than 200 
glorious years. 
 
And as we move forward in the world with the nation and 
people of France as our partners, our allies, and our friends, we 
should remember the ringing words of the patriots who created 



530 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 1999 

that democracy in France — liberté, égalité, fraternité. And we 
should remember the challenge inherent in those words — to 
build a society of freedom, equality, and brotherhood. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and colleagues of the House, I would now ask him 
to stand and my pleasure to introduce — and let’s give him a 
warm welcome — His Excellency, Monsieur Denis Bauchard, 
the Ambassador of France to Canada. Monsieur Ambassador. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I too would like to join with the Premier in welcoming 
the ambassador from France. I had the pleasure of meeting with 
Ambassador Bauchard and Madame Bauchard over lunch and 
the other officials of his group, and I enjoyed talking about the 
kinds of things relative to Saskatchewan from the French 
perspective. 
 
I want to welcome you to Saskatchewan. I want to encourage 
you to have just a tremendous visit. I know this is your first 
visit to Saskatchewan for you and your wife and I hope that it’s 
the first of many more to come. Welcome to Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to add 
warm words of welcome to the ambassador, His Excellency, to 
Saskatchewan, to Regina. I also had the pleasure of meeting and 
speaking with him at the luncheon and reminded him that he 
needs to come back. 
 
He’s a little busy on this occasion, but I reminded him to make 
sure he returns and visits our beautiful historic sites and 
particularly the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) 
training depot which I’m sure he’ll find very interesting. 
Bienvenue, Monsieur et Madame. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the west gallery 
we have a number of visitors as well that to you and through 
you, I want to introduce to the Assembly. They’re accompanied 
by their instructor or staff member, Harris Sutherland and these 
are students from the Saskatchewan Indian Institute of 
Technology. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, throughout our life we often hear of the 
phrase, self-government, and I want to say the students that are 
here today that they’ve taken the first big step. And I want all 
the Assembly in the same warm welcome as our ambassador, to 
the students from SIIT (Saskatchewan Indian Institute of 
Technology) to the Assembly here today. Thank you very 
much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
my distinct pleasure for me this afternoon to introduce to you 
and all members of the Assembly some very distinguished 
guests who come here from a very long way away. 
 
Today from the Namibia National Teachers’ Union are four 

guests: Mrs. Princess Luthuli, secretary of gender affairs; Paul 
Saerwein, the professional development co-ordinator; and from 
the Ghana National Association of Teachers we have John 
Nyoabe, research officer; and Kofi Nyiaye, head of the 
professional development division. 
 
They are accompanied here today by their colleagues from 
Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation, Mrs. Susan Bates. These 
African teacher leaders are visiting the STF (Saskatchewan 
Teachers’ Federation) and the British Columbia Teachers’ 
Federation as part of an international development program of 
the Canadian Teachers’ Federation. They are here to explore 
approaches for professional development of teachers, and I look 
forward, Mr. Speaker, to meeting with them in the next few 
moments. 
 
So I’d ask, Mr. Speaker, if they might rise and have all 
members of the Assembly join me in welcoming them not only 
to the Assembly today but to our fine province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — If other members have introduced guests, if 
you would permit the Speaker to introduce a special guest of 
mine who’s also located the Speaker’s gallery today. 
 
He’s a young man wearing a bright blue jacket with a French 
flag over his heart and with pins from many parts of Canada 
and other parts of the world. He’s also the source of the rock 
music that goes on in my basement into the wee hours of the 
night. 
 
His name is Nicolas Roos. And Nicolas is an exchange student 
through the Rotary exchange program, is in the city of Moose 
Jaw for a year, and has arrived in August, staying till July. For 
the past two and a half months, he’s been a guest in my home 
and will be staying with us until the end of the month. 
 
He hails from the Selesat community in the Alsace region of 
France and it’s a special day for Nicolas to be able to come 
while he’s here in Saskatchewan and meet his own ambassador 
to Canada; at the same time to celebrate the history of 
parliamentary democracy in his own country with the unveiling 
of the French parliamentary exhibit in the rotunda of our 
legislature. 
 
And I’d ask you to extend a warm Saskatchewan welcome to 
Mr. Nicolas Roos. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m sorry that I wasn’t 
quickly enough up on my feet before you were introducing your 
guest, but I would like to join with you in your introduction and 
I also have a guest of my own that I would like to introduce if I 
may. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, seated today behind the bar on the government 
side, and I would say seated only temporarily behind the bar on 
the government side, is a former MLA (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly) from the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Peter Prebble. 



April 13, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 531 

Mr. Peter Prebble, as members are all aware, very capably and 
ably represented the constituency of Saskatoon Greystone in the 
’80s. And Mr. Peter Prebble, as members do know, has most 
recently received the nomination once again for the 
constituency of Saskatoon Greystone, so he will be running for 
the New Democrats in Greystone once again and will be able to 
take his place with the government as a New Democratic 
member. 
 
I am very pleased that Mr. Prebble has come to Regina to 
participate in our caucus affairs and to bring us greetings and to 
let us know what is happening in Saskatoon Greystone. And, 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask that all members would welcome both 
a former colleague, a former MLA, and a future MLA in this 
Assembly, Mr. Peter Prebble. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to join with my 
colleagues in welcoming a guest to the Chamber today. 
Although she has been mentioned previously in our foreign 
visitors’ introduction, I want, on behalf of the members, 
through you and to you, Mr. Speaker, to give a special welcome 
to Susan Bates who has returned to Saskatoon in a position with 
the teachers’ federation but did spend some time in a hiatus here 
in Regina and it's nice to see your face again, Susan. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Minister of Labour’s Daughter’s Passing 
 
Ms. Stanger: — Mr. Speaker, it is with deep regret I stand in 
the Assembly to recognize the life of Sunny Thompson, the 
daughter of our colleague from Regina Centre, Joanne Crofford. 
Sunny died peacefully in her sleep today at the General 
Hospital in Regina. 
 
Our prayers and thoughts are with the family. I would like the 
family to know that all members of the Legislative Assembly 
are saddened by Sunny’s death. And please accept our deepest 
sympathies. 
 
There is a scripture that says: when one suffers we suffer 
together; when we are joyous we rejoice together. Today we 
share Joanne’s and her family’s sorrow. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
rise on behalf of the official opposition on this sad occasion to 
offer condolences to our colleague, the Labour minister, on the 
passing of her daughter, Sunny. 
 
We understand the stress and the heartache that she has gone 
through over the last six months and we share her losses. 
 
I would ask that all members join with us in offering those 
condolences to the family, to the two young children that Sunny 
leaves behind, and to her husband, as well as to the minister and 

her spouse. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to join 
with all colleagues in the House on behalf of the Liberal caucus 
to extend our sincere condolences and sympathy to the Minister 
of Labour on the passing of her daughter. 
 
It’s not easy to lose a loved one, Mr. Speaker, and I’m sure that 
we’ve, each of us, have shared such a loss. And our truly 
deepest sympathy goes out to the Minister of Labour and her 
family. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Increase in Retail Sales 
 

Mr. Kasperski: — Yesterday the member from Swift Current 
gave us some good news about building permits here in 
Saskatchewan and how they’re on the rise here if not in our 
neighbouring provinces. 
 
I also, Mr. Speaker, have some encouraging news which I’d 
also like to share with the Assembly. These figures come also 
from Statistics Canada, courtesy of our Leader-Post staff, our 
great provincial economy boosters. 
 
An article in today’s Leader-Post informs us that for the months 
of January and February of this year, retail sales were up in 
every province except Quebec. 
 
I quote from the article, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Saskatchewan department stores enjoyed the biggest jump 
in sales, posting an 11 per cent increase in February and a 
9.3 per cent increase in the first two months of 1999, 
compared with the same (time) last year. 
 

Any way you slice it, Mr. Speaker, this is good news for 
Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Health Care Services 
 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, people 
across Saskatchewan have expressed many serious concerns 
about the levels of health care services in Saskatchewan. 
Primarily we have heard from patients and family members. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, I would like to read a section of a letter I 
received from Dr. McKitterick, a medical doctor in Norquay. 
And the letter is dated April 8, 1999 and it is addressed to 
myself. The letter reads: 
 

I saw a 63-year-old patient on April 6. He has advanced 
arthritic changes in his hip and this patient has chronic pain 
both in the hip and the right knee, which is strained 
because of his hip abnormality. 
 
This patient has seen the excellent orthopedic people in 
Yorkton and is told that there is a possibility of him having 



532 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 1999 

his hip operation in the year 2000. A delay such as this 
patient has in getting an operation to relieve the pain 
appears to be quite unacceptable. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is not an isolated case. These conditions 
existed long before the dilemma health care faces today. 
Everyone from the patient through to the front-line caregivers 
like nurses and this doctor need to know that a plan is in place 
that will remedy these unacceptable situations. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Weyburn High School/Regional College 
Joint Use Facility 

 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Weyburn continues to shine as a centre of innovation and 
co-operation. Yesterday I attended the official announcement of 
the Weyburn joint use facility at the Weyburn Comprehensive 
High School, along with my colleagues, Hon. Clay Serby and 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag. 
 
I’ve had the opportunity on several occasions to meet with the 
regional college board and the Weyburn Comprehensive School 
Board, and I know the hard work and dedication that they have 
put into this project, along with other participating boards and 
the community. 
 
Both partners will save money by sharing the operating and 
maintenance costs of this facility. This money, along with the 
provincial government’s investment of $850,000 for 
renovations and expansion, will be directed to supporting 
instructors, teachers, and students. 
 
This is a win-win project. Both college and high school students 
will benefit from the improved facilities and equipment, as well 
as high school students will gain a first-hand look at the 
post-secondary education system. 
 
We are making the best use of available resources by enhancing 
existing facilities and creating more of the training and 
educational opportunities that lead to jobs and personal success, 
not to mention growth in the community. This is about 
partnership and lifelong learning. The benefits of this type of 
innovative solution extend beyond the high school students and 
adult learners to the community itself. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to offer my congratulations to all 
those who worked to make the Weyburn joint use facility a 
reality. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskPower Wins Court Decision 
on Cogeneration Proposals 

 
Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, today sees yet another example of 
how this NDP government lurches from crisis to crisis like a 
mean drunk at a pub crawl. Today SaskPower won a court 
decision over Wind Power and Dove Industries. After 
encouraging them in 1993 to invest a great deal in preparing 
proposals for cogeneration, this NDP then turned around and 
slammed the door in their face. 

Here we have another example of the heavy-handed but 
light-headed government with a record of missed opportunities 
and blown potential when it comes to getting needed additional 
power at little expense and diversified economic development 
in this province. The NDP asked for cogeneration proposals, 
promised help, but backed out and ended up dragging people 
through the courts. 
 
This NDP government operates like a schoolyard bully with a 
chip on its shoulder. It bullied people on GRIP (gross revenue 
insurance program). It bullied people back . . . with 
back-to-work legislation for IBEW (International Brotherhood 
of Electrical Workers) and SUN (Saskatchewan Union of 
Nurses), and tried again on cogeneration 
 
However, there comes a day when all bullies are called on their 
bluff, and it is obvious such a day, perhaps in June, is soon 
coming for this NDP (New Democratic Party) government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Fiftieth Anniversary of Western Development Museum 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Some 50 years ago 
Mr. J.L. Phelps submitted the first annual report of the Western 
Development Museum. And that annual report consisted of just 
over one page of report and said that, among other things, the 
price of admission at the North Battleford and Saskatoon 
museums was 25 cents, with children free. The Saskatoon 
exhibit was open year round but the hanger was unheated. The 
museum had a total of 300 exhibits, with half on display. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Phelps concluded his report, quote:  
 

It can now be said that the Western Development Museum 
is an established institution, the value of which will 
increase with the years in preserving in visual form the 
story of the pioneers of the West. 

 
Fifty years and 7 million visitors later, with an additional 
facility in Yorkton and Moose Jaw, with over 70,000 artifacts, 
the Western Development Museum has more than fulfilled the 
prophecy. 
 
Ninety seconds of private members’ statement today for 50 
years is hardly sufficient to help celebrate the WDM’s (Western 
Development Museum) 50th anniversary this week, but I know 
all members will want to congratulate the current staff and 
volunteers and pay tribute to all the visionary pioneers who 
made the Western Development Museum possible. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Caring and Compassion in the Community of Herbert 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, last Sunday in the community 
of Herbert I was privileged to witness the caring and 
compassion that are trademarks of the true Saskatchewan way. 
Close to 500 people attended a benefit brunch sponsored by the 
Herbert Lions and the Herbert Hawks. This was a tremendous 
show of support to help with the medical expenses of young 



April 13, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 533 

Braxton Penner. Later that day many Herbert residents again 
gathered to celebrate Harvey Jahnke’s 80th birthday. 
 
All this time, Mr. Speaker, the nurses of the Herbert hospital 
were providing relief for management at the hospital. Essential 
services were not being compromised as this government 
continues to falsely claim. No, Mr. Speaker, there’ll be no airlift 
of patients required from the Rolling Hills Health District. And 
I can advise that any attempt to drive wedges between people in 
this community will fail. 
 
In closing, I’d ask everyone to join me in saluting the 
community of Herbert for pulling together in true Saskatchewan 
fashion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Recycling Curling Rocks in Unity 
 
Ms. Murrell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Most of us who are 
curling duffers, if there is such a word, have felt the urge to 
smash those stones that won’t do what we want to into little bits 
— sort of the equivalent of throwing your golf clubs into the 
water trap — but they’re too heavy to throw and too hard to 
break. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, Frank Oatway from Unity in my 
constituency has come up with a way not only to break up old 
curling rocks but to also transform the pieces into attractive and 
unique objects. Frank is a rock recycler, turning curling rocks 
what once turned in when we said out, into pins, clocks, napkin 
holders, trophies, jewellery boxes — you name it. 
 
In the process, Frank has become something of an expert on the 
kinds of granite used to make the stones. He can look at a rock 
and tell what quarry it came from, what kind of granite it is 
made of, and whether it is a rare or common variety of granite. 
And since he began this hobby he has become well-known at 
bonspiels around the country. Frank also donates his work for 
charitable fundraising. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I tip my hat and wave my broom to Frank Oatway 
and his unique craft. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Nurses’ Strike 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
for the Premier. Mr. Premier, your back-to-work legislation 
didn’t work. Your court injunction didn’t work. What’s your 
latest solution? Another court injunction. It’s no wonder we 
have a health care crisis. You’re prescribing the wrong 
medicine. Every time the patient gets sicker you double the 
dosage. 
 
Mr. Premier, it’s time for you to admit you made a mistake. We 
need negotiation, not litigation. It’s time for you to go back to 
the bargaining table, withdraw the threats, withdraw the 
preconditions, work out an agreement that addresses working 
conditions and treats nurses with respect. Will you do that, Mr. 

Premier? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It may not be known by guests to the 
Assembly, and I would like to remind all guests of the 
Assembly it’s a long-standing tradition of parliamentary 
democracy and of this Assembly as well of course, that guests 
of the Assembly don’t participate in proceedings. And the Chair 
asks that you respect that and seeks your co-operation. Thank 
you. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
What I want to assure the public is that the Government of 
Saskatchewan has been advised by Saskatchewan Association 
of Health Organizations that as soon as nurses return to work 
they will return to the bargaining table. 
 
And we can get the kind of collective agreement that meets the 
needs of the various people that work in various workplaces 
across the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I’ve indicated to this House and to the public, 
we had an opportunity last Wednesday when the Premier met 
with representatives of SUN and the employer to address 
nurses’ issues. Mr. Speaker, what we were not able to do in this 
fiscal year was address the 22 per cent increase that SUN was 
requesting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is a minimum of 8.6 per cent or $20 million 
for pay equity beginning in 2001 and, Mr. Speaker, there is a 
recruitment and retention fund and there are other things there 
to address issues that nurses face in the workplace. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, 
today is private members’ day. This afternoon the 
Saskatchewan Party will be moving a motion calling on SAHO 
(Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations) and the 
government to return to the bargaining table. Show some good 
faith, go back to the bargaining table, and I’m sure that good 
faith will be reciprocated by the nurses. 
 
I think many of your members now realize you made a mistake. 
It’s time to admit that mistake. Get out of the courtroom. Get 
back to bargaining. 
 
Mr. Premier, will you allow your members to express their true 
feelings on your handling of the nurses’ strike? Will you allow 
a free vote? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I can assure the public that should the 
nurses choose to return to work this afternoon, we will ensure 
that SAHO goes to the bargaining table. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Government Employees’ Union 
Health Care Support Workers 

 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the 
Minister of Health as well. Madam Minister, this morning more 



534 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 1999 

than 600 support staff at Saskatchewan Cancer Agency in the 
North Central Health District walked off the job. These SGEU 
(Saskatchewan Government Employees’ Union) members said 
they were joining the nurses on the picket lines because the 
government wasn’t listening. 
 
Sound familiar, Madam Minister? You refused to listen to 
nurses and forced them onto the picket lines. Now the NDP is 
refusing to listen to health care support staff in Regina, 
Saskatoon, and Melfort. The net result of this NDP 
government’s incompetence is the worst health care crisis in 
nearly 40 years. 
 
Madam Minister, what are you doing to ensure that cancer 
patients in Saskatoon and Regina will receive the care they 
need? What are you doing to provide health care services to the 
people of Melfort who are now without nurses and support 
staff? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, thousands of civil 
servants in this province, thousands of teachers in this province 
and thousands of Crown corporation employees and municipal 
employees in this province have settled for 2, 2, 2 plus 1, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
If we were to do what is being requested, Mr. Speaker, we 
would go back to the ’80s where we ran up a debt in this 
province of $15 billion. Today, Mr. Speaker, today as I speak, 
$2 million this day is leaving the province to New York and 
Zurich and Tokyo as interest on the public debt. Imagine, Mr. 
Speaker, what we could do with $730 million that now leaves 
this province in interest. 
 
We could address, address every issue in this province — every 
issue, Mr. Speaker. But I for one have not spent eight years of 
my life turning this province into a situation where we no 
longer are spending money out in the deficit, Mr. Speaker, 
because that’s not where people want to go. They do not want 
to go back to the past which those members are asking . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Next question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
every day the minister gets up in the legislature and finds 
someone to blame. You blame past administrations; you blame 
the nurses; you blame the opposition; you blame the federal 
government. You blame someone. 
 
Madam Minister, it’s time to look in the mirror. This is your 
health care crisis. Your NDP government caused it, your NDP 
government made it worse, and now your NDP Premier lost 
control of it. 
 
Do you realize the kind of impact you’re having on people? In 
my constituency of Melfort all acute care patients have been 
hauled to Tisdale, Nipawin, or Prince Albert, wherever there’s 
space for them. Medical care is now being administrated by 
untrained family members and out-of-scope employees. 
 
Madam Minister, when are you going to get back to 
negotiations again with SGEU workers? When are you going to 

throw out the back-to-work legislation and the preconditions 
and negotiate with the nurses? When are you going to fix the 
problem you have created? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the people of 
this province — and this is an important question that needs to 
be addressed — I would ask that member if he believes that we 
should provide a 22 per cent increase. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Madam Minister, today there is no support 
staff working in the cancer clinics in Regina and Saskatoon. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order. Order. The Chair 
is having some difficulty being able to hear the question put, 
and I ask for the co-operation of members on all sides of the 
House. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, 
today there is no support staff working in the cancer clinics in 
Regina and Saskatoon. There are no X-ray technicians, no lab 
technicians, no licensed practical nurses, no home care aids, 
dietary aids, and laundry staff working at the Melfort hospital. 
And, Madam Minister, thanks to you and the NDP government, 
there are no nurses working in Saskatchewan today. 
 
The health care system is grinding to a halt. That’s NDP health 
care, Madam Minister. It’s a colossal failure, and every person 
in Saskatchewan knows it and is paying the price. 
 
Madam Minister, when are you going to get back to meaningful 
negotiations with no preconditions so these people of the 
province who want to provide health care can get back and do 
their jobs with dignity? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, I find the member’s 
question somewhat ironic given that Bill 29 — a Bill put 
forward by the Tory Party — The Democratic Unionism Act; 
Bill 30, The Trade Union Amendment Act which repeals 
successor rights; and, Mr. Speaker, Bill 31, The Saskatchewan 
Right to Work Act. Well, Mr. Speaker, I know where those 
members are coming from. I know where they’re coming from 
because I have sat in this House for the last 13 years and I’ve 
seen their record on the trade union movement of the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question remains. Does this member support a 
22 per cent increase? Is that his position, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Government Advertising During Nurses’ Strike 
 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Health. Madam Minister, haven’t 
you learned anything from the mistakes you’ve made over the 
past few days? On Sunday the minister writes a letter to nurses 
saying it’s time to end the recrimination. On Monday she’s 
using taxpayers’ money to take out a full page ad vilifying 
nurses. And today she runs an even more one-sided ad 
condemning nurses. The minister says . . . 



April 13, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 535 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — The minister says she’s extending her hand to 
nurses, but what she really is doing here is extending her hand 
to slap nurses in the face. Madam Minister, why do you 
continue with this form of disrespect? How do you expect to 
make peace with nurses when you just keep on insulting nurses 
with these one-sided ads? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, on Sunday I, on behalf of 
my colleagues and government, acknowledged that while we 
were dealing with a $15 billion debt that was wrapped up by her 
predecessors, the issues that workers were confronting in the 
workplace were not being addressed, Mr. Speaker. I did that, 
Mr. Speaker, with the understanding that the nurses would be 
returning to work, Mr. Speaker. 
 
At that time, on Sunday evening, after I sent my letter, the SUN 
people decided that they were not going to urge their members 
to return to the workplace and comply with the judge’s order, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
It is extremely important that the people of this province know 
the facts of this dispute, and we are not in the fiscal position to 
support a 22 per cent increase to the SUN. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Madam Minister, you are using taxpayers’ money 
to run ads that only tell one side of the story. There’s no 
mention . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — There’s no mention of how you have destroyed 
health care or how you have destroyed working conditions for 
nurses over the last eight years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — There’s no mention of how the hospitals have 
been closed and the nurses have been lost due to your 
mismanagement. Every taxpayer in Saskatchewan, including 
nurses, are being forced to pay for these ads. But most 
taxpayers don’t agree with the NDP’s handling of this dispute. 
 
Madam Minister, why are you only telling one side of the 
story? Are you going to continue running these costly ads? And 
if so, will you dedicate half of the space in the next ad to allow 
nurses to tell their side of the story? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, we live in a country that 
is a country where the citizens of this country and the citizens 
of this province abide by the laws of the province and the 
country, Mr. Speaker. My question to the opposition is this: do 
you support a 22 per cent increase and do you encourage people 
to not abide by the laws of this land? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

SGEU Health Care Support Workers 
 

Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
SGEU health workers in the North Central Health District 
offered their services to management, but instead of thinking of 
patients’ safety, management said no, thank you. 
 
The workers, the LPNs (licensed practical nurse), and lab techs 
said to management they would wear pagers in the case of 
emergencies. The workers offered to come in at a moment’s 
notice. All the hospital had to do was call them and send off the 
beeper. 
 
What was the response, Mr. Speaker, of the management? Did 
they say great, we’ll give you a call if we need you? No, Mr. 
Speaker. Management’s response was not only a refusal to call 
in case of emergency but they demanded the employers return 
the pagers. 
 
My question is to the Premier. Why should people believe you 
care about patient safety when your management is stripping 
the pagers from these employees who are offering to come in at 
a moment’s notice? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, one of the things that I’ve 
come to learn about some of the information that is shared in 
this legislature, is that when you check that information out it is 
not always found to be factual. What I can assure the member, 
what I can assure the member is I will check to see whether the 
information he’s provided us is in fact factual. 
 
But I can say to the people of this province is that we are not in 
a position to agree to all of the requests or demands that are 
being made of us. To do so would mean the following — we 
either cut services, increase taxes, or go back in a deficit 
position. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have not spent the last eight years trying to get 
this province into a fiscal position where we can start paying 
down the debt, start paying down taxes . . . or start giving 
people a tax cut, and start improving services. Mr. Speaker, 
that’s not where we want to go. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Madam Minister, I dare say you have 
another option. And that’s to let go about the 600 spin doctors 
and hacks that your government has stuck all over the Crown 
Corporations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on the weekend government spokesperson and 
chairman of SAHO, Brian Rourke, said that they were so 
confident that nurses would go back to work they didn’t even 
need a plan B — they didn’t need a plan B, Mr. Speaker. Well 
it’s no wonder health care is in such a chaos with this 
short-sightedness of your government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP had no plan B for nurses going back to 
work and now look where it’s got us. With such demonstrated 
incompetence I’m almost afraid to ask what the NDP’s plan B 
is for the SGEU workers. 



536 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 1999 

Mr. Premier, don’t you think that plan A, B, C, or whatever 
plan should be first, to repeal the Bill that you put before this 
House and allow the collective bargaining process to go ahead 
without your political interference? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier this 
afternoon, we live in a province where people abide by the laws 
of this province. Mr. Speaker, we are encouraging the SUN to 
ask their members to return to the workplace in order that the 
law of this province can be upheld. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Advertising for Out-of-Scope Hospital Administrators 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When the people of 
this province read our newspapers these days they read ads like 
this one condemning nurses with full-page ads in the paper. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they also see ads from other provinces like this 
one: Seeking nurses to move from Saskatchewan and work 
elsewhere. However, Mr. Speaker, they see ads . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Now the Chair is having some difficulty . . . 
Order. The Chair is having some difficulty . . . Order. Order, 
order. Order. Order. 
 
Now the Chair has had — Order! — has had much difficulty 
being able to hear the question being put by the hon. member 
for Arm River and recognizes that part of the reason is because 
one of his colleagues is involving the guests in the gallery and 
— Order, order — and because of interruptions on both sides of 
the House. Order. 
 
And I’ll ask for the co-operation of all hon. members. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. However, the ads 
that they see in the papers from the health care people in 
Saskatchewan are ads looking for more administrators, Mr. 
Speaker. They’re not looking for . . . not advertising for nurses. 
They’re advertising for administrators, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, can the Premier tell us in this House what kind of 
a message that he’s sending to our nurses that are residents of 
this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, one of the things that has 
become apparent to us in the last six days is that we have very 
few out-of-scope nurse managers that are able to deal with the 
work that is being requested of them. I mean they can’t possibly 
take care of the patient needs of people that are in our 
institutions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what I can say to the member is that this province 
cannot afford a 22 per cent increase at this point in our history. 

Mr. Speaker, we are urging nurses to go back to the workplace. 
And we can assure SUN and its members that we will ensure 
that there is a collective agreement that meets the needs of their 
members, meets the needs of the taxpayers of this province, and 
meets the needs of people who are served by our health system. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Mr. Speaker, maybe the Minister of Health 
could tell this House how many nurses they could hire with 
these fearmongering ads that they’ve got spread across the 
newspaper in Saskatchewan this morning. Mr. Speaker, there 
are also reports that the Pasqua Hospital might be closing today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of Health: can she 
confirm or deny these reports; is it just more of your 
fearmongering, Madam Minister? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, as you will know, that in 
this province unlike other times when there have been 
withdrawal of services by the registered nurses, we have a much 
more integrated system. As I indicated yesterday to the press, 
that the province would be looking to its districts because we 
were advised that they were going to begin to consolidate 
medical services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m advised that the people who are providing 
nursing services in the health districts are becoming extremely 
fatigued and, Mr. Speaker, those individuals are asking for 
some relief. In some cases, Mr. Speaker, I can report that SUN 
has been able to provide relief but, Mr. Speaker, in other 
situations I can advise that that has not been possible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as this dispute continues, the health districts will 
continue to consolidate medical services for the people of this 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Negotiations During Saskatchewan Union of Nurses’ Strike 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
government states that its legislation is necessary as far as 
legislating the nurses back to work, because it compromises 
patient safety. It also states that it cannot pay nurses an increase 
of 22 per cent in salary. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want us to be blunt about patient safety and how 
it has indeed been compromised for several years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Physical exhaustion, mental fatigue, being 
bumped from one area of nursing expertise to another, ever 
increasing demands with diminishing numbers of support, have 
already put people at risk who are in need of health care in our 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Madam Minister, I ask you this. Please, please have your 
government take the leadership role. Say this — say, we were 
wrong. Say, we are fixing it now. Say, we ask you to come back 
to the table first. And say it without requesting them to have to 
go back to work. 



April 13, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 537 

The Speaker: — Order, order, order, order. Order, order. Now 
the hon. member has been extremely lengthy in her preamble 
and I’ll ask her to go directly to her question now. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Madam Minister, will you please take this 
step. Will you extend your hand fully to the nurses today, 
Madam Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1430) 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, that member will know 
that I have the highest regard for her, and that member will 
know that on Sunday I sent a two and a half page letter to the 
president of SUN indicating that mistakes had been made, and 
for that I apologized on the part of the government. 
 
I asked the president of SUN to take a step forward with me. 
We can solve this problem. We can solve it together. We are 
committed to addressing the issues that nurses feel so strongly 
about. I asked the president to take that step, to take it with me. 
But we cannot take that step while people are in violation of the 
law. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Mr. Speaker, Madam Minister, there is 
only one reason why nurses are in violation of the law in 
Saskatchewan, and that was because your government did not 
think this through clearly. These are people . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — It is true, the government has been in 
error. And to present the stance like somehow you’re solely 
protecting the taxpayers of the province from some unrealistic 
demands of greedy nurses is absolutely unconscionable. 
Because everyone knows the truth — the nurses have been 
taken for granted; nurses have been disrespected. They were 
shut out of a process and now why should they have to blink 
first in this showdown with the government. I do not believe in 
people breaking the law, Madam Minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Mr. Speaker, what has been tried is not 
working. If it’s not working, it’s not working because the 
problems are cumulative and they are long-standing. Is your 
government willing to put aside its pride in this situation, to 
accept responsibility for this very, very sad standoff. Don’t ask 
at this point to walk side by side. Lead . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order, order. Order, order. Now 
the hon. member has been extremely lengthy again. I’ll ask her 
to go directly to her question now. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
question, Madam Minister, is this. Do something else. Do 
something different. What will you do to initiate this process 
again? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, where I come from, 

where I come from, Mr. Speaker, your word is your word. And 
last Wednesday there was a meeting, there was a meeting with 
the Premier of this province . . . I think people should listen. 
Last Wednesday there was a meeting with the Premier of this 
province, and SUN representatives said they would come back 
the next morning at 8:30 in the morning. When you say you’re 
coming back, you come back. Mistake number one, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We can say, and I have said, that we have made mistakes. There 
is no doubt about it. But, Mr. Speaker, we have a law in this 
province, a law, and a court injunction — a judge’s order. And, 
Mr. Speaker, the people in this province are law-abiding people 
and we do not support the breaking of the law, Mr. Speaker. 
And we simply can’t afford 22 per cent pay increase. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order! Order. Order. Order. Order. I will ask 
the hon. members not to be interacting with the guests in the 
gallery. Order! And I will ask all the hon. guests to respect the 
traditions of democracy. Co-operation is appreciated. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 211 — The Legislative Assembly and Executive 
Council Act, 1999 (FREE VOTES) 

 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I move that Bill No. 211, The Legislative Assembly 
and Executive Council Act, 1999 (FREE VOTES) be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 239 — The Resumption of Services 
(Nurses - SUN) Repeal Act 

 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, with leave, Mr. Speaker, I move 
first reading of Bill No. 239, The Resumption of Services 
Repeal Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of this House, now. 
 
Leave not granted. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — If leave is not granted now, then next sitting of 
this House. 
 
The Speaker: — I’m sorry, the — order — the Chair was 
unable to hear the remarks of the hon. member for North 
Battleford. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — My apologies, Mr. Speaker. If leave to move 
second reading is not granted for immediately, I ask for leave 
for second reading at the next sitting of this House. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair I think I heard the hon. member 



538 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 1999 

correctly. Request to leave is not in order because leave can 
only be requested for a matter to be dealt with at this time by 
this House and that was not the nature of the request as the 
Chair understood. Next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to provide the 
response to question 44, and by leave of the Assembly, also 
provide the answers to questions 45, 46, 47, and 48. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip, with leave, 
simultaneously provides the answers for items 1 through 5. Is 
leave granted? 
 
Leave is granted, and the answers are provided for item 1, 
question 44; item 2, question 45; item 3, question 46; item 4, 
question 47; and item 5, question 48. Those answers are tabled. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — I request, Mr. Speaker, that question no. 49 
be converted to orders for return (debatable). 
 
The Speaker: — The question, item 6, question 49 is converted 
to notice of motions for return (debatable). 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — The answer for question 50, Mr. Speaker, 
submitted. 
 
The Speaker: — The answer to item no. 7, question no. 50, is 
provided. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — I request that question no. 51 be converted 
to orders for return (debatable). 
 
The Speaker: — The item 8, question no. 51, is converted to 
notice of motions for return (debatable). 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 

Health Care Funding 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, at the 
conclusion of my remarks, I will be moving: 
 

That this Assembly support the government policy of 
increased funding for health care, backing its commitment 
with the largest health budget in the history of the 
province, a budget that will lead to a health care system 
ready to meet the demands of the new century. 

 
Mr. Speaker, events have rather overtaken this motion and it is 
so easy to focus simply on the events of today and to ignore the 
larger context. But, Mr. Speaker, I have witnessed in the last 
week some things that have caused me great personal distress, 
because I am extremely concerned that until and unless we have 
the rule of law in this land, we are creating the conditions, and 
some members within this Assembly are creating the 
conditions, of anarchy. 
 
I joined the New Democratic Party, Mr. Speaker, because I 
believe in progress. I believe in social justice, equality, and 

fairness for all. I believe that elected representatives with a 
social democratic point of view can provide a voice for the 
powerless, for the weak and downtrodden in society. 
 
I did not join the New Democratic Party, Mr. Speaker, simply 
to be a mouthpiece for special interests, no matter how loud 
they may be. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I joined the New Democratic Party, I became an 
NDP MLA because I believe we can work for change within the 
system. I believe that the majority of Saskatchewan people, all 
union members believe that we can work for change within the 
system. And so therefore I am rising today to address the issue 
of the health care system in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it seems to me we need to focus on the larger 
context when we are debating the question of health care. As 
the Minister of Health has indicated, yes, there have been 
mistakes made. 
 
But I would say to the members of this Assembly that mistakes 
have been made because we have been coping with an 
incredible debt in this province. We were handed an 
unprecedented situation when we took government. And we 
have tried to find a way to reform and improve the health care 
system. 
 
We had first of all to deal with a $15 billion debt. We were 
lucky that we were able, through the co-operation of the people 
of Saskatchewan, to bring it down to $12 billion. 
 
We had a $1.2 billion deficit in government programs. We’ve 
been able to bring it down to zero. Indeed this year we have a 
slim surplus of $8 million; $8 million, Mr. Speaker, as all 
members know, is not very much when it comes to dealing with 
a lot of the pent-up demands that many people in Saskatchewan 
feel — many people in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, not only 
the group that is currently withdrawing its services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we had . . . in order to deal with the deficit, 
unfortunately we had to raise taxes and we had to cut programs 
— programs that many of us on the social democratic side of 
the House held very dear, like the prescription drug plan and so 
forth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those were not easy decisions for us to make, but 
with the co-operation of the people of Saskatchewan we made 
them. And all people sacrificed — members of the opposition, 
members of unions, members of the government. All people in 
this province sacrificed to get the province of Saskatchewan 
back on track. 
 
We have now been able to do it and we were able this year, 
thankfully, to put $195 million extra into health care. 
Unfortunately in the last week, we saw the Saskatchewan Union 
of Nurses withdraw their services because they wanted more 
than all the other workers of Saskatchewan who get their 
paycheques from the taxpayers, they wanted more than those 
workers received. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last Thursday we passed a Bill, the famous or 
infamous Bill 23, that gave the nurses 2, 2, 2 and 1 plus an 
additional 1.2 for wage parity. They got exactly the same as all 



April 13, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 539 

other workers in the province. At the same time though, Mr. 
Speaker, we made significant offers for binding 
recommendations from the nursing advisory process, something 
that the Associate Minister of Health had been working for 
since 1988 during the nurses’ strike and in the 1999 nurses’ 
strike. It can be summed up simply, Mr. Speaker — that was 
whistle-blowing legislation, a process for dealing with 
whistle-blowing. We made binding recommendations for that. 
 
We gave them seniority-driven selection criteria. We offered 
pay equity — $20 million pay equity to be implemented in 
2001. We offered a recruitment and retention strategy with a 
tripartite-administered committee and conversion of casual 
positions to permanent positions. Those, Mr. Speaker, would 
have taken up a significant part of that $195 that we had in 
health. We still want to negotiate with the nurses for those 
offers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1982 — people have been saying, well, 
remember ’82, you might lose government again — in 1982, 
Mr. Speaker, when we had health care workers out, at that time 
nurses were demanding that they be paid the same as carpenters 
in this province. Well in 1982, the carpenters signed an 
agreement to give them an end rate of $18.26 an hour. Mr. 
Speaker, right now a union carpenter currently receives $17.50 
an hour, down 76 cents from 1982. Now it’s making its way up 
from the low of $12 an hour that it went to in the ’80s, but what 
I’m saying is we have to put all of these things into context. 
 
This province has been dealing with a sinkhole of debt and all 
people have been paying the price. And now, Mr. Speaker, as 
we start to see some bright spots on the horizon, now is not the 
time for one group or another to say they are more than 
especially entitled than anyone else to a fair share of the pie in 
Saskatchewan. All people have to be treated equitably and 
fairly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have to look at the geographical context. In 
Manitoba nurses have had a wage rollback. In Alberta they had 
a rollback; now their salary has come up again, but they have a 
labour relations code, Mr. Speaker, that does not allow nurses to 
strike. In BC (British Columbia) they have essential services 
legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also have to take a look when we’re looking at 
the larger context at the care context. Mr. Speaker, there are 
many people involved in health care, and I would like at this 
moment to pay tribute to all those people involved in health 
care. MLAs on all sides of the House have had many occasions 
in the last little while to be present in hospitals, in nursing 
homes, and to be in the homes of people receiving home care 
services. They receive, by and large, excellent care, excellent 
care from LPNs who have been holding the fort in the last few 
days; excellent care from housekeeping aides, from dieticians, 
from respiratory therapists, and excellent care from nursing 
managers and from nurses as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the health care system is large, it is complex, and 
all people in the health care system deserve an equitable amount 
of compensation. Mr. Speaker, I believe very firmly in fair 
wages for all workers. The offer that we have given, that we 
have legislated for SUN, provides them a fair wage. 
 

It also provides them with mechanisms for dealing with 
long-standing grievances and concerns. And I ask them to 
understand that everyone in this province has sacrificed 
together, which is the Saskatchewan way. Together, the 
co-operative way, people have been working to get this 
province back on track. And now is not the time — nor indeed, 
Mr. Speaker, is there ever a time for one group to say that they 
are especially entitled to more than all other people get. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have offered a great deal in terms of 
non-monetary items on the table. We have legislated the same 
fair wage package for nurses as we have for all other workers 
who receive their paycheques from the taxpayers of this 
province. 
 
I ask the nurses to understand that there is a rule of law in this 
country. I ask them to understand that Bill 23 has been 
proclaimed and it is important that they go back to work. As 
soon as they are back at work, we will be back negotiating with 
them at the bargaining table for all those non-monetary items 
that they cared about so deeply in ’88 and in ’91. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s not a one of us here in this House who 
hasn’t been touched by personal tragedy, who hasn’t felt the 
strains in the health care system. Sadly, Mr. Speaker, there are 
many of us here who are feeling the strains in the health care 
system most acutely in the last six days. There are people in this 
House who have relatives who now are phoning them and 
saying, I’ve been diagnosed with breast cancer — how do I get 
my treatment? 
 
As we know, as we heard earlier today, the Minister of Labour 
has not been present in this House for the last week because she 
has been over at the Pasqua Hospital day and night tending to 
her dying daughter. Mr. Speaker, I am assured that her daughter 
received excellent care at Pasqua Hospital both — and at the 
General Hospital as well — both before the current labour 
situation erupted and during the current labour situation. 
 
Health care workers, whether they are nurses, LPNs, MDs 
(Doctor of Medicine), or housekeeping aides, or any of the 
other plethora of workers in health care, health care workers are 
professionals and I am very pleased that they have been 
conducting themselves in a professional way. 
 
I hope, notwithstanding some of the signs that we have seen in 
this House of incipient anarchy, that those workers who think 
that the way to achieve their goals is to scream and intimidate, 
I’m hoping that they will understand that it is far better to be 
calm, to go back to the table, to obey the rule of law, and to 
listen and put their demands within the context of the larger 
society of Saskatchewan and the budgetary means and ability of 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased that this year we were able to 
provide an additional $195 million for health care. And I do ask 
that everyone understand that as money becomes available, as 
we are able to improve the economy of this province and pay 
down more debt, that we will be able to make further 
improvements. 
 
In the meantime, Mr. Speaker, I do ask all members of the 
Assembly to join me in supporting this motion, which is, and I 



540 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 1999 

do now move it: 
 

That this Assembly support the government policy of 
increased funding for health care, backing its commitment 
with the largest health budget in the history of the 
province, a budget that will lead to a health care system 
ready to meet the demands of the new century. 
 

I do so move, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I’m afraid the motion is not in order without a 
seconder, and I cannot accept it without a seconder. 
 
Ms. Lorje: — I’m sorry, Mr. Speaker, I sometimes get carried 
away with my rhetoric and I forget to follow the fine points. 
That doesn’t mean I’m an anarchist; it just means I forget about 
rules. 
 
I do move, seconded by the member from Swift Current, that 
the motion that I had previously read out be now concurred in. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the Assembly 
to second the motion made by the member from Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
I thank you for the opportunity to say a few words about the 
state of medicare in Saskatchewan and in Canada. Although we 
are presently experiencing a little difference of opinion between 
the demands of nurses and the government’s position, I still 
believe that with patience, understanding, and good will, that 
we will reach a suitable settlement which will be fair to the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan, fair to the nurses, and fair to the 
patients. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, this afternoon I would like to take a global 
view of the overall state of health care, not only in this great 
province but in Canada as a whole. 
 
Mr. Speaker, good health means more than the treatment of 
physical shortcomings or the treatment of disease and illness. 
Good health refers to the well-being of the whole person. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the government’s responsibilities then is 
that we must create conditions conducive to good health. That 
means we must develop public policies made for healthy 
people, policies which provide for full employment, decent 
wages, housing, a strong social safety net, food, safe 
neighbourhoods, a clean environment, and a safe workplace. 
Mr. Speaker, these are all part and parcel and necessary for a 
good health policy. 
 
This government is committed to public policies which will 
enhance the well-being of the people of Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Speaker, I am not going to list all the programs that this 
government has initiated. I would be here for many more hours 
than you would allow, and as a wise man once said: the mind 
can only absorb as much as the seat can endure. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our policy of economic development has led to the 
creation of many jobs. In fact more people are working in 
Saskatchewan than in any other time in our history; good jobs at 

decent wages which provide them with a healthy environment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also like to mention the child action plan 
and how it contributes to improving the health and well-being 
of children. The child action plan is a long-term provincial 
strategy for government and communities to work together to 
improve the health and well-being of children. Emphasis is 
placed on helping those who are most vulnerable to health, 
education, social, and justice problems. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as part of a broader poverty reduction strategy, 
Saskatchewan Health is participating in an interdepartmental 
comprehensive early childhood development strategy. That 
strategy is a long-term plan for all children aged zero to five 
that will attempt to link existing programs, build on existing 
resources, and introduce new community-based partnerships. 
 
Mr. Speaker, three of Saskatchewan’s Health activities related 
to the child action plan include: contributing 2 million through 
the family health benefits program to help families on social 
assistance enter the workplace without losing child health 
benefits; 500,000 for additional mental health staff to help 
coordinate services for children and youth with challenging 
behaviour; 150,000 for the early skills development program 
whose goal is to help kindergarten children with persistent, 
aggressive, and anti-social behaviours. Mr. Speaker, these are 
just a few of the public policies that help create a climate for 
good health. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is known as the birthplace of 
medicare in Canada. It took a while to convince the rest of 
Canada to accept medicare, but eventually it became universal 
throughout Canada. The foundation of medicare of course in 
Canada is the Canada Health Act. Mr. Speaker, we often speak 
of the principles of medicare but I think that a lot of us forget 
what they are. 
 
(1500) 
 
The five main principles of the Canada Health Act are: 
universal coverage, accessibility, portability between provinces 
and territories, comprehensive coverage, non-profit public 
administration. Mr. Speaker, this government is committed to 
maintaining the five principles. However, the province alone 
cannot ensure that these principles will be maintained and 
enforced. This is clearly the responsibility of the federal 
government. The federal government must maintain sufficient 
cash transfers to the province to guarantee access to health 
services as a right for all Canadians. 
 
When Ottawa provided 50 per cent of the funding for medicare, 
it did have the financial clout to enforce the principles by 
threatening to withhold cash transfers to provinces that violated 
the Canada Health Act. However, when the funding from 
Ottawa only constituted a small percentage, richer provinces — 
like Alberta — could ignore the threats from Ottawa and 
proceed to implement their brand of medicare. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Tories opposite often refer to Alberta when 
comparing Saskatchewan’s policies and accomplishments. One 
of the areas that they refer to is privatization of health care. Mr. 
Speaker, on April 3, 1999, the Edmonton Journal headline read: 
“Klein sees private hospitals some day.” Quoting from the 



April 13, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 541 

article: 
 
. . . the government released a . . . report compiled by a 
blue-ribbon panel which indicates how the province might 
license and regulate private hospitals and fit them into the 
provincial health system without contravening the Canada 
Health Act. 
 
Later Klein said the report could form the basis for 
legislation which permits privately owned, for-profit . . . 
(hospitals). 

 
Mr. Speaker, why should one be so concerned about the action 
in Alberta? Well, Mr. Speaker, if private facilities are allowed 
to tap into the public health insurance, US (United States) based 
health care providers will be able to open up in Canada and 
under the terms of the North American Free Trade Agreement, 
NAFTA, make the same claim on the public systems as a 
province, public, and non-profit providers. 
 
At this time I would like to just compare the systems under four 
main points. It’s a proven fact that the American system costs 
more. In 1995 Canada spent $2,049 per person or about 55 per 
cent of what the Americans spent per person. 
 
Canadians get much more for their health dollars. The public 
money covers every Canadian for a wide range of services. In 
contrast fewer than 30 per cent of Americans are covered by 
government care plans. And yet our Tories say they like 
privatized American health care. 
 
One of the things which, Mr. Speaker, one of the things which 
we’re often told about by the opposition party is about 
administrative costs. Well the administrative costs in Canada 
are much, much lower than what they are in the States. A study 
comparing hospitals in California, in Ontario, estimated that 
roughly half the difference in hospital costs could be explained 
by higher administrative costs in the land south. 
 
Quality of care — often we hear the opposition and the Third 
Party across the hall exclaim about the quality of care which is 
in Canada. Although there is relatively more technology in the 
US, there is little evidence that all of it is necessary or altered to 
improve care quality. 
 
There is however evidence that Canada distributes its 
technology more appropriately and equitably. The existence of 
a public administrated health care system in Canada enhances 
the likelihood that research conducted here and abroad will be 
translated into improved care, and we have a lot of it. 
 
Portability — Mr. Speaker, earlier I mentioned that portability 
was an important principle in Canada’s Health Act. In Canada, 
public health insurance coverage follows Canadians, without a 
break in service, job to job. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the threat of privatization of health care in Canada 
is the biggest challenge we face. This government will do 
everything it can to oppose what I believe is the greatest danger. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our position is clear. But, Mr. Speaker, and to 
their credit, the position of the Tories is also clear. Despite 
having a care . . . health care system in Saskatchewan 

which is . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. The hon. member’s time has 
expired. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the motion presented by the member from Saskatoon Southeast 
and spoke on by the member from Swift Current are typical 
NDP motions and typical NDP speeches. 
 
Brag, brag about what they think, brag about what they think 
they have done in the last eight years and blame everybody else 
for anything that somebody might disagree with. It’s never their 
responsibility. What we’ve had here, Mr. Speaker, for the last 
eight years is irresponsible government — not responsible 
government but irresponsible government. 
 
They accept no blame whatsoever for the year . . . eight years 
that they have served as the Government of Saskatchewan. It 
makes you wonder why they want to be in power. They want to 
exercise the power but they don’t want to take responsibility for 
the things they do. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, there are some people who are prepared to 
hold them responsible. The member from Kindersley was just 
out in the rotunda and talked with the lady who is sitting in the 
gallery right now. And this lady told him that she has been a 
lifelong supporter of the NDP but that she will not be voting for 
them again. 
 
There’s a lot of people across this province, Mr. Speaker, that 
are expressing those kind of sentiments when it comes to the 
nurses’ strike. 
 
The member from Saskatoon Southeast last week wanted to 
brag about how great health care in Saskatchewan was under 
the member from Riversdale, the Premier and the Leader of the 
NDP Party. Well, Mr. Speaker, I think we’ve seen the evidence 
that not all is well in health care in Saskatchewan. We have a 
strike in place, Mr. Speaker, that has been going on now for five 
days because of the actions of the member from Riversdale, 
because of the interference in the bargaining process that he 
stepped forward and implemented last Wednesday. He stepped 
in to interfere in the collective bargaining process, and it fell 
apart on him. 
 
This was after the Minister of Health had told the nurses during 
negotiations, you will either do it my way or we’ll legislate you 
back to work. 
 
Can you imagine? Can you imagine the hue and cry that would 
arise from those members opposite if an employer in the private 
sector was to approach his employees during labour 
negotiations and use those kind of threats. He’d be thrown in 
jail immediately. He’d be thrown in jail immediately. And the 
member from Regina Wascana Plains would be the first one 
demanding that to happen. 
 
And yet she sits in her seat and votes back-to-work legislation 
on the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses. And she’s proud of it. 
She’s proud of it, Mr. Speaker — proud of it. I hope the people 



542 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 1999 

in her constituency remember her pride in voting back-to-work 
legislation — not once, Mr. Speaker, but twice. Twice, Mr. 
Speaker. She voted for putting the IBEW back to work, and she 
voted for SUN going back to work. And she’s proud of that. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I think there’s a good many members over 
there who are showing false bravado in showing pride for what 
they are doing. Because they are getting the phone calls a lot 
more than we are, Mr. Speaker — a lot more than we are. And 
those are phone calls saying you’re wrong, you’re wrong, Mr. 
Speaker, to be voting this back. 
 
The member from Saskatoon Southeast talks about middle of 
the night. Well that’s what this government did in the labour 
negotiations. Two-thirty in the morning we get the phone call, 
back-to-work legislation is going to be presented; be here 
tomorrow at 10 o’clock. Middle of the night. And that’s what 
the member from Saskatoon Southeast is supporting — 
back-to-work legislation in the dark of the night. 
 
We have seen the problems, Mr. Speaker, that are taking place 
in the hospitals, and it’s not just something that happened last 
week. It’s been an ongoing process for the entire duration of 
this government in power — the entire duration. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we have a nurses’ strike in place. And we 
believe that it’s incumbent on this government to step forward, 
assume their role of leadership, assume responsibility for the 
things they have done, and say to the nurses, we will sit down 
with you and negotiate with no preconditions. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, I will be moving an amendment to the 
motion at the conclusion of my speech calling on the 
government to do exactly that. I also call on the government, 
Mr. Speaker, to allow their members to vote freely, to vote their 
conscience and vote on behalf of their constituents; to vote on 
behalf of their constituents, including the nurses, Mr. Speaker, 
including the patients, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And some of the members over there are asking, what is a free 
vote? I know they don’t understand the concept, Mr. Speaker, 
because they have never been allowed to freely vote their 
consciences. It’s when the party whip doesn’t force discipline 
on you to vote the party line. It’s when there are no threats such 
as the threat the Minister of Health used on the nurses: we’ll 
force you back to work if you don’t follow our way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I call on the whip to release his members, to not 
force them to follow party discipline, to allow them to vote their 
consciences, and to listen to what their members are saying. 
 
The member from Saskatoon Eastview who was the past 
president of SUN — let her vote the way she wants to, Mr. 
Speaker, not the way the Premier and the party whip demands. 
Let her vote her own conscience. Let her vote for her 
constituents. Let her vote, Mr. Speaker, for the people that 
helped to elect her, the nurses that went on the doorstep and 
knocked doors for her, not the party line, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many problems in the hospitals, 
problems that this government is not yet prepared to address — 
shortages of nurses. Isn’t it amazing, Mr. Speaker, that with the 
past president of SUN sitting at the cabinet table that neither the 

Premier nor the Minister of Health knew that there was a 
nursing shortage. They had sat there together for nine months or 
better and didn’t know there was a nursing shortage. Perhaps 
the minister at that time wasn’t allowed to speak for the nine 
months she sat in cabinet. I don’t know. 
 
But I think it would be a worthwhile question to ask that 
minister, did she raise that issue? Did she raise the nursing 
shortage issue with the Premier and with the Minister of 
Health? Perhaps her colleagues in SUN could ask her that 
question and get an answer from her because that member 
certainly doesn’t stand in this House and speak to those kind of 
questions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The member from Saskatoon Eastview spoke about offering 
parity to the nurses. I think we need to clarify what she meant 
by parity. What this government has offered is parity starting in 
the year 2001 at a rate of 1 per cent — 1 per cent. 
 
So if the nurses are asking for 22 per cent, and they’re saying 
that’s what it takes to bring us to parity, the government has 
offered 7 per cent over three years under this forced contract. 
That leaves 15 per cent. At 1 per cent a year it would take them 
an additional 15 years, Mr. Speaker, to reach parity — 15 years. 
Most of these nurses, Mr. Speaker, will not be able to continue 
working under the present conditions for another 15 years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has offered very little other than 
fines and court injunctions to the nurses. It’s incumbent on the 
nurses, Mr. Speaker, to step back from the line, from the 
confrontation, and offer nurses the opportunity to go back to the 
table to negotiate without any preconditions. 
 
Therefore I would move an amendment, Mr. Speaker, seconded 
by the member from Kelvington-Wadena: 
 

That all words after “increased funding for health care” be 
deleted and the following substituted: 
 
but urges the provincial government and SAHO to return 
to the bargaining table with the Saskatchewan Union of 
Nurses with no preconditions in place in order to bring an 
end to the current labour dispute. 
 

I so move, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1515) 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
delighted to stand in the House today and discuss this motion, 
more specifically the amendment put forward by the member 
from Cannington. Because I believe that’s the type of 
amendment, that’s the type of motion that not only the nurses in 
this province, but all the people in this province are waiting to 
hear. 
 
They’re waiting to hear the government take some 
responsibility for their own actions, and for once not blame 
somebody else in this province. 
 
For the last eight years, we’ve been sitting here listening to the 



April 13, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 543 

government find somebody to blame whether it be the federal 
government, the district health boards, everyone else is . . . it’s 
their fault but it is never this government’s fault. 
 
I think that one thing we learn as parents, as adults, as business 
people, is that when you make a decision you take 
responsibility for it. You always have to be willing to take the 
responsibility if you make a decision. 
 
There’s been many, many decisions made in this House lately, 
and once the decision is made, the person who has talked about 
it, voted on that decision, they are responsible. They are the 
ones that have to pick up the phone and say yes, that was my 
idea; it was my idea to legislate you back to work; it was my 
idea for the court injunction and I’m sure proud that that’s the 
way I think we can deal with the nurses in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I hardly could believe my ears when I listened to 
the member from Saskatoon talking about how tough it was . . . 
how tough the nurses had made it on the rest of the staff in the 
hospitals there. 
 
And I’m wondering if she hasn’t heard that all the nurses, all 
the LPNs, all the support staff, SEIU (Service Employees’ 
International Union), SGEU — everyone is supporting the 
nurses. They are saying, we understand what you’re doing; we 
know why you’re doing it. Health care is in a crisis and we’re 
going to do whatever we can to make sure that this government 
recognizes that there is a crisis in this province. 
 
I think there is . . . the member also talked about a great deal of 
non-monetary items that were on their list. Now there’s very 
little that we do, when it comes to government, that doesn’t 
involve money in some way. And I think that the members 
opposite will have a hard time convincing the RNs (Registered 
Nurse) that they have enough non-monetary items to make their 
life a lot easier as they’re working on the wards and looking 
after the patients, the citizens of Saskatchewan. 
 
I also wonder if the members opposite are relating the RN 
problems and the nursing problems with the social workers who 
have been outside the legislature very often, who have been 
calling their offices, and have been walking lines in Saskatoon 
and Regina to bring forward their problems and their concerns 
of their caseloads and the overloads they have in their cases. 
 
The social workers did accept a monetary contract last summer 
on the provision . . . They recognized that there was many 
problems dealing with their clients, with the people they’re 
dealing with. And so they said to the government yes, wages are 
a big issue, but we also have the huge issue of the number of 
cases that we have and the fact that the patients and clients in 
this province are dealing with the problems in social work that 
we can’t deal with. We don’t have the time or the ability to 
even work up to our own standards and work up to our own 
code of ethics. 
 
And the government says, don’t worry, we’re going to deal with 
them. You just settle your wages idea and by December we’re 
going to have . . . everything’s going to be wonderful in the 
social workers’ world. 
 
Well we all know that that didn’t happen. The social workers 

are still trying to get the help that they need for their clients. 
They’re not talking about themselves; they’re not talking about 
wages. But they’re talking about what’s happening to the 
people who are on social services in this province. 
 
And that’s what the RNs are doing as well. They’re talking 
about money but at the same time they’re talking about the 
patients in this province, the people that are under their care, the 
ones that need to be in the hospital system or at home in the 
home care system, and they are asking for additional help for 
those people. 
 
We also heard the Minister of Health say today that if the 
nurses would go back to work, then they would fix the problem. 
Well I think that the only problem that that would fix would be 
the government’s problem of what they’re going to do before an 
election with everybody in a union on strike, or wanting to be 
on strike. 
 
They know very well if they go back to work, then to get the 
attention of the public, the attention of the media, the attention 
of the people in this province to relate to the fact that there is a 
serious health care crisis, that it won’t happen as easily. 
 
I don’t believe that one of them would like to be on strike. They 
want to be there doing their job. They want to go to work. But 
how are they going to underline the fact that there is a huge 
problem in health care if they don’t have the attention of the 
media, if they don’t have the attention of the government? 
 
As soon as they say, I’ll go back to work, then they’re stuck in a 
room and there’ll be a little headline somewhere on the bottom 
of page 12 and it’s not going to really bring their concerns 
forward any more. The government can deal with it in their 
offices but they don’t have to have it smacked in their face 
every day when they come in the legislature. 
 
And that’s what the RNs are asking for — make sure we deal 
with all the problems. We’re talking about money, but more 
than money we’re talking about patient care and what’s 
happening in this province. 
 
We also heard the minister talking about obeying the law. In 
fact we heard a number of the members opposite talking to the 
SUN members about obeying the law. I wonder if they realize 
that last week at this time Bill No. 23 wasn’t even a law. You 
know what we’re doing right now? The government just makes 
up the laws, repeals the laws, adds to the laws, do whatever they 
want to with the laws, to suit their needs. 
 
The nurses in this province and other people in this province — 
ask the farmers when we talk about the GRIP contract — the 
laws change according to the whim of this government. You 
have to be . . . have somebody on full-time staff just looking at 
them to see what they’re going to decide is law today. 
 
An Hon. Member: — You’ve got to understand that . . . 
 
Ms. Draude: — I understand what’s happening in this province 
. . . 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — Order. Order. I just wish 
to remind the hon. member that comments made in speeches in 



544 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 1999 

the legislature are to be directed through the Chair and I know 
that you will want to comply with Rule 28 in that regard. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and of course 
I would like to comply with Rule 28. 
 
We are talking about the laws in this province and the fact that 
nurses are forced to obey a law that wasn’t even, wasn’t even 
law last week at this time. The government is bringing forward 
laws to make to . . . at their convenience. They repeal laws at 
their convenience. They decide to add or subtract from a law at 
their convenience. 
 
And that’s the type of thing that the people of this province are 
saying, we have . . . I have elected representatives, we’ve sent 
them into Regina to make sure that they are bringing forward 
our voice. 
 
Now I wonder in the middle of the night if this government 
heard a voice from their elected . . . from their constituents 
saying, please make a law in the middle of the night tonight and 
bring my nurses back. As elected representatives, that’s what 
we do is carry the voice of our constituents into this building. 
 
In the dead of the night, this government, unless they had a 
terrible number of phone calls in their offices, made of a law of 
themselves. And they decided . . . eight o’clock the next 
morning, it should be enacted. I didn’t see anybody or hear 
anybody get any calls. They didn’t call our office and say, hey I 
want, I asked the minister . . . 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — Order. Order. I ask the 
co-operation of all members to allow the hon. member from 
Kelvington-Wadena to make her remarks. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you again, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, we were talking about the laws and the 
members opposite, I guess, would prefer if we didn’t talk about 
the law that they made in the dead of the night. 
 
So maybe we should talk about the newspaper ads that the 
government has taken out to somehow let the public know that 
the nurses are . . . are really an uncaring bunch of people. That 
they are just asking for money and that their main life revolves 
around money. I think that that isn’t working, that the tactic is 
not working because the people in my constituency and from 
around the province that have contacted my office are saying, 
why in the world is the government wasting thousands and 
thousands of dollars trying to make up my mind for me? 
 
People in this province have the ability to make their own 
decisions. They don’t have to have the government spending 
thousands of dollars taking out newspaper ads and radio ads to 
convince them about their way of thinking. That’s called 
programming I believe. And I don’t believe that the people in 
Saskatchewan need to be programmed. They’re quite capable of 
making up their own mind, especially if they’re given both 
sides of the story. 
 
And when we’re using taxpayers’ dollars to put big ads in 
newspapers and on the radio with one side of the issue then I 
believe that that is a blatant waste of taxpayers’ dollars. And it 
is not giving the people of this province the opportunity to make 

up their own mind because they’re only hearing one side of the 
story. 
 
I was definitely happy this weekend to be able to visit with 
some of the nurses in my constituency so they could discuss 
some of the issues first hand. They told me quite openly and 
one of the first sentences that they said when I went in there, 
that the main issue . . . 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — The hon. member’s time 
has expired. 
 
Ms. Stanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
I’m very happy to enter this debate. 
 
I was going to say that I support the member from Saskatoon 
Southeast’s motion. I do not support the amendment to the 
motion. 
 
I was going to go into quite a bit of detail on how we made an 
investment of $1.9 billion in Saskatchewan for health services 
— an increase of 11.3 per cent, 195 million more than the 
1998-99 budget — and some of the new services that we are 
going to provide. 
 
But before I go on, I just want to make it very clear to the 
people of Saskatchewan that are listening exactly what went on 
in this legislature when Bill 23 was passed. 
 
Bill 23, when it was passed, allows for both sides of the House 
to debate. It also provides in a democracy — it provides in a 
democracy —for the opposition has many, many tactics that 
they can use to hold up legislation that they do not agree with. 
 
I was in this House, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We adjourned early. 
That group over there on both sides did not fight that Bill. They 
passed it through with record speed. I am sick and tired of them 
talking about wanting to debate now when they had an 
opportunity to hold up that Bill for many days in this legislature 
and they passed it. And this House adjourned early, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. And I want the people of this province to know that. 
 
Now I’m going to go on to also say that all of a sudden the 
opposition are the people that are supporting labour. Well, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, then I challenge them to withdraw all their 
union-busting Bills that they have on their order paper. And 
there are many of them. I challenge them to remove those 
union-busting Bills off the order paper. There are three of them. 
 
And I’ll tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that when the people of 
Saskatchewan are not fooled by this. Right in their platform 
they say they would freeze Health budgeting — freeze Health. 
How could they come up with the money that we need if they 
freeze it? How can they come up with the new services that we 
are going to provide when we put 195 million more in — 11 per 
cent more? 
 
And we’re going to increase investments in our valued 
professional commitment to health care providers in that budget 
right there. Funding for collective bargaining, increases of 
revitalization of the College of Medicine, improve hospital 
surgical and diagnostic care with that $195 million — stronger 
cancer programs, increase cancer agency funding, new cancer 



April 13, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 545 

drugs and treatment, expansion of the stem cell transplant 
program, a focus on women’s health, additional bone density 
programs to fight osteoporosis. 
 
(1530) 
 
A constituent of mine has been asking and fighting for this. We 
fought for this to increase the testing for bone density for 
women, streamline breast cancer assessment, stronger screening 
for cervical cancer. All of these improvements to the women’s 
program; enhance rural and community services. 
 
Our primary care model is second to none in Canada. These are 
the things that we are committed to. People out there in TV land 
have to know that when you put $1.9 billion into health care, 
the biggest expenditure in the province, in the history of this 
province, you have to know we’re committed to it. We are 
committed to the caregivers and to giving them increases when 
we can afford. 
 
I just want the people to know out there that I have a salary 
schedule; the source is the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses. We 
are third. BC and Alberta are ahead of us. We are third. This is 
their source. 
 
We are not doing too shabby when it comes to the payment to 
our people that we value in the health care system. We will 
improve this. And there is an improvement on the table. And I 
ask nurses to come back. Come to the bargaining table, and we 
can get on with this. 
 
The only thing I do say in all fairness . . . and this is on behalf 
of my constituents. The opposition has been asking me to 
represent my constituents. I will. Twenty-two per cent increase 
is too much. We are the fourth highest paid nurses in Canada 
now. We are going to do even better. But my constituents tell 
me over and over again 22 per cent is too much. 
 
And SUN walked away from the best workplace agreement 
offered in a decade. And I believe that their rank and file 
members want that. They want a better workplace and I am 
behind that and so are my constituents. 
 
And we’re willing to negotiate and listen, but we must have the 
nurses returning to work. My challenge is to the nurses — 
return to work and then together we’re going to build the best 
health care system in Canada. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m pleased to 
enter this debate and the opportunity to debate the motion 
brought forward by the member from Saskatoon Southeast who 
is asking us to support the government’s policies on health care. 
And the member from Lloydminster saying that the nurses 
should go back with a gun to their heads and be told what to do, 
continue to be told what to do. 
 
And while we welcome the government’s decision to place 
additional monies — particularly federal monies, I might add 
— into health care, it’s surprising to me to think that member 
would have the audacity to ask anyone to support them on their 
health care policies. 

Why would the NDP members even begin to think we would 
support them on health care policies after the mess they’ve 
made of the health care system in this province? They talk 
about a legacy left by the Tories of a $15 billion debt. But the 
Premier’s legacy will have been to completely mess up our 
health care system in this province. 
 
It’s gotten so bad, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government is 
willing to put its own political interest ahead . . . 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — Order. Order. Order. 
Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. As I was 
saying, it’s gotten so bad in this province that the government is 
willing to put its own political interests ahead of Saskatchewan 
people — ahead of the medicare system that Saskatchewan 
residents are so proud of, and ahead of the well-being of health 
care workers from right across this province. 
 
The member from Saskatoon Southeast wants us to support 
their health policies through this motion at a time when they are 
out launching a smear campaign against our nurses. Today, for 
example, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government has an ad in the 
paper which points out plain as day that nurses in this province 
are not paid as well as those in other provinces. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a shortage. Yet the government expects 
these valued health workers and others to stay here, work for 
less, and do so in working conditions that are getting worse by 
the day. 
 
You’d think this was a recruiting poster for Alberta, British 
Columbia, or Ontario. If you’re about to graduate from nursing 
or are facing fines like our nurses, the NDP has already outlined 
your options for you. You get paid better elsewhere, and you 
don’t have the threat of jail hanging over you. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I would have thought that Alberta, BC, or Ontario 
should have paid for these ads because it’s going to benefit 
them a lot more than the people of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, sure we support adding more money to the health 
care budget. A few weeks ago, Mr. Deputy Speaker, our caucus 
introduced its priorities on health care. In fact, we laid out our 
plans for what we would do if elected government. Among 
those plans is placing priority on health care. People in 
Saskatchewan want to see health care become the number one 
priority. 
 
The motion before us today, like the NDP government’s budget, 
fails to make health care the number one priority it deserves to 
be. For that reason alone, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it deserves no 
one’s support. 
 
By contrast, the Liberal plan would see new federal dollars 
directed and other funds redirected to provide pay equity and 
fair competitive salaries for nurses and health workers. The 
members opposite are asking us to support a motion which does 
not make nurses and health care workers a priority. And that is 
just not acceptable. 
 
The NDP budget did not provide enough to make certain that 
these valued contributors to our health system receive pay 



546 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 1999 

equity and salaries that are competitive with other provinces. 
Rather than provide enough money to cover the problems laid 
out in the Dorsey report and to give competitive rates of pay, 
this government had other priorities. 
 
Among their priorities was higher rates of pay for CEOs (chief 
executive officer), particularly health board CEOs, some of 
whom had a 17 per cent increase in pay over the last three 
years. Go figure — 17 per cent for health board CEOs and 2, 2, 
and 2 for health care workers. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the member from Saskatoon Southeast has 
the gall to ask us to support a motion which pats the 
government on the back for a budget which lets them to 
continue waste money on political hacks — and lots of them. 
The Premier’s office, Mr. Deputy Speaker, gets around $7 
million. We believe about $4 million of that could be cut and 
redirected to other priorities. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, let’s 
not forget the numerous middle managers, the advertising, the 
foreign travel which this government continues to condone. 
 
Rather than presenting a motion patting the government on the 
back, rather than presenting that motion, the member from 
Saskatoon Southeast should have put one forward condemning 
the NDP government for wasting thousands and thousands on 
full-page ads and radio advertising attacking our nurses. These 
ads, Mr. Deputy Speaker, were on the heels of others which 
gave accolades for the government’s budget. Propaganda, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, is a higher priority for the NDP than nurses 
and health care workers. 
 
Why did the members opposite waste money trying to cover for 
their gross mismanagement of health care issues? Why did they 
waste piles of money attacking nurses when it could have been 
better spent on hiring more nurses and improving the working 
conditions for nurses? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, how can anyone support this government 
on any of its health care policies. They not only pay health care 
workers less than other provinces, but they’re also too willing to 
use the heavy hand of Bill 23 back-to-work legislation to get 
what they want. That’s right, Mr. Deputy Speaker, these people 
think nothing of rewarding their friends and using the heavy 
hand on people who are out there providing care for the great 
residents of this province of ours. This time, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, the NDP members and their entourage of political 
hacks have finally trapped themselves. One has to question the 
government’s sincerity on anything concerning health care. 
 
Back in April of 1984, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the present Deputy 
Premier was busy quizzing the Tory Minister of Health on his 
handling of the nursing contract negotiations. The Deputy 
Premier said, and I would like to quote: 
 

. . . I believe you have an obligation to put the money into 
the Saskatchewan Health . . . Association (SAHO’s 
predecessor) so a settlement can be reached at an early 
stage. I’ll tell you, Mr. Minister, what you are attempting 
to do is force (a) confrontation . . . And I predict that if you 
continue on this path, that we will (once again) be called 
(upon) in this Assembly to deal with a strike and this one 
of far greater magnitude, that when . . . nurses of this 
province cannot get a contract, when the health care of this 

province is sabotaged by you and your department . . . your 
neglect in this area (do not) allow for proper funding of a 
nurses’ contract will lead to a strike and you, Mr. Minister, 
will be responsible.  

 
The Deputy Premier, at that time in 1984, his very words, and 
now he sits and dares to condemn our nurses — to condemn our 
nurses. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what’s changed? 
 
The member from Saskatoon Southeast wants us to support a 
motion patting the government on the back for its health 
policies. Yet, she and her NDP colleagues have gone off and 
done the very same thing to the nurses that they condemned the 
Tories for planning to do. Yes, they’re every bit as bad as the 
Tories when it comes to handling health care and treating of 
health care workers fairly. There’s no fairness in that NDP side. 
 
They want accolades for their sorry health record even though 
they failed to put up enough money and bargaining to pay 
nurses competitively. The NDP members want a thumbs-up 
even though they goaded nurses to walk off because they are 
unwilling to address the problems like working conditions and 
staff shortages. 
 
As the Deputy Premier so ably noted back in 1984: “failure to 
provide enough money would lead to a strike and responsibility 
would lie squarely in the hands of the government.” 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in good conscience I cannot support 
any motion that gives this government accolades for its sorry 
and disastrous health care records. I cannot support any motion 
from a government that’s laid off 600 nurses; closed numerous 
beds, 53 hospitals; increased waiting lists; and created a health 
care catastrophe in this province that we are facing now. 
 
It’s time this government and the Premier simply swallowed 
their pride and said, I’m sorry, we will repeal Bill 23. We don’t 
need back-to-work legislation. We don’t need motions like this 
one today that offer credit where it isn’t deserved. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, what we do need is a government that 
makes health care a number one priority. It’s a question, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, of a priority and the NDP just do not, they do 
not have their priorities right and they are wrong in what they 
are doing to our health care workers in this province. 
 
They should immediately, the Premier should immediately 
recognize . . . He’s been a big enough man to get up and say 
that yes, he has made mistakes in the past and he’s tried to 
correct them and they will correct them . . . he will try to correct 
them. Now is the time for him to stand up in this House and 
again apologize to the people of Saskatchewan, apologize to our 
nurses and health care workers and say, I’m sorry we acted too 
hastily, we will repeal, we will repeal that law, and we will get 
our people back to the bargaining table. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
public has been asking, and rightfully so, they’ve been asking 
for the government position on health care. The Minister of 
Health and the Minister of Finance, my seatmate, have 
responded over the last two or three weeks, Mr. Speaker, 
responded to the position on . . . through the budget with $195 



April 13, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 547 

million added to the budget — more than ever before, Mr. 
Speaker, a greater increase than ever before — to address the 
waiting times, Mr. Speaker, that people have had to deal with 
and that are increasing in some cases, to address the concept of 
better cancer treatment, and also to address, Mr. Speaker, the 
working conditions for nurses and pay for nurses, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The public is also asking, Mr. Speaker, they are asking for the 
positions of the opposition parties. And I challenge, Mr. 
Speaker, the opposition parties to answer two questions; two 
questions that are related to the strike right now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have heard considerable rhetoric from the parties opposite 
about the position and the strike that’s before us right now. But 
what is not clear from the Tories, Mr. Speaker, is where they 
stand exactly on the increase. They’re giving us mixed signals. 
 
When they let the legislation through, that was telling me at that 
time that they were not in favour of the 22 per cent increase. 
Now the rhetoric I hear from the members opposite, I’m 
wondering if that’s still their position. Have they changed? Are 
they now saying that they’re going to favour that 22 per cent 
increase? Their original position, Mr. Speaker, was: zap, a 
freeze on health care. We have to know that from the opposition 
parties, Mr. Speaker, where do they stand? Do they stand for 
the 22 per cent increase, or do they not stand for the 22 per cent 
increase? 
 
(1545) 
 
When it comes to the Liberals, Mr. Speaker, there’s another 
question. And that is the question whether or not they truly 
stand in favour of supporting the law as it exists in 
Saskatchewan now. Last Sunday, Mr. Speaker, as I was driving 
I happened to be listening to the radio, the same radio station 
that the member from Wood River was listening on. And guess 
who I heard on that station, Mr. Speaker, reporting. And what 
he did at that time in response to the questions asked . . . he was 
asked whether or not he was supporting the nurses in their 
illegal strike. 
 
The member from Wood River, over the telephone, over public 
radio, at that time equivocated. He at no time did say that he 
was supportive of the laws of Saskatchewan — whether he 
liked the laws or not. He never at that time did. 
 
And I challenge the Liberal Party. Do you . . . does he represent 
the position of the Liberal Party? Does the member from Wood 
River . . . 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — Order, order. Why is the 
member for Wood River on his feet? 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Point of order, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — What is your point of 
order? 
 
Mr. McPherson: — I’d be prepared to answer the question if 
he wants to put it to me. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — The member for Wood 
River will appreciate that he did not in fact raise a point of 

order. Order, order. Order, order. Order. Order. 
 
Now members have had the enjoyable chat back . . . Order. 
Members have had an enjoyable chat back and forth. I would 
ask, if you want to have a private chat, please do so outside of 
the Legislative Chamber. 
 
The member for Wood River raised a point of order which is in 
fact not a point of order. The member will know that under rule 
70 . . . under the 75-minute timed debate there is in fact a 
10-minute period allowed for question and answers which, quite 
frankly, members, hon. members, we have now reached because 
the speaking time has expired. So we’re now to the point of 
recognizing questions and/or comments. 
 
Ms. Stanger: — Yes. I’d like to ask the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena, when we were debating Bill 23, why the 
opposition did not use the tools available to them to hold up the 
Bill — why we adjourned early. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you very much. Actually it was 
interesting that the members opposite didn’t ask . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Answer the question. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Oh that’s a real unique thing for you to say. 
 
The amendment that we put forward is something that we 
thought the people of Saskatchewan and the nurses and the 
government could work with. It was something that seemed to 
be kind of conciliatory, which maybe isn’t something you 
understand. So that was the kind of thing that we brought 
forward. We brought forward the amendment that would have 
actually helped solve some of the problems, and maybe that 
isn’t what you wanted was to solve . . . 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — Order, order. Order. I 
wish to remind all members that in the question and answer and 
comment period, all questions and comments and answers are 
to be addressed through the Chair as opposed to directly to 
members opposite. 
 
I’m uncertain if the hon. member for Kelvington-Wadena was 
finished with the answer. I see the nod being yes. Further 
comments or questions? 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yes, in my 
remarks I put two questions and I was pleased that the member 
from Wood River was willing to respond to it. I’m not sure if 
the rules of the House allow for him to respond, but I’m sure he 
could respond through his leader. 
 
But the question is straightforward, Mr. Speaker. I’m requesting 
whether the Liberal Party is backing the position of the member 
from Wood River when on the radio he said he was supportive 
of the nurses as they were defying the back-to-work order of 
this legislature. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the irony of this whole 
exercise here is we would not be at this stage if it wasn’t for the 
tyrannical use of power, that’s what we’re opposed to, by this 
NDP government that’s imposed, that’s imposed unfair 
legislation in this House, attacking the very caregivers, the very 



548 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 1999 

people of this province of ours who care for our sick, for our 
disabled — the health care workers, the caregivers, the nurses. 
And they continue to attack these people. 
 
Even to this day when they have a law, when they have passed 
a law where they rammed a law through this legislature . . . 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — Order, order. Order. Now 
members, I just would like to say the Chair is having a great 
deal of difficulty, despite a significant voice that the Leader of 
the Third Party has, the Chair is having difficulty hearing the 
answer. The question was put, and I ask all members to 
co-operate and allow the member to respond with the answer. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I was saying, for these 
people to now continue to enforce a law after having enacted 
legislation that was totally uncalled for, to destroy, to destroy 
the bargaining process, the collective bargaining process in this 
province is tyrannical on the part of a government of this day. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, I have a supplementary 
question. I would like the member to be rather more definite. 
When I heard their remark on the radio, the thought that came 
to me, and my interpretation was, was that the member from 
Wood River was bordering on contempt for the law and 
contempt for the decision. 
 
And that is why, Mr. Speaker, I am asking for their position 
now. It was not clarified by the member. And I would like to 
know whether or not this Liberal opposition, whether this 
Liberal opposition is backing the nurses in their defiance of the 
law. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, what we do not support is 
the tyrannical use of authority that this NDP government is 
imposing on people of this province. People who have every 
right to bargain in good faith, something that the NDP 
government boasted — boasted —about supporting and now 
has completely taken away, completely taken away from all the 
workers in this province. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, I would request leave of the 
Assembly to allow the member from Wood River to answer the 
same question. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — I remind members of rule 
17 . . . Order, order. I remind hon. members of rule 17(2) which 
reads, and I quote: 
 

At the expiration of sixty-five minutes, there shall be a 
period not exceeding ten minutes to be made available, if 
required, to allow Members to ask questions and comment 
briefly on matters . . . 
 

Order, order. I wish, before I read the rule book to members, I 
wish to remind members that when the Chair or Speaker is on 
his or her feet, rulings are to be listened to. And I respectfully 
request the co-operation of all members. Rule 17(2) says, and I 
quote: 
 

At the expiration of sixty-five minutes, there shall be a 

period not exceeding ten minutes to be made available, if 
required, to allow Members to ask questions and comment 
briefly on matters relevant to the contents of the speeches 
and allow Members who spoke in the debate to respond to 
(the) questions raised. 

 
That was adopted March 1, 1994. According to Rule 17(2) of 
the Rules and Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan, the request is out of order. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I would like to 
address my question to the member from Kelvington-Wadena 
and ask them whether they are in favour of the 22 per cent or in 
favour of a freeze? 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I am pleased 
to address this question because I think maybe the government 
doesn’t realize that the word collective bargaining is something 
that they brought forward. They have some . . . the people of 
this province . . . The nurses and SAHO were working on 
something, and the government, the Premier, got in and decided 
he could be the great white father and make the decisions. 
 
We are not the kind of government that is going to come and 
say, this is what’s going to happen. It’s called negotiating. It’s a 
term in the dictionary that you would learn if you understand 
that people have a right to agree on something — collective 
bargaining. That’s our answer. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Just another 
question to the member from Kelvington-Wadena. How does 
this collective bargaining coincide with the right-to-work 
legislation that you people . . . (inaudible) . . . on the order 
paper? 
 
Ms. Draude: — Guess what? The people want to go to work 
. . . 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — Order. Order. Order! The 
Chair requires no help from other members. I simply wish to 
remind the hon. member for Kelvington-Wadena — Order, 
order — I simply wish to remind the hon. member for 
Kelvington of rule 28, which is that comments be addressed 
through the Chair. Thank you. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. My comment 
to the government through the Chair would be that the word 
collective agreement and bargaining is that there’s two people 
at the table and they discuss together and they come to a 
decision together, and a compromise. Negotiate — it’s a word 
that seems to have been forgotten over there. 
 
And when they bring a Bill in in the dead of the night and have 
the Premier come in and decide the way that it’s going to, 
what’s going to happen — that’s not negotiating, that’s not 
collective bargaining. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — Members, it is my duty to 
inform you that the time under the 75-minute debate has 
expired. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 



April 13, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 549 

Motion No. 1 — Support for Agriculture 
 

Mr. Johnson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The motion that I’m 
going to move at the end of my remarks is: 
 

That this Assembly support this government for making 
the highest per capita investment in agriculture of any 
government in Canada, and express its dismay at the 
woefully inadequate federal efforts to support our 
producers who must deal with subsidies provided to their 
farmers by other countries. 
 

Mr. Speaker, it is relatively an easy task to indicate that the 
province of Saskatchewan is providing a lot of funding to 
farmers, to the agricultural community in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
But I would like to take just a little time to sort of give some 
history as to what is taking place with the federal government 
and its support to agriculture in the province of Saskatchewan 
over the last 30 or 40 years or so. 
 
(1600) 
 
Prior to 1970, the federal government had a number of 
programs that it delivered the funding to the agriculture 
community or provided support to the agriculture community 
that were fully funded by the federal government. The PFRA 
(Prairie Farm Rehabilitation Administration) had water projects, 
pasture programs, the purchasing of some lands that were not 
suitable for agriculture and turning them into pastures, and in 
1961 fully funded the crop insurance program. Prior to 1970, 
the federal government support was fairly significant in the 
program. 
 
Secondly, at that time the Crow rate was in effect, which left 
farmers with a marketing of a rate for moving their produce to 
the port that had a set amount and that was approximately 
between 4 and $5 per metric tonne. All of this was supported by 
the federal government. 
 
Then by about the . . . in the early 1970s, the federal 
government came out with the Agricultural Stabilization Act 
and this was fully funded by the federal government. In 1970, 
the federal government also implemented and paid the lower 
inventories for tomorrow’s program or LIFT, although it wasn’t 
a program that was as beneficial to the agricultural community 
as one might have wanted. It was fully funded by the federal 
government. 
 
And if you move up a little further into the mid-’70s, the federal 
government put in place the Western Grain Stabilization Act. 
This was funded two-thirds by the federal government, 
one-third by the producer for a program in essence that was a 
producer/federal government program and the funding came 
there with no provincial funding. 
 
Now the crop insurance continued with the producer sharing 
half the premiums and the federal government the other half 
with the province providing the administrative costs. And, Mr. 
Speaker, this still indicates that the federal government was 
fully funding a number of programs. 
 

Now at that time the province implemented some programs that 
they fully funded, and just to name a couple of them: the 
SHARP (Saskatchewan hog assured returns program) program 
for the hog producer and the beef stabilization program. These 
were fully funded by the producers and the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these programs you could say were value-added 
programs or programs that were aimed at increasing the value 
of agricultural products before they left the province and they 
were funded by the province. 
 
But if you go a little further into the ’80s and get into the ’80s, 
you have the federal government then making a major change to 
the Crow rate. And they changed it to the Crow benefit where 
they increased the cost to producers to move a tonne of product 
to port from an average in the province of Saskatchewan of 
$4.85 to $13.37; or something between 150 to $170 million was 
taken out of the agricultural community in this one move alone. 
And in that move, they’ve shifted the costs on to the producer 
from the federal government. 
 
Now in 1985 to 1990, which is a five-year period, the federal 
government started to implement some more program changes 
that increased the costs to the farmers or to the province of 
Saskatchewan to the provincial government. 
 
In 1988, the two-price wheat program which they had 
established earlier, they abandoned. And this was a fully-funded 
support program by the federal government. 
 
The programs, the special grain program no. 1 and the special 
grain program no. 2 in 1986-87 were two other fully-funded 
programs that lasted one year by the federal government. 
 
The 1988 drought assistance program, announced and 
implemented by the federal government, forced the provinces to 
pay 25 per cent of the program if the producers in that province 
were to access this program. And we see now another move for 
the federal government to move out of paying as large benefits 
to the agricultural community as they were previously. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if you look into the ’90s you see some fairly major 
shifts. In 1995 the federal government abandoned the Crow 
benefit and left then the farm community at the mercy of the 
railways. And the cost to the farmers in the province of 
Saskatchewan runs something in excess of a half a billion 
dollars a year. And if just that money alone was back into the 
farm community the economy of the agricultural sector would 
be substantially better than what it is right now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, but the interesting thing is what it did with other 
programs. With the crop insurance program, it shifted in 1990, 
asking the province to pay approximately 10 per cent of that 
program. 
 
In 1991 in setting up NISA (Net Income Stabilization Account), 
that program was shared, cost shared 50 per cent by the 
provincial government, 50 per cent by the federal government, 
and then matched by the farm community itself. 
 
Now the federal government has since 1990, in NISA, done a 
number of top-ups. In 1991 and ’92, or 1990-91, each of those 
years the federal government gave a top-up I believe of 1 per 



550 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 1999 

cent. And for the year 1998 they gave a top-up of 2 percentage 
points. 
 
Well the reason that I’ve been going through detail of where the 
federal government is at is just to give the rationale behind what 
amounts to a very short statement in that, during the past 10 
years or thereabouts, federal support for the agricultural 
community in the province of Saskatchewan, that’s from 1991 
to date, has dropped 78 per cent in the province of 
Saskatchewan —78 per cent; $2.3 billion in 1991 to less than a 
half a billion dollars in 1998. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is probably the most . . . that alone is the 
major reason for the agricultural community feeling such a 
reduction in the economic condition that they have. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to indicate that during the last year 
or two, actually in the last budget year, that the province of 
Saskatchewan has been putting a fair amount of money into the 
agricultural program. Now when you look at it, what is taking 
place in agriculture, the province of Saskatchewan is putting in 
over $300 per capita into agriculture as compared to something 
like $78 for the federal government and the rest of the . . . 
(inaudible) . . . If you want to break that down it comes in a 
couple of different manners. 
 
One is in tax relief, and one of the taxes that isn’t paid is on the 
fuel used in the agricultural community. And I again point out 
that if the federal government were prepared to do exactly the 
same thing as what is being done by the provincial government, 
there is about 10 cents a litre of fuel tax that could be removed 
from the fuel that’s used by the agricultural community in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The department expenditures, for just a quick breakdown of 149 
million, consists of 113 million on direct financial expenditures 
through the safety net programs; 13 million on research and 
development, which is a significant number; 3.7 million on 
industrial assistance including veterinary diagnostic services; 
and 19.1 million on interest subsidy, loan losses through the 
Agricultural Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan for a total of 
about 149 million. 
 
There’s a 289 million in benefits from tax programs. The largest 
one is the E&H (education and health) tax exemption on farm 
machinery, repairs, fertilizer, pesticides, etc. And the second 
largest one is 120 million fuel tax exemption for farm activities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I’d indicated earlier, if the federal government 
were to reduce the tax that they have on fuel in the same 
manner as the province of Saskatchewan does for the 
agricultural community there’d be about an $80 million 
reduction for the agricultural community right there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to move the following motion, 
seconded by Sharon Murrell — oops — the member from 
Battleford-Cut Knife: 
 

That this Assembly support this government for making 
the highest per capita investment in agriculture of any 
government in Canada, and express its dismay at the 
woefully inadequate federal efforts to support our 
producers who must deal with subsidies provided to their 

farmers by other countries. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I so move. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Murrell: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Today, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I rise in my place to second the motion 
supporting this government’s investment in agriculture. 
 
We recognize the contribution this industry makes to our 
economy and to our communities. Our budget continues to 
support our agriculture industry by providing more funding to 
farmers per capita than any other government in Canada. 
 
We as Saskatchewan residents have been though extremely 
difficult times of horrendous debt, an unstable economy, and an 
ever-changing technology. In addition to these events, farmers 
have experienced additional circumstances putting much stress 
into their workplace. And, Mr. Speaker, farmers’ stress affects 
our families and our communities. 
 
Farmers work long hours, especially those who have mixed 
farming ventures. Sheep, alpaca, cattle, elk, and buffalo calve 
on their time, not on yours, so many farmers spend long hours 
in February, March, and April on three-hour patrol ensuring the 
safety of their herd, their moms and their babies. 
 
(1615) 
 
After a three-month calving period, farmers can now prepare for 
seeding — checking equipment, chasing repairs, hoping for 
rain, purchasing fertilizer, cleaning grain, income tax, GST 
(goods and services tax) returns. How many hours in a day is a 
person expected to work? 
 
Now many of the above circumstances can be controlled or 
regulated by the farmer. But much that affects the farmers is 
from outside forces — such as the federal government’s lack of 
support and understanding of this industry. 
 
Our federal government over time has gone from taking the 
major responsibility for safety nets and disaster type of funding 
to a position of requiring provinces to pay 40 per cent of the 
cost. During the same period the federal government has taken 
away major programs that help Saskatchewan, such as the 
two-price wheat system and the Crow rate. 
 
Farmers continue to face a number of challenges — 
international subsidies funded by national treasuries, declining 
commodity prices, rising input costs, increasing freight rates. 
Mr. Speaker, 320 million each and every year removed from 
assisting us when the federal government eliminated the Crow. 
And now the Estey report wants to remove the cap on freight 
charges. 
 
Just where is the commitment of our federal government to this 
industry? It’s not to highways. We are the only country out of 
all the developed countries who do not have a major . . . a 
national highways program. 
 
It’s not to our railroad system — well it might be to the CP 
(Canadian Pacific) or CN (Canadian National). 



April 13, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 551 

And it certainly is not to tax breaks. And it is certainly not to 
tax breaks. The GST is charged on each purchase every 
Canadian makes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are committed to our people and to our 
farmers. And our tax cuts reflect these fair and sustainable tax 
cuts. Since 1994-95 we have reduced the sales tax from 9 per 
cent to the current 6 per cent. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we as a government acknowledge our 
agriculture industry through the following benefits: E&H 
exemption on machinery and repair purchases; E&H exemption 
on fertilizer, pesticides, and seed; fuel tax exemption for farm 
activities; E&H tax rebate on livestock and horticultural 
facilities. 
 
We contribute to safety net programs: crop insurance, NISA 
(Net Income Stabilization Account), wildlife compensation 
programs; on industry assistance research and development; on 
interest subsidy, loan losses and allowances for bad debt for 
ACS or Agricultural Credit Corporation; ag-food equity; and 
loan management. 
 
Our industry also benefits from other provincial programs such 
as Economic and Co-operative Development and Saskatchewan 
Opportunities Corporation, and Saskatchewan Trade and Export 
Partnership. 
 
Saskatchewan Ag and Food has invested in our beef industry, 
pork industry, specialized livestock, food processing, crop 
development, ag-west biotech. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan taxpayers provide 4.7 times the 
provincial average for agriculture programming on a per capita 
basis. This is 4.1 times what the federal government provides 
on behalf of Canadian taxpayers. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, these are investments that encourage us as 
farmers to expand our operations, diversify our crops and 
livestock, and to invest in processing of our own products and 
our future. Mr. Speaker, farmers are innovative, creative, and 
proactive — growing and processing echinacea, raising elk and 
processing elk horn, forming co-ops to raise hogs in feedlots, 
building terminals and pellet plants. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you and my colleagues know, the 
Battleford-Cut Knife farmers experienced severe drought the 
past four years in certain areas, causing additional stress. I am 
extremely proud of the support system we as farm 
organizations, community groups, and government agencies 
have established to respond to rural people in crisis. 
 
The farm stress line began operating on February 10, 1992. All 
calls are confidential, and a farm stress counsellor listens, 
provides encouragement, and assists the caller to clarify the 
program, the problem, or the concern that they are facing. The 
counsellor uses the human service directory to match programs 
and services to the information or referral needs of the caller. 
 
At the termination of the call, which may last from five minutes 
to over an hour, the counsellor completes a statistical report that 
briefs other counsellors. There is no mechanical recording 
device on the line, meaning the conversations are not 

tape-recorded. And this allows our farmers, their farm 
companions, and families to deal with something that has never 
been implemented in our areas before and is very greatly 
appreciated. 
 
And I would like to acknowledge the counsellors that give of 
their time, because dealing with farm stress is probably a lot 
different than dealing with any other stress because it involves 
so many other people. 
 
I would like to emphasize the importance of having stress dealt 
with. It affects us physically and it affects us mentally and it 
affects our behaviour. And the farm families are experiencing 
behaviour problems that many people don’t understand that it 
involves our teachers, because the children are misbehaving at 
school; it involves different situations that would never have 
occurred if we were allowed as farmers to continue to do what 
we do best. And that is to go out there and grow and produce 
and market. 
 
And we’ve had so many interventions and so many programs 
that were implemented. Especially I remember some of the 
programs that were involved and implemented in the 1980s that 
have caused a great deal of stress, because my farmers no 
longer can meet the demands of back-owing bills, much less 
trying to deal with the incoming bills. 
 
So I feel that anything that we have done as a government has 
been — keeping in mind that we need to think seriously of the 
programs that are implemented so that they are to the best and 
to encourage our people to deal with their own concerns — but 
we need to also be able to assist them with their concerns. 
 
And I commend this government for the support because of the 
initiatives that we have done. And I commend them for wanting 
to work and to encourage and to expand the role that agriculture 
does contribute and play in this province. 
 
Therefore I am proud to stand in my place to second the motion 
moved by the hon. member from Shellbrook-Spiritwood. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to enter the 
debate here this afternoon surrounding the topic of agriculture. 
After the ramblings from the previous two members, incoherent 
about agriculture as they were, we’ll try and discuss the subject 
here this afternoon. 
 
Every single time that the government gets up and wants to talk 
about their record, the first thing they do, the very, very first 
thing they do is blame everybody and anybody they can think of 
for all their problems that they’ve created. 
 
They blame us for two-price wheat. I don’t even think, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I don’t even think I was farming when 
two-price wheat was done away with. I started my farming 
career in 1978, some 20 years ago now. I don’t even think I was 
around then. I was in high school probably, or in short pants as 
the member from Melfort used to say, when this was done. But 
somehow or another the members of the opposition are 
responsible for two-price wheat disappearing. 



552 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 1999 

Next they blame us for . . . next thing you know you’ll be 
blaming us for prairie fires, gophers, frost, low grain prices, fuel 
prices, insecticide problems, drought. They’re all our fault, all 
our fault. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — I didn’t realize, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we had so 
much power or we would wield it far more than we do. That 
kind of lunacy coming from the members opposite doesn’t cut it 
with the farmers of this province any longer, and the Minister of 
Agriculture should know that. 
 
The farmers of this province want some action on a number of 
things from this government, but they consistently get up and 
blame everybody for the shortcomings of their administration 
and want to say that everybody else is responsible for all of the 
troubles that farmers are going through. 
 
Low grain prices aren’t happening everywhere else, they’re 
only happening in Saskatchewan. That’s what the member for 
. . . the Economic Development minister likes to get up and say. 
The only place where we’ve got problems, the reason why 
we’re losing jobs in this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 
because of low commodity prices. Alberta doesn’t have low 
commodity prices, Manitoba doesn’t have low commodity 
prices, United States doesn’t have them, but we have them here 
in Saskatchewan. Somehow or another international grain 
prices are set right here in Regina. That’s what this government 
likes to tell the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
When it comes to the price of oil or when it comes to the price 
of potash or when it comes to the price of uranium or any other 
commodity, it’s set right here in Regina; at least that’s what the 
members opposite would like to have people of Saskatchewan 
believe. 
 
And that’s why we’ve got such a dismal record in job creation. 
Incidentally the job creation record when it comes to 
agriculture, the topic of this afternoon, is we lost 5,000 — count 
them, 5000 — jobs in agriculture last year in this province. Five 
thousand jobs lost in agriculture last year as a result of the 
administration opposite and the policies that this government 
presents to the people of Saskatchewan. Five thousand jobs 
have been lost — the minister has said that — 5,000 jobs have 
been lost, picked up 3,000 in a couple of other areas for a net 
loss of about 2,000 jobs. And somehow or another the Minister 
of Agriculture wants to blame everybody and anybody he can 
find for his dismal record in agriculture. 
 
A record that now we see problems that farmers are faced with 
in this . . . in the province of Saskatchewan that are going to be 
extremely critical come another couple of weeks when seeding 
starts. Farmers are attempting right now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
to line up operating lines of credit, to secure supplies to seed, 
fertilizer, all kinds of herbicides and that kind of thing for 
spring seeding that’s just around the corner. In fact it’s just 
started in the very extreme southwest of the province. 
 
And somehow or another, where’s the government when all the 
troubles are? The Minister of Agriculture, day after day after 
day, stands up in this legislature and throughout the province of 
Saskatchewan and says, don’t blame me, blame everybody else; 

don’t blame me. That’s what the Minister of Agriculture says. 
 
Where were you, where were you when the farmers were asking 
for help the last time around? Where are you today? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Right there. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Right there, he says. 
 
Well I’d like to know where he is on some of the issues that the 
farmers are faced with. Where were you when they were 
negotiating the AIDA (Agricultural Income Disaster 
Assistance) plan, the one that . . . the AIDA program that’s in 
place today? The only AIDA program that we have today is 
“you ain’t gonna get any money.” That’s what it amounts to 
because there’s no farmers that I know of that are getting any 
help from this administration. 
 
The form is so ludicrous you can’t hardly . . . nobody can 
understand it. The accountants across this province are telling 
us it’s going to cost anywhere between 300 to $1,000 to fill it 
out. None of them know that they are filling it out correctly. 
 
The administration opposite was sleeping at the switch when it 
come time to negotiate that program and the Minister of 
Agriculture knows it. 
 
If he knew anything about modern agriculture today he would 
have been there speaking on behalf of farmers. But oh no, the 
only thing he could say was give us more, give us more, give us 
more. That’s always the NDP way — it’s not our fault; blame it 
on somebody else. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, you’re going to have to do a lot better than 
that because the farmers of this province aren’t satisfied with 
your program and the federal government’s program when it 
comes to the AIDA program that’s out there right now. Frankly, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we were amazed at the audacity of this 
government to bring forward a motion like this, saying that 
somehow or another they are helping agriculture. 
 
The member from Shellbrook there smiles from his seat 
knowing full well that they don’t want to take any responsibility 
for agriculture. Oh, blame it on somebody else. It’s always the 
NDP way. When the farmers are down or when anybody else is 
down in this province, blame it on somebody else; hope the 
problem goes away; try and get support somewhere else; don’t 
put one nickel of your own money forward. 
 
The Minister of Agriculture has stood in this legislature now 
long ago when the debate was surrounding the AIDA program 
and said, it’s not our fault. You don’t go into a machinery 
dealer and say, I’ve got so much money and I want to buy a 
tractor . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That’s exactly what you 
do. When was the last time you bought a tractor, sir? 
 
You walk in there and you say, I’m interested in buying a 
tractor. That’s what you do. I’m interested in buying a tractor. 
Yes, I’m interested in buying a tractor. When they say what 
kind of tractor do you want, you tell them, don’t you? How 
much is that one? How much is that one? How much is that 
one? Exactly. And then you find out from there whether or not 
you can afford it. Exactly. The member opposite says exactly. 



April 13, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 553 

(1630) 
 
But first and foremost, first and foremost, you walk in and say 
to them . . . But what did you do? You walked into Ottawa and 
said to them . . . what did you say to them? We’ve got a 
balanced budget, yes. Can we afford anything? Yes. Yes, we 
can afford some help. We’re so proud of the fact that we have a 
surplus here in Saskatchewan. We’re so proud of the fact that 
we have a surplus here in Saskatchewan. Do we have a 
problem? No, we don’t have a problem. 
 
What are you asking for? What are you shopping for, in other 
words, here today, Mr. Minister of Agriculture? What are you 
shopping for? And the minister said, I don’t know. I don’t 
know. That’s exactly what he said. That’s exactly what he said. 
How much of a program are you looking for? I don’t know. 
 
The Minister of Agriculture in the House of Commons before 
the Ag Committee when they asked him, what would you like 
to see in Saskatchewan and how much are you willing to 
contribute, he said, I don’t know. 
 
That was his solution — I don’t know. I don’t know how to 
help the farmers of Saskatchewan. I don’t know what I’m 
talking about when it comes to agriculture. That’s what the 
minister in effect was saying to the House of Commons 
Standing Committee on Agriculture. I don’t know how to 
address the problem in Saskatchewan. In fact I don’t even know 
whether there is a problem. 
 
The minister’s on record as saying, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
the ag crisis was over. Right in the middle of the negotiations 
— right in the middle of the negotiations. The Canadian Wheat 
Board as you recall, put up the initial price on wheat, durum, 
and barley by about 20 cents a bushel. And then the Minister of 
Agriculture gets up in his place and says, whoa, she’s all over 
boys; the crisis in agriculture is fixed; we’ve got her looked 
after now. 
 
I’m sure that helped the negotiations, Mr. Minister, when you 
said before the farmers of this province, when you said before 
the farmers of this province . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . He 
keeps shouting from his seat, that’s a lie. That isn’t a lie, and he 
knows . . . 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — Order. I will simply 
caution members that it is inappropriate to make comments 
from the floor that you cannot make from your seat with a 
microphone. And I want to remind members on both sides that 
there was some — Order! — that there has just been some 
language used that is not in fitting with our parliamentary 
traditions. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, this government, which is congratulating itself for all 
its help in agriculture, is the same government, as you’ll recall, 
back in about 1992, ’93, thereabouts, was the same 
administration that cancelled GRIP contracts. They have this 
famed . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Ah, going to confession. 
We’ll say we’re sorry in agriculture when you say you’re sorry 
at agriculture. 
 
So a hundred and ninety-three million dollars you took out of 

the province, out of the farmers’ pockets of this province, and 
you have never once accepted any responsibility for that. Never 
once. 
 
The farmers of this province, I suspect, would be thankful and 
grateful if they had a program that guaranteed them some 
degree of support today. But they don’t. And it’s a result of 
your actions opposite, Mr. Minister, and Mr. Minister of 
Agriculture. And the member from Rosetown-Elrose was the 
minister at the time when that program was stripped from the 
farmers. 
 
And every single . . . there was the longest disruption of 
services, of disruption of this House in the history of 
Saskatchewan ensued as a result of that government’s actions. 
And at the time, if you remember the legislation, they even had 
to bring in legislation that absolved them of any kind of 
personal responsibility surrounding that legislation. 
 
And we still have court cases going on to this very day 
surrounding the GRIP legislation and surrounding the removal 
of some modest degree of support for farmers at that time. And 
this administration, this Minister of Agriculture has the gall to 
bring a motion before this legislature saying how supportive 
they are of the farmers of this province after conducting that 
kind of heavy-handed legislation back in those days. 
 
During the farm crisis, we’ve seen this administration remove 
support systematically day after day, month after month, from 
the farm people of this province. Day after day, day after day 
the farmers of this province have to try and market their product 
over highways that are barely passable; have to try and address 
the concerns that the federal government leaves at their door 
surrounding rail-line abandonment that many, many producers 
are faced with in Saskatchewan today. 
 
An Ag minister who says one day we got a crisis, the next day 
we don’t. A Premier who says one day we’ve got a crisis and 
the next day we don’t have a crisis in agriculture. And all the 
time the farm families of this province are hoping that they 
somehow or another come to their senses and realize that there 
is a crisis out there. 
 
Right now we’re faced with another crisis, and that’s the 
nursing situation. But we . . . As soon as that one’s addressed, 
and it won’t be long . . . I suspect this government will be 
throwing people in jail before long with respect to that. And 
then the next thing we’ll be faced with is an ag crisis because 
that one’s there. 
 
The west side of this province is dry once again. Farmers have 
no money to put a crop in — and the members opposite know 
that. The member from P.A. (Prince Albert) raises his hands. 
What do you want me to do, in effect, is what he’s saying. 
 
The farmers of this province are asking for some degree of 
support. At least say you support them. That would be a step in 
the right direction. At least say that you somewhat care about 
their problem. At least that would be a step in the right 
direction. 
 
The member from P.A. holds his hand over his brow. He knows 
of what I speak. 



554 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 1999 

We are saying . . . we saw a Minister of Agriculture tell farmers 
he was bargaining tough with the federal government and then 
hop on a plane to Mexico. Well that was sure a great signal for 
the farmers of this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
At a time when they’re having difficulty meeting their bills, at a 
time when they’re having difficulty raising money for input 
costs this spring, at a time when the farmers of this province are 
in desperate straits to raise the money that’s necessary to put a 
crop in, where are you? Where are you? Nowhere to be seen. 
 
The member from just the constituency to the north of me 
knows very well that in her area the farmers . . . farmer after 
farmer after farmer is facing bankruptcy because they have no 
money, no hope, no chance . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, 
it’s giveaways, is it? It’s giveaways. That’s what they want to 
talk about. 
 
When the farmers needed support in years gone by, it was there. 
It was there. And the member opposite says, giveaways, 
giveaways. Giveaway, that’s what the member opposite calls it. 
What you people are doing is . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
When another administration is providing support for 
agriculture, it’s called a giveaway. When you people are doing 
it, somehow it’s a noble cause, a noble cause when the NDP is 
supporting people. When any other administration is supporting 
them, it’s a giveaway. 
 
Well I’ll tell you, Madame. There would be a lot of, Mr. 
Speaker, there’d be a lot of people in Saskatchewan, a lot of 
farmers in Saskatchewan would like to see a little help from an 
administration today. They’d like to see an administration that’s 
coming forward with a program that has some degree of 
support. The NDP’s solution is: tough it out yourselves boys 
because we’ve got no help for you. That’s their support level. 
That’s the support level that this administration has for 
agriculture. 
 
The Agriculture budget of this province has plummeted under 
you people, plummeted under you people. Look back in the 
budget Estimates. I challenge you to look back. See what it was 
in ’92, see what it is today. See what support there was for 
agriculture in ’92, see what support there is for agriculture 
today. It’s a minuscule, a minuscule amount of money and the 
members opposite know it, and the farmers of this province 
know it. 
 
And that’s why the farmers of this province are leaving your 
party in droves, are leaving your party in droves. Of the 55,000 
farm families of this province, there’ll be scarcely few that 
support you in the next election, scarcely few that support you 
in the next election. 
 
I remember and many farmers of this province will remember 
back in 1991 when the current Premier, then the opposition 
leader . . . then the opposition leader said at that time: the way 
you measure a premier’s performance when it comes to 
agriculture is how much money he can go to Ottawa and get in 
a time of crisis. That was what the Premier of this province, the 
then opposition leader, said at that time — how much money he 
can go and extract from Ottawa and get for the farm families. 
 
Well the one and only, the one and only occasion that the 

Premier of this province . . . the one and only occasion that the 
Premier of this province went to Ottawa to try and support 
farmers, he came back with a bill for the plane fare. That was 
the level of support that he got for farmers. 
 
Even by his own yardstick . . . even by the Premier of today — 
the leader of the opposition back in those days — even by his 
own yardstick, he’s been an absolute, dismal failure for farmers 
in this province. By his own yardstick, by his own yardstick, by 
his own yardstick — he’s a failure. 
 
And the member from her seat says, what about Mr. 
Hermanson? What about Mr. Hermanson? Well I’ll tell you 
about Mr. Hermanson. The farmers of this province know that 
when it comes to helping Saskatchewan and when it comes to 
helping farmers in Saskatchewan, you count on Mr. Hermanson 
for some help. You count on Mr. Hermanson for some support. 
You can count on him to say: no money for bureaucracy and 
administration, put the money into a program that’s meaningful 
for the farmers of this province. 
 
That’s what he has said consistently since the time he was an 
MP (Member of Parliament), a Reform MP in Ottawa. Since he 
was a Reform MP, he has been attempting to try and drive some 
degree of sanity into the debate, saying that the money 
shouldn’t go to administration, it should go to programs that are 
meaningful for the farmers of this province. That’s what he said 
then. That’s what he says today. And that’s what he’ll say 
tomorrow . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. Minister, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, the Deputy Premier shouts from his chair 
about no tires. I have no idea what he’s even referring to. 
 
No hope. No opportunity. No chances for agriculture here in 
good old NDP Saskatchewan — good old NDP Saskatchewan. 
 
Well I’ll tell you it’s these kinds of motions that this 
government puts forward that cause the farm community of this 
province to be in distress because that’s all they have is some 
sort of feigned hope for farmers. Some sort of, some sort of way 
of saying that we support agriculture. But when it’s there, when 
it’s necessary, when the farmers really need it, they’re nowhere 
to be seen, nowhere to be seen — an absolute failure when it 
comes to supporting agriculture. 
 
And that’s why, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when it comes time for 
election I don’t think the NDP are going to do all that well in 
rural Saskatchewan — all over Saskatchewan for that matter, all 
over Saskatchewan for that matter. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to conclude my remarks, I want to 
conclude my remarks by amending, amending this shameful 
motion, this shameful motion: 
 

That after the word “Assembly”, all words be deleted and 
the following be substituted: 
 
That the Assembly condemns the Premier and the Minister 
of Agriculture for showing no leadership whatsoever 
during the most recent agriculture crisis and because of this 
lack of leadership, allowed the federal Liberals to bring in 
a federal farm aid program package which has done 
nothing to address the serious situation facing many 
Saskatchewan producers. 



April 13, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 555 

I move the following motion, Mr. Deputy Speaker, seconded by 
the member from Humboldt. 
 
(1645) 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I am pleased to rise today to enter into the debate. And 
I too have got to really hand it to the NDP — as the member 
from Kindersley said — for having the sheer audacity to bring 
forward a motion such as this, patting themselves on the back 
for their handling of agriculture. This is truly a laughable 
motion. 
 
Since 1991, Mr. Deputy Speaker, since they were elected, the 
NDP has slashed and hacked away at the agriculture budget. It’s 
now only a fraction of what it was when the NDP took over, 
and everyone knows that. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the president of SARM (Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities) said, when he summed up 
the latest NDP budget, he summed it up with the following 
words, saying, “It’s a black day for rural Saskatchewan.” It was 
a black day for rural Saskatchewan, it was a black day for 
Saskatchewan completely, for all of Saskatchewan when this 
government came into being. 
 
This government, Mr. Deputy Speaker, which is congratulating 
itself today, is the same government that pocketed $193 million 
of farmers’ money when it cancelled GRIP. Farmers of this 
province have not forgotten that and they will not forget it. 
They will not forget that. Hundreds of millions . . . of millions 
of dollars flowed back to the federal government because of the 
NDP’s actions. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, you’ll have to excuse farmers when they 
don’t have a lot of sympathy at all with the NDP when they cry 
poor when it comes to farm aid. And the same heavy-handed 
legislative approach that they used when they cancelled GRIP, 
they have now used recently against the nurses, the nurses of 
this province who have not been heard as they’ve been voicing 
their need over and over and over again to have extra help, to 
have more staffing, for somebody to notice the kind of stress 
that they were going under. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to read a letter . . . 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — Order. The members will 
appreciate that I’m not that far removed from the hon. member 
for Humboldt and having a great deal of difficulty hearing the 
hon. member’s remarks, and I ask . . . Order. And I ask hon. 
members in allowing other members to make their speeches 
when it’s their turn. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, the members opposite would like me to speak up. And 
because I have received a letter from a person in Wadena who 
would like to pass on his words to this NDP government, I am 
pleased to be able to do that for him here today. And here’s 
what he says. This person says: 
 

I would like to thank the present NDP government for 
allowing what was once the most prosperous province in 
all of Canada to become one of the largest welfare states in 

North America. Thanks Roy, thank you Roy, for allowing 
farmers to be forced into losing land, shooting livestock 
and being forced . . . 

 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — Order, order. Order. Now 
I’m not certain if the member is reading from a published 
document or from correspondence. I simply remind the hon. — 
order — I simply remind all hon. members that . . . order, order 
. . . Now two issues now come up. First off, I would invite all 
hon. members that wish to engage in a private discussion to 
please carry on outside of the Chamber. 
 
With respect to the matter at hand, I remind all members that 
when quoting and reading names of sitting members it is 
acceptable if it’s in a direct quote from a published article, but 
is not to be used in simple correspondence. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The writer of 
this has informed me that he has issued this to the papers of the 
province. So if . . . With your consent, I will proceed. 
 

Thank you, Mr. Premier, for allowing farmers to be forced 
into losing land, shooting livestock, and being forced into 
taking financial handouts because they can no longer 
afford to feed their livestock. 
 
Thank you to the NDP, the new dictatorship platform, for 
closing rural and urban hospitals and schools, the Plains 
hospital fiasco, forcing major companies out of 
Saskatchewan through high taxes, the highest gas prices in 
North America, forcing students on student loans to barely 
eat while you breast-feed your CEO supporters through 
raises and financial tax breaks. 
 
Thanks for the casinos, for all of the destruction. Thank 
you for roads like those in Kosovo, and for setting the 
record straight on your world, for setting your record 
straight on how diversified our economy really is. 
 
By the way, what colour is the sky in your world, Mr. 
Premier, so detached from reality? Oops. Freedom of 
speech is not a Saskatchewan value, as your Justice 
minister puts it. 
 
Got to bow to the whip. Have we been to Cuba lately, 
because the nursing strike and your actions have me 
wondering. I guess old American McCarthy-era suspicions 
were right, but it did take some forty years. 
 
Well enjoy your greed of power — enjoy that greed, 
because when this province and its voters go to the polls 
and boot you from power, you can be sure that that will be 
the last day you enjoy anything. 
 
Meanwhile, me and my wife and my two children are 
leaving the province that we love. Put that in your 
statistics. Saskatchewan-born, soon to be a past resident for 
good. 
 
PS Resign Roy — do us all a big favour. 

 
So that’s just an instance, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of some of the 
kind of the letters that we have been receiving and some of the 



556 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 1999 

letters being issued to the editors of papers all over this 
province. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if we’re going to be helping our 
farmers we have to ensure that it is a kind of help that is 
meaningful to them. Ask the farmers of this province how 
meaningful this AIDA program is. Each of them that has even 
considered it has gone to their accountant and they know that 
they’re going to be facing bills of around $700 just to be able to 
fill this out and possibly have a payout in the end. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, how many farmers can even afford to take 
that route? The official opposition put forward a very, very 
wonderful suggestion about paying out on seeded acreage basis. 
Every farmer in this province that I’ve talked to since this farce 
of a program has been put forward is saying that that would 
have been the more sensible thing to do. They would have 
received some sort of a payment and they would have received 
it on time in order to help themselves in time for seeding. 
 
But what do we have now? Due to the negligence of the 
Minister of Agriculture, the member from Watrous, we have a 
program that is terribly flawed, that is not going to be of any 
help to farmers, and our farmers are going to be facing 
bankruptcy again — many of them are right now and are forced 
off their farms into the cities. The cities aren’t going to help 
anybody, it’s going to be more people on welfare. 
 
The other issue, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the high taxation that 
not only farmers have to pay in this province but every person 
in this province is facing. People of the province have been 
yelling loudly. They have been trying to get the attention of the 
NDP government to lower these taxes. People cannot live in 
this province and have a penny in their pocket at the end of the 
day. 
 
And I just can't resist getting in, Mr. Deputy Speaker, some 
words from nurses that I’ve been talking to today. Nurses who 
also have spouses that are farmers, both are them are in dire 
straits. This wonderful package that the NDP government is 
wanting to push on the nurses will amount to approximately 
four cups of coffee a day. That’s the kind of increase they will 
be getting. 
 
Surely, surely they are worth more. And surely when their 
husbands, many of them are facing a crisis in agriculture, the 
NDP government can be a little more caring and at least 
negotiate properly with the federal government for a package 
that is suited to Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I wanted to also mention a couple of other 
things that have been brought to my attention. And one of them 
is that the farmers who are trying to determine how short-line 
railroads will be set up often are not told about the kind of taxes 
that they are going to have pay should they try to buy the 
elevators along the routes. 
 
Taxes for instance in Porcupine Plain on elevators since 
reassessment have gone up from 15,000 to $45,000. Does the 
NDP or anyone that is trying to determine whether or not it’s 
going to be feasible to have short-line railroads and elevators 
along those lines, is it feasible? Can they pay these kinds of 
taxes? These are the kind of things that need to be brought 

forward so that farmers realize the full cost facing them. 
 
The other issue that I would like to present the government with 
is the area that they’ve been failing in is the rural water supply, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. We have contaminated water throughout 
the province in rural areas. The University of Saskatchewan has 
brought this to the attention of government. The government 
has done nothing about it. 
 
There are many, many specific issues in the area of agriculture 
and rural life that have not been addressed by this government, 
have been ignored by this government, and they truly deserve 
not to have the confidence of the people of the province at the 
next election. 
 
I would move to adjourn debate at this time, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:57 p.m. 
 
 


