





























































Hansard: March 22, 1999


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 129 
 March 22, 1999 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I have a petition to present on the topic of the Crown 
Construction Tendering Agreement. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to end 
its unfair tendering policies and immediately cancel the 
Crown Construction Tendering Agreement. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition today come from 
the city of Saskatoon. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present today on behalf of the disenfranchised 
widows. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to have the Workers’ 
Compensation Board Act amended whereby benefits and 
pensions are reinstated to disenfranchised widows and 
whereby all revoked pensions are reimbursed to them 
retroactively with interest to April 17, 1985. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions come from the Regina, Estevan, all over 
southeast Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
demand that the federal government work with 
Saskatchewan to put in place a farm aid package that 
provides real relief to those who need it, and that the 
provincial government develop a long-term farm safety net 
program as it promised to do when it cancelled GRIP 
against the wishes of farmers. 
 

The signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from the little city of Rhein, 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
today to present petitions on behalf of people from this province 
who would like to see the Crown Construction Tender 
Agreement scrapped. 

And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to end 
its unfair tendering policies and immediately cancel the 
Crown Construction Tendering Agreement. 
 

The signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Saskatoon. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
my pleasure to rise once again on behalf of parents and students 
and interested citizens in Saskatchewan who are concerned 
about children with specific learning disabilities. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide essential funding and ensure the delivery of 
scientifically proven diagnostic assessment and 
programming for children with learning disabilities in 
order that they have access to an education that meets their 
needs and allows them to reach their full potential. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

The people who have signed this petition today, Mr. Speaker, 
are from Kinistino, Melfort, Beatty, and the James Smith 
Reserve. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present petitions on behalf 
of citizens of Saskatchewan. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call on federal and provincial 
governments to dedicate a significantly greater portion of 
fuel tax revenues towards road maintenance and 
construction so Saskatchewan residents may have a safe 
highway system that meets their needs. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And the signatures are from the good folks in Broadview, 
Whitewood, Grenfell. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This afternoon I 
present petitions on behalf of petitioners from Battleford, 
Delmas, and North Battleford concerned about the confusing 
and dangerous entrance to the city of North Battleford and 
praying that the intersection of Highway 40 with Highway 16 
be relocated. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
petitions on behalf of citizens of the province. These ones are 
concerned about the deteriorating state of our highway system 
in the province. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 



130 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 1999 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call on federal and provincial 
governments to dedicate a significantly greater portion of 
fuel tax revenues toward road maintenance and 
construction so Saskatchewan residents may have a safe 
highway system that meets their needs. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Those who’ve signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
communities of Woodrow, Gravelbourg, Glenbain, Coderre, 
and Limerick. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I join with my 
colleagues here today in bringing forward petitions. The prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call upon provincial and 
federal governments to immediately take steps to end 
unfair world subsidies and provide farmers with prompt 
relief from declining incomes, and act as watchdogs 
against rising input costs which are harming the rural 
economy. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed these petitions are 
from the Mankota and Glentworth area of the province. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy 
today to present a new petition. I’ll read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to listen to the petitioners humbly request 
immediate implementation of the infrastructure plan for 
replacement and upgrade of Highway No. 13 to facilitate 
the orderly east-west movement of people, goods, and 
resources. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This came in from the town of Eastend administrator and the 
signators are mostly from Eastend. There’s a couple from 
Saskatoon and I see one from Lloydminster . . . or Lethbridge I 
guess it is. 
 
And I’m happy to present it on their behalf today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Langford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have petitions 
here on behalf of Emma Lake and Christopher Lake association 
ratepayers. There’s 523 petitions signed. The petitioners are 
requesting: 
 

That the legislative changes be made to The Election Act, 
1996, and to the municipality Act, to enable all ratepayers 
in the school division to have the democratic rights to vote 
in the school board election. The current legislation 

sanctions taxation without representation. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the petitions presented at the last 
sitting have been reviewed and found to be in order. Pursuant to 
rule 12(7) they are hereby received. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 11 ask the government the following question: 
 

Has your government considered, and this is to the 
Minister of Agriculture incidentally, has your government 
considered an acreage-set-aside program to reduce the 
number of seeded acres in Saskatchewan’s farming sector? 
Has your department discussed this American approach 
with SARM members who have promoted this $20 per 
acre concept? And have you made any efforts to get the 
federal government involved in this type of program? 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to introduce to you and through you to the Assembly 
two constituents of mine, Robert and Irma Hammermeister, 
sitting in your gallery, from Frobisher, here to observe the 
proceedings today and I would ask the Assembly to welcome 
them to our proceedings. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

International Day for the Elimination of Racial 
Discrimination 

 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today because yesterday, March 21, was the International Day 
for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination. March 21 has 
been designated of this day because of actually the Sharpeville 
massacre in South Africa. 
 
Some will remember that was the day that peaceful 
demonstrators were protesting against apartheid when they were 
massacred by South African security forces. In 1966 the United 
Nations declared that March 21 would be the International Day 
for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination. 
 
Last night I had the pleasure of joining a large number of 
people here in Regina at an event over at the university to — on 
a more hopeful note — celebrate the spring free from racism. 
The event was a day of drumming against racism, and it was a 
celebration of many different cultures that brought together four 
different drum groups. And we’re very proud that our Minister 
of Labour was one of the people drumming last night in . . . to 
support this worthy cause. 
 



March 22, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 131 

I know all the members share a concern about the growth of 
racism in our province and in our society. And I would hope 
they would join with me today in recognizing this important 
event. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
also like to join with the member from Regina South in 
recognizing yesterday as a very, very important day in the 
world. In 1966 the United Nations General Assembly declared 
March 21 the International Day for the Elimination of Racial 
Discrimination. 
 
I rise in this Assembly today on behalf of the Saskatchewan 
Party to recognize the Sharpeville massacre. On March 21, 
1960 the police in Sharpeville opened fire on a crowd of over 
70 unarmed blacks who were surrounding the police station 
demonstrating against apartheid. All of the demonstrators were 
killed and over 180 people injured. 
 
The Sharpeville massacre aroused international indignation to 
an unprecedented degree. South Africa sustained a net flow of 
foreign investment capital and appeals for military, economic, 
and sporting boycotts began to be given serious attention. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are entering into a new millennium — a time 
in which new hope and prosperity can be enjoyed by all. It our 
duty as a society to respect everyone, regardless of race, colour, 
national or ethnic origin. 
 
The elimination of racial discrimination and racism can be 
accomplished if we allow ourselves to be reminded of the 
tragedies that occur when we are not responsible for our 
actions. We have made significant progress on our journey to 
racial harmony and I ask all members to recognize this very 
important occasion. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Politicians as Actors 
 

Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last night many 
watched the Academy Awards and found them lacking 
compared to the overacting of the NDP (New Democratic 
Party) and the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party bad actors have credibility problems of 
their own, especially after today’s release of the National Post 
compass poll showing the Saskatchewan Party at 23 per cent. 
Compare that to the Saskatchewan Party’s own December poll 
showing their party at 34 per cent. 
 
Now if that was accurate, their party has slipped 11 points in 
three months. If that poll was not accurate, then how can you 
trust them when it comes to numbers regarding health care and 
highways and budgets? Either their party is sinking faster than 
the Titanic or their original polling numbers were done a long 
time ago in a galaxy far, far away. 
 
This afternoon in Carrot River a public meeting is going on 
about the future of the Carrot River Hospital. When the Liberals 
first raised the issue of rural hospital closures, we saw spin 

doctors going in to try to hold the NDP’s thin, red line. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party complains because the Liberals invite 
people to these meetings. Obviously they are complaining 
because the Liberals see this as the people’s priority while the 
Saskatchewan Party don’t care about health, just politics. 
 
We have bad actors in government who mismanage the health 
care as badly as Grant Devine Tories mismanaged budget. 
While on the other side we have the Saskatchewan Party who 
prefer to analyze this. The glitz of these bad actors will fool 
nobody, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to election day. 
 

North Battleford Telephone Pioneers Make Donation 
 
Ms. Murrell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I would like 
to commend the North Battleford Telephone Pioneers for their 
recent support of two seniors’ projects. On March 11, the North 
Battleford Pioneers donated a total of $2,400 to River Heights 
Lodge and the Battlefords District Care Centre. 
 
The River Heights contribution will be used to purchase a set of 
physiotherapy parallel bars. This equipment is used to assist 
residents in walking. The exercise strengthens a person’s lower 
body thereby increasing and maintaining the person’s mobility. 
 
The Battlefords District Care Centre funds will be used for the 
gazebo and outdoor area refurbishing project which are located 
just off the ward 4, a special care unit for individuals with 
Alzheimer’s disease and related dementias. 
 
The Telephone Pioneers are a group of retired or current local 
SaskTel employees who put in many long and hard volunteer 
hours to help serve their community better. They believe in 
supporting the seniors who helped build both their community 
and the province. The group is a prime example of how a 
community can work together to maintain continuity and 
strength. I thank them and congratulate them for their efforts. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Bruno Athlete Attends Canada Winter Games 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to recognize a fine young 
athlete from my constituency from the community of Bruno, 
Joelle Buckle. Joelle recently attended the Canada Winter 
Games in Cornerbrook, Newfoundland, from March 1 to 7. She 
had been chosen as a member of Team Saskatchewan’s 
wheelchair basketball squad. 
 
Joelle has had past experience in national competition. She 
participated in the 1997 Canada Summer Games in Brandon 
where she competed in wheelchair racing. But basketball and 
wheelchair racing are not the only sports Joelle excels in. 
 
In February she won a gold medal in the short distance sit-ski 
competition at the Canadian Disabled Cross Country Skiing 
Championship at Whitetail Ski Resort in North Battleford. To 
recognize her sporting accomplishments, Ms. Buckle has been 
awarded the Ada MacKenzie Award of $200 from the Canadian 
Wheelchair Sports Association. 
 
Joelle Buckle is an extraordinary young girl, Mr. Speaker. She’s 



132 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 1999 

a hard-working, determined, spirited young woman who has 
embraced her disability as a means of reaching her full potential 
and who is a source of inspiration to all. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Retail Store Marks 70th Anniversary 
 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, I suspect that you and other 
members of the House have often wondered how it is that the 
member from Saskatchewan Rivers and the member from 
Prince Albert Northcote and myself look so stylish on certain 
occasions. I know that you know but you’ve just been too polite 
to ask us, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The answer is simple. For years we have been patrons of Ted 
Matheson Men’s Wear in Prince Albert, and before us, some of 
our friends and relatives were patrons. 
 
I mention that because this month Ted Matheson Men’s Wear is 
celebrating its 70th year of continuous business on the same 
block. 
 
Ted Matheson Sr. opened the store on March 19, 1929 — not 
the best of years to open a store, but he survived and he 
prospered until his death in 1971. His sons, Fred and Jack, then 
joined the business and ran it for another 35 years. And 
currently Jack and his son, Fred, are proprietors. 
 
That’s 70 years and three generations of making sure that 
Prince Albert MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) 
look sharp, feel sharp. And he’s even going into a line of 
women’s clothing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But Mathesons are not only known for business, they’re also 
known for their community spirit. And their motto is providing 
service and quality. 
 
Congratulation to Ted Matheson Men’s Wear for 70 years, and 
my best wishes for the next 70. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Juvenile Provincial Curling Playdowns 
 

Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Friday I had 
the pleasure of attending the juvenile provincial playdowns in 
Gravelbourg, Saskatchewan. The Gravelbourg curling club in 
the town of Gravelbourg proudly hosted the festivities which 
featured 16 mixed teams from all regions of the province. 
 
In this the International Year of Francophones, the three-day 
event was a great opportunity for the town to welcome these 
visitors and share some of their warm hospitality and heritage. 
An enjoyable and rewarding experience was had by all who 
attended, both on and off the ice. 
 
During the time the youths were not curling, they were treated 
to tours of many of Gravelbourg’s historical heritage sites. 
 
I’d like to commend all of the teams for the spirit of 
competition that they exhibited, with special mention of the two 
Thunder Creek entries: the foursome of Amanda Jahnke, Twyla 

Leisle, Patti Dueck and Nicole Giydon from the town of Morse; 
as well as the host team from Gravelbourg, Mr. Speaker, that of 
Daniel Carrobourg, Candice Cooper, Guy Perrault and Colin 
Gauthier. 
 
I applaud the work done by all involved in making the event a 
great success and I wish all of the participants in this event 
continued good luck and the brightest of futures in their sport of 
curling. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Country Music Association Awards 
 

Mr. Flavel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the guns 
were blazing last night at the Regina Inn as the Saskatchewan 
Country Music Association held its 10th awards show in the 
Applause Dinner Theatre. 
 
Regina’s own Faster Gun led the pack with four awards 
including: non-touring group of the year, song and single of the 
year, and group of the year. Then along came Regina’s Tex 
Pistols, whose album Not Suitable for Airplay won the album of 
the year category. The group was also named back-up band of 
the year, while their band leader Brian Sklar was named male 
vocalist of the year. 
 
North Battleford’s Lorrie Church came away with the female 
vocalist of the year, and fans’ choice entertainer of the year. 
Stephanie Thompson of Fort Qu’Appelle won in the video of 
the year category, and the Cockrum Sisters of Meadow Lake 
won gospel album of the year. 
 
Prince Albert’s brother-and-sister team of Jim and Brenda 
Chute, formerly of Nokomis, won the category of vocal 
collaboration while the group Stepping Out, also from Prince 
Albert, were named the most promising artists. 
 
For the fourth consecutive year, Melfort radio station CJVR 
was named country music station of the year, while Regina’s 
Pump Country Roadhouse won the nightclub of the year 
category. 
 
Special awards included the legend and legacy award presented 
to veteran Saskatoon broadcaster Denny Carr, while the 
Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority received the 
international humanitarian award. The Kinsmen Club of 
Saskatchewan also presented Johner Brothers with the 
entertainer of the decade award. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
Health care for Patients Seeking Out of Country Treatment 

 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
for the Minister of Health. 
 
Madam Minister, despite NDP rhetoric to the contrary, your 
government’s failing health reforms have created a two-tiered 
health care system in Saskatchewan. One level of service for 
people living in Saskatoon and Regina, and another level of 



March 22, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 133 

service for people living in rural communities. 
 
One level of service for people with money to seek treatment 
outside of Saskatchewan, another level of service for people 
who can’t afford treatment outside of Saskatchewan. Now we 
find out that for Saskatchewan people who seek medical 
treatment outside the province the NDP deny access to 
follow-up treatment in Saskatchewan. 
 
Madam Minister, will you confirm that this is your policy of the 
NDP government, that when a patient seeks medical treatment 
outside of Saskatchewan, necessary follow-up treatments in 
Saskatchewan are denied? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I know that the 
members of the Saskatchewan Party are busy today meeting in 
Carrot River. I think they’re meeting at about 2 o’clock with the 
people in the Carrot River area. And I also understand that the 
Liberal leader is also there. In fact the Liberals have been busy 
advertising the Saskatchewan Party meeting, which is all very 
confusing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the people of this province know, there are 
literally hundreds and hundreds of health services available to 
the people of this province. There are occasions when those 
particular health services are not available and with the 
agreement of the Department of Health, people who cannot 
receive their health services here can be sent outside of 
Saskatchewan for treatment. And if the treatment is not 
available outside of Saskatchewan in the country, then those 
people can be referred out of country to the United States. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we try and do in this province is make sure 
that we have the services here to facilitate our own citizens’ 
treatment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam 
Minister, Robert Hammermeister, is a 75-year-old man from 
Frobisher who has lived and paid taxes in Saskatchewan his 
entire life 
 
Last fall, Mr. Hammermeister was diagnosed in Saskatchewan 
with a pituitary tumour in his brain. He was then put on a long 
waiting list for an MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) to 
confirm the diagnosis. Mr. Hammermeister was extremely 
concerned about his medical condition and the unreasonably 
long waiting time to get an MRI in Saskatchewan. So, Mr. 
Speaker, he decided to pay $1,600 to have the MRI done 
immediately in Minot. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the MRI confirmed the diagnosis of a brain 
tumour that could have left him blind or dead without surgery. 
Faced with the longest surgical waiting lists in Canada, Mr. 
Hammermeister chose to have the surgery done at the Mayo 
Clinic at his own expense of $41,000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, now the NDP’s health system is refusing to give 
him a follow-up MRI. Why, Madam Minister, is that the NDP’s 
position? Threaten a patient’s life or health with the longest 

waiting lists in the country and then deny him follow-up care 
when they return to the province after their initial treatment? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
do understand why the Saskatchewan Party likes to indicate 
longest waiting lists in Canada when there is no evidence to 
suggest that. And I think, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the 
discussion and the public discourse that needs to go on in this 
province around health, it is important that everyone give 
factual information. And that’s what I’m going to try and do as 
the Minister of Health. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when people go out of country to receive their 
health services and do not have prior approval, the policy of the 
Department of Health is that those treatments will be paid by 
the individual. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am also aware of cases where someone close to 
the North Dakota border went south for some diagnosis. It was 
determined that that person required an operation and that 
person was sent to Regina and received their operation on an 
emergency basis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if people have the information and the treatment is 
available in Saskatchewan, people receive the treatment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — I have a letter from the surgeon at the 
Mayo Clinic that says, and I quote: 
 

A repeat MRI scan is of critical importance. If these scans 
are not performed, the tumor could regrow. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the surgeon also advises that, quote: 
 

Mr. Hammermeister has tried going through official 
channels in the Canadian health system to obtain a 
post-operative MRI scan and has been told that this would 
not be done for him. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP didn’t tell Mr. Hammermeister that he 
would have to wait for a while to get what the doctor described 
as a critical MRI. No, the NDP government said he couldn’t 
have an MRI at all in Saskatchewan. Why? Well because he 
didn’t get his original treatment in Saskatchewan. 
 
Madam Minister, is that your NDP’s government policy? Put a 
patient with serious health problems on the longest waiting list 
in Canada and then deny them follow-up treatment if they 
choose to seek treatment elsewhere. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, as the member will know, 
it is illegal for the Minister of Health to comment about any 
individual case. It is contrary to the information and privacy 
Act. And in fact when ministers of Health in other parts of this 
country have commented on individual cases, they have had to 
leave their position as Minister of Health. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what I will say is that I am prepared to look into 
the specific details of this particular case. I can indicate to the 



134 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 1999 

people of this province that there are over 5,000 people each 
year that receive an MRI in the province of Saskatchewan, and 
we also have follow-up treatment when people are sent out of 
province or out of country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will indicate to the member that I will for sure 
look into this case to make sure that he is not exaggerating or 
misrepresenting the facts of this case. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Our facts are 
accurate, unlike the previous opposition before 1991. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another question to the Minister of Health. 
Madam Minister, it was your failed health system that caused 
this problem. It’s the NDP’s two-tiered health system that is 
causing great pain for thousands of people in Saskatchewan. 
 
Robert Hammermeister was forced to seek medical assistance 
outside of Saskatchewan because he was afraid that waiting for 
service here could leave him blind or worse. A burst brain 
tumour could have killed him. 
 
Madam Minister, your NDP government forced Mr. 
Hammermeister to seek treatment outside of Saskatchewan, 
then refused the follow-up treatment. You have committed 
today to look into Mr. Hammermeister’s case. Will you also 
compensate him for any cost associated with follow-up medical 
treatment that he is forced to take outside of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, what I can indicate to the 
member is that if that treatment is available in the province of 
Saskatchewan and if it’s appropriate treatment, what I can 
assure the member is that that treatment will be available in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Grain Handlers’ Strike 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Agriculture or his designate. 
 
Mr. Minister, for two months rotating strikes by 70 west coast 
grain handlers has been backing up shipments of western grain. 
Mr. Speaker, those 70 strikers have already caused the loss of at 
least $9 million dollars worth of grain sales for Saskatchewan 
farmers, and further transportation delays have the potential to 
cost farmers a million more in lost sales and demurrage charges. 
 
Last week the NDP government refused to debate the need for 
back-to-work legislation and now the federal NDP and Reform 
parties are holding up legislation in Ottawa. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this situation is totally unacceptable. Following 
question period today, the Saskatchewan Party will be again 
moving for an emergency motion calling on the federal political 
parties, all political federal parties, to co-operate the immediate 
passage of back-to-work legislation. Mr. Minister, will you and 
your government, your NDP government, stand up for Sask 
farmers in supporting this motion? 
 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the 
question from the member opposite and I want to quote from 
Hansard of March 17 when the Premier dealt with this issue, 
and the member I think was here in the House but he said, and I 
quote: 
 

. . . we want this strike to be completed and the blockage, 
the stoppage, ceased as quickly as possible. 
 

He goes on to say this should be: 
 

. . . settled and settled quickly, and if not, legislation should 
be considered because the economy of Saskatchewan 
demands it. 
 

Now what surprises most Canadians is the report in The 
Toronto Star on Saturday and I quote: 
 

Boudria sought Commons consent to have the MPs deal 
with all stages of the Bill in a single day, but to his 
surprise, the western-based Reform Party balked. 
 

Now better than debating here in the House, maybe your leader 
. . . maybe your leader, Mr. Hermanson, the former Reformer, 
the former Reformer, would get on the phone and phone his 
colleague and see if he couldn’t unblock the Reformers in 
Ottawa and get on with the legislation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Deputy 
Premier, it just so happens . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order, order. Order! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Premier, for your information we have contacted every federal 
party to get on board, support this legislation, including your 
federal party, including the Reform Party, and every other party 
down there. So we aren’t playing favourites. You contact your 
federal party and ask them to get on board. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party has written, as I said, to 
all parties in the federal system and we’re asking quite simply 
the same question. We’re asking for an emergency debate 
following question period, and what we’re asking you to do is 
allow this debate so all parties can take part, put pressure on all 
federal parties and the federal government. This problem cannot 
continue. Will you support our motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, for the last three or 
four days we’ve been debating the Throne Speech. And I’ve 
listened to many of the speeches and I have not heard members 
opposite, who have opportunity to speak whenever they want 
on this issue, talk about it in any detail at all. They don’t even 
speak about it. 
 
But today, grandstanding in question period, grandstanding in 
question period, they now want to, they now want to get some 
press. 
 



March 22, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 135 

Well let me tell you what might work. If Elwin Hermanson 
would get on the phone: “Hello, Preston. Hello, Preston. How 
are you today? This is Elwin Hermanson, your former 
colleague. Do you think you want to pass this legislation?” 
That’s what you should do. 
 
Where is Mr. Hermanson today? Get him on the phone. Get him 
on the phone, phone Preston Manning, and let’s see if we can 
get this legislation unblocked. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Retail Sales Record 
 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Finance. 
 
Mr. Minister, Statistics Canada released another set of figures 
this morning and once again Saskatchewan is dead last. This 
time it’s retail sales. From January 1998 to January 1999 retail 
sales in Saskatchewan fell by 5 per cent — 5 per cent, Mr. 
Minister. That’s your record. It’s the worst record of all in 
Canada. 
 
Mr. Minister, the NDP has the worst job creation record in the 
country and now you have the worst sales record in the country. 
That’s the record. Dead last again and again and again. Mr. 
Minister, will you admit that high taxes are crippling our 
economy? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Pardon me, Mr. Speaker, I was 
momentarily distracted signing a cheque for $2 million, which 
is the amount we pay daily in interest on the debt left behind 
when those people left office, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I’m not sure why the member is on his high horse. But what 
I’m going to tell the member is this, Mr. Speaker, that between 
1992 and 1997 Saskatchewan led Canada in terms of economic 
growth, Mr. Speaker. And in terms of retail sales, we’ve had 
really amazing growth in retail sales since we came to office in 
1991. 
 
And it’s true, Mr. Speaker, that this year our economy is going 
to grow slower than it has in previous years. But that’s because 
we’ve been hit hard on the farm and hit hard in oil, Mr. 
Speaker. But we’re still growing, which is a far cry from what 
occurred in the 1980s when the hon. members over there were 
in office, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Communications Budget in Department of Health 
 
Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, the week before the Throne 
Speech, the Premier was explaining to reporters the mistakes 
that his government had admitted making in health care. The 
mistake that the Premier admitted to was his failure at 
consulting and communicating their plans to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I find that hard to believe that 
communications would be a problem in health care. You see, 
Mr. Speaker, according to a freedom of information document 

obtained by the Liberal caucus, the Saskatchewan health 
communications branch saw a 340 per cent increase in their 
total labour and operating expenses budget from 1992 to 1998, 
and a 356 per cent increase in the communications labour 
budget for the same period. In just six years — zap — a 356 per 
cent increase for flacks and more communications propaganda. 
Zap — more flack; and zap — more propaganda. 
 
Can the Minister of Health stand up in this House today and 
justify those horrendous increases? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to 
thank the member for the question. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this morning we had the opportunity — the 
Associate Minister of Health and myself — to meet with the 
Saskatoon Star-Phoenix editorial board, and one of the 
discussions we had was their observation that we needed to 
provide much more information to the people of this province 
about health care in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last week in this House in answer to questions, I 
began to start to provide the many myriad of services that the 
people of this province have: for instance, 4,600,000 visits to a 
physician each year in the province of Saskatchewan; for 
instance, 28,000 people in this province receiving home care 
services. That helps people stay in their own homes; it helps 
people recover from day surgery. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have 200 people in this province that receive 
Betaseron; 43,000 radiation and chemotherapy treatments each 
year. Mr. Speaker, we are spending $1.732 billion each year in 
the province of Saskatchewan and we’re going to tell people 
what that gets the people of the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — Well I thank the minister for all those flowery 
statistics, Mr. Speaker. But I’m wondering if the minister 
realizes that the increased costs of her communications branch 
would, in fact, pay for 15 new nurses or 84 hip replacements; 
3,200 cataract surgeries; 8,300 mammograms; 3,000 MRI scans 
or 6,800 CT (computerized tomography) scans, besides another 
26 kidney transplants per year. 
 
It’s a question of priorities, Mr. Speaker. Priorities is the 
question here, Mr. Speaker. Can the minister explain why it’s a 
priority to increase the propaganda department by 340 per cent, 
when there are long lines for diagnostic treatment here in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s really 
important that people do know what sorts of services that are 
available in the province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, you 
know we now have palliative care for people who are in the 
process of passing away and they can receive that service in 
their own home. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we now provide drugs free of cost for people who 
are receiving palliative care in their own homes and, Mr. 
Speaker, 2,500 people receive that kind of care in their homes. 



136 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 1999 

And I think it’s important that people know that they don’t have 
to go to the hospital if they want to be in their own homes with 
the support of home care as they live out their remaining days. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important that people who have 
multiple sclerosis know the kind of drugs that are available in 
this province, so that they can try and continue to live 
independent lives. That’s important and people need to know 
that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important that people in this province 
know you don’t have to go to Saskatoon and Regina to get your 
chemotherapy. You can get your chemotherapy in Humboldt, 
and Kerrobert, and Outlook, and Edam, and Lloydminster, and 
Rosetown, and Melfort, and Nipawin, and Meadow Lake. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people need to know what they can get. And, Mr. 
Speaker, we think that’s extremely important. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Nursing Shortage 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, a 
few years back when the associate Health minister was the 
vice-chair of the province’s Health Human Resource 
Committee, she was telling the province about the impending 
nursing shortage. Mr. Speaker, can the associate Health minister 
tell us in plain language when she told the Premier and the 
Health minister about the nursing shortage? 
 
Can she tell us when and if she sat down with the Minister of 
Health to warn her of the impending nursing shortage or not. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. What we’re 
doing in Health human resources is looking at a long-term plan 
for this province that not only deals with what nurses we’ll 
need, what doctors we need, what LPNs (licensed practical 
nurse) we’ll need, what licensed practical nurses, what 
therapists we’ll need. We’re looking at a sustainable long-term 
plan that covers our needs into the future as well as now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well that answer 
has been as vague as everyone else, that other ministers are 
answering here. 
 
I’d like to ask the Minister of Health when she became aware of 
the nursing shortage in Saskatchewan. In an article written 
January 29 of this year the minister was quoted in the 
Leader-Post as saying that she was not aware of the problem of 
the nursing shortage and that she was caught off guard. How 
come she was caught off guard? 
 
When you are in charge of an almost $2 billion organization, 
don’t you think it’s important to know the key parts of that 
organization and operation, Madam Minister? That’s part of the 
internal communication process. It would be like a hockey team 
starting the season with only three players. Don’t you think that 
maybe, just maybe, you should have known about this problem 

in advance? 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question to the minister is this: do you not 
agree that it was a failure on your part and the Premier’s part to 
not know about this nursing shortage in advance? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, very much for the question, 
for the member from Wood River. 
 
Mr. Speaker, each year in the province of Saskatchewan, the 
Department of Health undergoes what is called a health 
employers’ survey. And, Mr. Speaker, in the 1997 health 
employers’ survey, there was an indication that there were 52 
vacant positions in the province out of 5,560.1 full-time 
equivalent nursing positions. Mr. Speaker, the vacancy rate was 
.7 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is no question that all provinces in this 
country as well as various jurisdictions in North America and 
across the globe are experiencing not only a shortage in nursing 
but also a shortage in a number of different professions, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what I can tell the member is that we are working 
very closely with the SRNA (Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ 
Association), with the University, with SIAST (Saskatchewan 
Institute of Applied Science and Technology), and with the 
department in order to develop an ongoing nursing recruitment 
and retention strategy, but for also other health care providers as 
well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Social Service Caseloads 
 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Social Services. Mr. Minister, 
Social Services employees demonstrated last week in front of 
government offices across the province. They are angry and 
frustrated because the NDP government doesn’t seem to get it. 
 
It’s the same story no matter where you look. Nurses and social 
workers crushed under the weight of a massive and growing 
workload, and an NDP government that is more concerned 
about politics than people. 
 
It’s ridiculous, Mr. Minister. Child protection workers with 
caseloads of more than 45. Foster care workers with caseloads 
of more than 50. Young offenders’ workers, caseloads of more 
than 65. Income security workers, caseloads of more than 300. 
Mr. Speaker, with caseloads like this, superwoman herself 
could not get the job done. 
 
Mr. Minister, Social Services caseworkers need some help. 
What is the NDP government doing to address these 
dangerously high caseloads? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the 
member for the question. The question of child protection 
caseloads is one of concern to the government. It is for that 
reason that the government acted during the course of the last 



March 22, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 137 

year to add significant new staff in the area of child protection 
so as to reduce the caseloads in that area. 
 
Coupled with that, we have also sought to expand training 
opportunities for our staff so that they’re in a better position to 
discharge the very difficult jobs that they do in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what I didn’t get . . . We know what the union’s 
position is, which is to add even more staff at this point and also 
to make staff commitments binding on the government and on 
the members of the Legislative Assembly. Our position is that 
we will continue to monitor it. We are very concerned about 
this. 
 
What we didn’t hear though, Mr. Speaker, is what is the 
position that party, given that their position is to freeze staffing 
levels and to freeze expenditures in the area of Social Services. 
We really need to get beyond hypocrisy, Mr. Speaker. We need 
sort of some clear answers from that group opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 7 — The Prairie Agricultural Machinery Institute 
Amendment Act, 1999 

 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I move that Bill No. 7, The Prairie Agricultural 
Machinery Institute Amendment Act, 1999 be now introduced 
and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 8 — The Assessment Management Agency 
Amendment Act, 1999 

 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 8, 
The Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, 1999, 
be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 10 — The Boiler and Pressure Vessel Act, 1999 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 10, 
The Boiler and Pressure Vessel Act, 1999, be now introduced 
and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 12 — The Northern Municipalities 
Amendment Act, 1999 

 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 12, 
The Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 1999, be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 

Bill No. 13 — The Rural Municipality 
Amendment Act, 1999 

 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 13, 
The Rural Municipality Amendment Act, 1999, be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 14 — The Urban Municipality 
Amendment Act, 1999 

 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 14, 
The Urban Municipality Amendment Act, 1999 be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise pursuant to 
rule 46 to ask leave to move a motion of urgent and pressing 
necessity. 
 
The Speaker: — The hon. member for Saltcoats requests to 
introduce through rule 46 a motion of urgent and pressing 
necessity and to set aside the normal business of the House. 
 
I’ll ask the hon. member to very briefly describe why he 
believes the matter is one which justifies setting aside the 
normal business of the House and to also advise the House very 
briefly of the motion he wishes to introduce. 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 46 
 

Back to Work Legislation for Striking Grain Handlers 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, our 
motion today is very similar to the one that we put forth last 
week. I think at this point though it’s a necessity because of 
federal . . . all parties federally seem to be . . . There seems to be 
a holdup to this legislation. And I think what we need in this 
House is that we have a coming together of all parties to show 
them the need for this legislation to be passed very quickly. 
 
So therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member 
from Moosomin: 
 

That this Assembly calls on all the federal political parties 
to pass back to work legislation for striking grain handlers 
on the west coast port immediately. 

 
The Speaker: — It’s not in order for the hon. member to move 
the motion because that is not acceptable yet. But at this point 
the hon. member has advised the House as to why he wishes to 
have the House set aside its normal course of business and the 
nature of the motion which is introduced. Leave is required. Is 
leave granted? 
 
Leave not granted. 
 
Ms. Stanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I ask for leave to 
introduce a guest. 



138 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 1999 

Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Stanger: — Thank you. It’s not very often we get someone 
from our constituency of Lloydminster here because it’s such a 
long way. I’d like to introduce a constituent of mine, a person 
who has worked very hard in the Sask Wheat Pool area, also on 
the Lakeland Regional College Board — a constituent who 
works very hard for his community. And I’m proud to introduce 
Jim Metherell from Lashburn. Stand, take a bow, Jim. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Jess, seconded by Ms. Murrell, 
and the proposed amendment thereto moved by Mr. Krawetz. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with great humility 
that I rise to address the hon. members assembled here today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all of us are fortunate to have been given this 
opportunity to represent our constituents in this esteemed 
House. Few are chosen to serve their fellow citizens in this 
unique manner. At times we may forget that we are servants of 
the people of our constituency, but also of the people of this 
wonderful province which has been truly blessed with natural 
resources, dedicated people, and riches beyond our fondest 
dreams. Mr. Speaker, it is good that we reflect, if ever so 
briefly, on our boundless blessings. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you have received many accolades — not only 
from members in this legislature, but from the public at large 
with regard to your program of informing and educating various 
groups on the importance of participation in democracy — 
accolades which are rightly deserved. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am impressed by your wisdom, your fairness — 
almost to a fault at times — and your devotion to the decorum 
and operation of this legislature. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, before your cranium becomes so swollen as 
to distort the shape of the tricorne which sits upon your round 
head, the same is not true in your culinary tastes. Really, Mr. 
Speaker, fast food services for an evening out? 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s good to be back. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of the Swift Current constituency are 
truly an inventive, energetic, and diverse group. It has a 
diversity as varied as the weather. We have a strong 
Scandinavian contingent north of Swift Current. The city itself 
is a true mosaic of many nationalities. And in the south we have 
a large number of Mennonites who came and settled the area 
originally known as the Mennonite reserve. The people have 

prospered very well in this constituency. 
 
Mr. Speaker, agriculture and oil industry play a vital role in this 
constituency. However, manufacturing, construction, and the 
service industries are also very important. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this area experienced full employment during ’97 
and ’98. Because of depressed commodity prices, this is no 
longer true at this time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, building reached a record high in ’98 and all 
indications suggest that ’99 will be the same. I had the 
opportunity of talking to the owner of a small construction 
company who was so proud that he was able to keep his crew 
all winter working and that he has enough work planned till 
September with various other projects on the side. 
 
And so we have manufacturers of agricultural implements, 
metal siding, oil field equipment, and all types of energetic 
people working in this region. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the constituency also has many fine recreational 
facilities. Swift Current will boast of two first-class 18-hole golf 
courses in the near future. A new extension to the Fairview 
Arena has now given the city three artificial, indoor ice surfaces 
for the people. 
 
Shared services, a unique of combination of city, school boards, 
and health boards, are working together to establish a fine arts 
facility. 
 
The people of Swift Current are proud of the fact that they were 
an integral part of health region no. 1 which introduced 
medicare to the province and eventually to Canada. Mr. 
Speaker, we helped introduce medicare to Canada and we will 
do all in our power to maintain universal free health care 
despite the efforts of the Tories and the Liberals to introduce a 
two-tier American-style health system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you and I perhaps are the only members in this 
Assembly who remember a famous boxer named Kid McCoy, 
and I’m not even sure that you remember it. But I do. The 
Statler Brothers have immortalized the Kid in a song which 
they called “The Kid’s Last Fight.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Kid was in a bar one night when a slightly 
inebriated individual began to harass him. The Kid told the man 
who he was: hey, I’m a professional boxer. Lay off. The Kid 
stated that he did not want to harm him. The man persisted and 
actually took a swing at him. The Kid ducked and landed a 
punch on the man’s jaw and knocked him down. The man 
grabbed his jaw, moved it back and forth a few times, and then 
announced to all and sundry that was the real McCoy. And so a 
new phrase was entered into the English language. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what a knock out: the Speech from the Throne — 
the real McCoy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1430) 
 
Mr. Wall: — An outline that offers common sense, reality and 



March 22, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 139 

hope to the people of this great province. Mr. Speaker, hope for 
the young, assurances for those needing medical attention, 
common sense economic development for the business and the 
workers, fiscal prudence for the taxpayer. In short, the real 
McCoy which has sent the opposition members reeling in their 
corners. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the first steps which was mentioned in the 
Speech from Throne is job creation and continued growth. Mr. 
Speaker, despite the naysaying opposition, more people are 
working in good, full-time jobs in Saskatchewan today than 
ever before. In fact, a recent Alberta study ranks Saskatchewan 
number one in youth employment for three years running. We 
are also building partnerships with northern and Aboriginal 
communities to open the door for full participation in our 
economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government will continue to work with 
business and the co-operative community to create jobs, to 
promote investments in diversification, to reduce the costs of 
doing business in this province and to expand trade and tourism. 
In short, this government is committed to job creation, 
economic development and a balanced approach, debt 
reduction, tax cuts, and enhanced services such as health and 
education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is coming off five years of solid 
economic growth where it led the nation. The February 1999 
job numbers reflect a slight slowing down of this economy that 
has been performing so strongly, where more people are 
working, as I mentioned before, than at any time in the 
province’s history, and more people working at full-time jobs 
than ever before. 
 
The province has also seen two years of record capital 
investment expenditures by public and private organizations. 
Statistics Canada figures show that Saskatchewan’s investment 
expenditures of 7.1 billion in 1997 were an all-time high and 
last year’s number of 6.5 billion was the second highest level 
ever reported for the province. Saskatchewan’s projected capital 
investment of 5.7 billion in 1999 will be the third highest level 
of spending in the province’s history and will be more than 1 
billion higher than the level projected for Manitoba in 1999. 
 
It should also be noted that Statistics Canada established these 
projections in the survey conducted in the wake of last year’s 
market turbulence, and the figures could turn out to be even 
more positive. 
 
Mr. Speaker, mention was made in the speech with regard to 
this government’s firm commitment to medicare. While this 
Romanow government continues with improvements to health 
delivery, opposition members preach doom and gloom about 
the crisis in medicare. Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the Throne 
emphasized that this government, under the leadership of 
Premier Romanow, is committed to a strong, sustainable health 
system and that we will defend the Canada Health Act with its 
five principles of: portability, access, comprehensive coverage, 
non-profit public administration. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are bound and determined that we will do this. 
As you know health care is a very important issue for our 
government. Although we have gone through challenges and 

many changes in the past years, health care remains at the top of 
our agenda. 
 
What is the real story about health care in Saskatchewan? 
Health care reform means we are doing more for people. The 
provincial government increased health care spending to make 
up for the federal cutbacks which were drastic. Because we are 
doing so much more, we are spending more money. 
 
I am really pleased to see the federal government begin to 
replace some of the money they have cut from health care. It’s a 
step in the right direction, and with this extra money we are 
going to target some of the key issues which are facing health 
care. Issues like: waiting lists, cancer care, women’s health, and 
better working conditions for the health providers. The federal 
government is only replacing some of the money it has cut, but 
it will still help us improve our services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just a few statistics to indicate the state of health 
care in Saskatchewan. There was an 18 per cent increase in 
surgeries; in other words, a total of 91,773 surgeries were 
performed last year. That’s a large amount. An 80 per cent 
increase in cataract surgeries, a total of 10,500 cataract 
surgeries. A 30 per cent increase in hip and knee surgeries, a 
total of 1,850. One hundred and nine per cent increase in 
angioplasties, which is of course coronary surgery, a total of 
899. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure how many of you people saw the 
television coverage where they mentioned that the waiting list 
for angioplasty is no longer in existence. With the modern 
equipment and the staffing which they have at the General 
Hospital in Regina and what they have in Saskatoon, this 
waiting list is going to disappear. And so we are very, very 
happy and proud of that. 
 
During all this time we hear from the opposition that we only 
put in enough money to cover the cost of living increase. Well 
there was a 14.5 increase in provincial government spending on 
health care. That’s a little bit more than the cost of living 
increase, if I know my mathematics a little bit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just a few statistics that I’ve mentioned about the 
increase in health services for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when one reads the headlines or listens to the 
rhetoric of the members opposite, especially the leader of 
rhetoric, innuendoes, and fearmongering, one would think the 
health system was in complete disarray. Mr. Speaker, here is 
what the people are really saying. 
 
People who have been patients or made use of the health system 
. . . 91 per cent rate it as excellent or good. Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to personally say that I couldn’t have received better 
care at any time in my recent stay in the hospital. And I’m sure 
that the member from Rosthern would be prepared to also state 
the same facts. 
 
In the general public, according to an omnibus poll conducted 
in November of `98, 75 per cent of the people rated it as 
excellent or good. This is a health system that is in disarray? 
This is a health system that is in crisis? 
 



140 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 1999 

Mr. Speaker, in spite of the general attitude of the public, 95 per 
cent of the media reports on health care are negative. And 
believe it or not, 100 per cent of the Tories’ expression on 
health care are negative. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Negative. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Negative — no good things to say about a health 
system which is the envy of the rest of Canada. Mr. Speaker, a 
clear example of fearmongering carried out by the Tories 
opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I already mentioned . . . mention was made in 
the speech about the contribution Health Region One made in 
pioneering medicare in the province. I’m proud to represent 
those people who continue to be innovative and creative in 
dealing with issues that do arise. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a good example of this occurred only last year. 
The Swift Current Health District was facing a shortage of 
doctors and so a public meeting was called to discuss this issue. 
They made it clear at the beginning that this was not a meeting 
to point fingers. This was not a meeting to assign blame. It was 
an open discussion to be held and several suggestions were 
made. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, up to the microphone strode the member for 
Moosomin and proclaimed to everyone there that he was the 
Health critic for the Tories. Mr. Speaker, to the embarrassment 
of all present and to the member, the Health critic for the Tories 
ranted that Swift Current would lose its status as a regional 
hospital and that the government was to blame. 
 
Mr. Speaker, doom and gloom, divisive tactics, half-truths. The 
people would have nothing to do with this fearmongering and 
they dismissed his out-of-hand claims and proceeded to solve 
the problem. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since then the Swift Current Health District is 
fully staffed, is making plans for regeneration of the hospital, 
and will have a balanced budget for the coming year. Perhaps 
we should invite the critic more often as a catalyst for making 
improvements. 
 
Mr. Speaker, then out of the woodwork — sorry, I didn’t mean 
out of the woodwork. From out of Wood River the member 
arrived in Swift Current and announced to all and sundry that he 
was here to promote and — guess what — demand that the 
Swift Current Health District install a CAT scan and establish a 
renal dialysis unit. Mr. Speaker, unbeknownst to this champion 
of medicare, this knight in rusty armour, who favours a two-tier 
American-style health system, the board had both issues already 
under advisement and were in the process of preparing 
presentation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the shared services meeting that I attended on 
Friday and, of which I am going to be a full-time member, 
discuss the CAT scan, discuss the renal analysis . . . dialysis 
unit. And together this shared services group is presenting their 
findings and so forth to the Department of Health. This is the 
way that you solve problems — co-operatively and in a shared 
way. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Then, Mr. Speaker, the leader of the Tories, Mr. 
Hermanson, true to form, announced just the other day: we 
want to increase public awareness that the NDP may have some 
sinister plans for health care in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, notice the use of may. Fearmongering, divisive 
tactics, based on innuendo, half-truths, and suppositions. Mr. 
Hermanson is going to gallop around the countryside spreading 
rumours, innuendoes, and half-truths about hospital closures in 
rural Saskatchewan. 
 
When the Minister of Health was invited to attend, she stated, 
“We have no plan to close rural hospitals and I’m not interested 
in being part of a fear campaign by a bunch of opposition 
politicians who are trying to get themselves elected in the next 
political election.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan know who introduced 
medicare first to southwest Saskatchewan, then to this province, 
and eventually to Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also remember those who oppose medicare, 
those who worked against universality, and those who would 
introduce two-tiered American-style health care in a flash. And 
who would profit from this American style medicare? The big 
corporations who are waiting expectantly to pounce on an 
unsuspecting public. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not only New Democrats but the people of 
Saskatchewan will fight this invasion with all their resources 
available, and our health system will continue to be the best in 
Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is the Tory health care policy really all 
about? Some of you have perhaps heard of the saying, “money 
audit.” Well their value-for-money audit really means that 
control over the health system will become the job of 
accountants and not health care professionals and the local 
boards. The value-for-money audit is the only way they can 
come up with any new health care money. 
 
By auditing the work of front-line caregivers and their support 
networks, the Tories hope they will find the money for all their 
other health promises. Remember their plans for health, and 
education for that matter, are to increase the budget by only the 
amount of inflation. 
 
So where will we get they money for new equipment? Where 
will we get the resources for new nurses? Where will they get 
the money for contract settlements? Where will they get the 
resources to hire new doctors? Where will they get the money 
to enhance services? Where would we be today if they were 
governing during the massive federal health off-loading? These 
are just a few of the questions which one should ask. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve always believed that education is so vital for 
any individual, group, or society. Universal, free education 
provides the means by which individuals can improve and 
become productive individuals in our society. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our education system is in a state of flux, and 



March 22, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 141 

more and more responsibility is being placed on the educational 
system to deal with many expectations of society. 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is why I am proud of our government action 
to continue funding education as a prime priority. And that a 
task force will be established to look at the role of schools in 
this present day. Mr. Speaker, all the stakeholders — parents, 
students, trustees, teachers, administration, the general public 
— will have an opportunity to express their viewpoints, their 
concerns, their hopes for the future of education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, an open public discussion to arrive at betterment 
of the educational system so that our students will receive the 
best educational program available. Mr. Speaker, an ambitious 
and worthy endeavour, what better way to provide our citizens 
with the tools for living, than to provide the best education 
possible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the opposition Tory Party, sometimes referred to 
as the Saskatchewan Party also has a platform for education. 
Mr. Speaker, they have stated publicly and ensured it in their 
platform that a freeze except for the cost-of-living increase will 
be placed on education for five years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the former president of the trustees association, a 
former Liberal, a former defender of public education, now 
sitting as a member of the Tory Party, must certainly feel proud 
of the stand his so-called new party has taken on education. Mr. 
Speaker, an absolute freeze, other than the cost-of-living 
increase on educational spending for five years. Disgraceful, 
repugnant and deplorable — deplorable. 
 
This government wants to ensure that children get the best 
possible start, can learn in a safe and healthy school, and have 
broader access to technology. The school as a social, cultural, 
educational centre for the community will be examined in the 
role of the schools’ task force also announced in the Throne 
Speech. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I’m positive that this government will do 
all that it’s empowered to ensure that the people of this . . . that 
the children and the adults of this great province will receive the 
education which is necessary. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m going to digress a little bit this time, and I’m 
going to take a few moments and express a few thoughts about 
taxation. And a lot of these are my own personal feelings, and 
so I’ll have to live with them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, whenever taxes are mentioned by Tories, Liberals, 
the taxpayers’ association, the Fraser Institute, and other 
right-leaning individuals, it is as though the word tax is a dirty 
word. Well, Mr. Speaker, it would be wonderful if we had 
universal free education; universal free medicare; excellent 
roads; clean drinking water; pollution-free atmosphere; good 
public and private transportation; safe, secure communities; and 
no taxes. Mr. Speaker, it sounds like Utopia. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker — and this actually happened — a 
Mennonite farmer called on me the other day in my office. 
Mennonites, by the way, are noted for their concern of their 

fellow man, are also known for their deep religious convictions, 
and are also known for their frugal ways. They keep their 
money close to the vest. That is an understatement. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, he wanted to talk taxes. I was prepared for 
the onslaught. He started. You know, he says, my rate of 
income tax is about 50 per cent. Well I knew he was reasonably 
well off and so I agreed with him. I pay a lot of property tax for 
my modest home. Well again I agreed with him, except that I 
think that he had more than just a modest home. 
 
Then I have to pay 7 per cent GST (goods and services tax) and 
7 per cent PST (provincial sales tax) on many of my purchases. 
I quickly reminded him that we had changed from 9 to 7, and 
that we charge PST on a much smaller base than other 
jurisdictions. He just waved that off. So altogether, he says, I 
pay a lot of taxes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was about to interrupt and expound with great 
wisdom on the taxation issue when he silenced me with a glare 
and continued. You know, he stated, I went on a cruise last 
winter, and one of our stops was an island nation which has no 
taxes. None whatsoever. They also had no roads, no safe 
drinking water, no schools, no modern transportation, poor 
housing for the majority of the people, abject poverty 
everywhere. 
 
You know he concluded, I’m glad I live in Saskatchewan and 
I’m glad I enjoy a comfortable life. It would be nice if my taxes 
were lower but I’m not going to complain. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well when I finally lifted my chin from my chest, 
I realized that there are many things we take for granted in this 
great province of ours. Mr. Speaker, taxes are a means by which 
we can ensure that education will be available for all, not just 
the rich and powerful. Medical care will be there when needed. 
Money will not determine your place in the line. Safe, secure 
communities will be provided and a reasonable standard of 
living will be enjoyed by the majority of citizens. 
 
And I thought, Mr. Speaker, I thought this was an isolated case 
but I’m not so sure anymore. Mr. Speaker, a headline in the 
national news on Tuesday, March 16, read: “Canadians are 
losing interest in tax cuts.” Well, as you know, sometimes 
headlines are misleading so I thought I’d better read the whole 
article. 
 
The articles goes on to say that Ottawa’s Ekos Research show 
91 per cent favoured increased health care; 83 per cent of 
Canadians said that productivity should be a high priority. And 
here was the statistic: 64 per cent, down from 75 per cent only a 
few months before, supported tax cuts. In other words, there 
were fewer people who were supporting tax cuts; 54 per cent 
felt there had already been too many cuts to social programs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the findings suggest that for a tax cutting agenda 
to succeed it had better get beyond the trade-off of social 
programs versus tax cuts. Mr. Speaker, all of us would like to 
see lower taxes but, before we forget, let us at least look at the 
consequences. 
 



142 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 1999 

Mr. Speaker, it’s a sad commentary on our political system 
when a government must contemplate introducing legislation to 
cover an issue which common sense, dignity, and honour 
should dictate. Mr. Speaker, I refer to the legislation which will 
require any member of this legislature who changes political 
allegiance during his or her tenure to resign from the legislature 
and allow the constituents to determine, in a by-election, 
whether they agree or disagree with the member’s action. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it sounds simple and straightforward to me. It 
must have sounded straightforward to the member from 
Athabasca also because that’s what he did. He resigned, sought 
the nomination, and then of course fought in an election. But I 
guess this doesn’t appeal to the Tory and Liberal members 
opposite who now form the so-called Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those members opposite have been falsely 
representing their constituents for over a year now at the 
expense of the Saskatchewan taxpayer. Then on top of all that 
they had the unmitigated gall to request official status as the 
opposition and receive still more public funds. 
 
Mr. Speaker, is there no end to their lust for power, their 
over-consuming zeal to gain power at any cost? 
 
Of course the reason for not seeking vindication by the voters of 
their questionable tactics, as they stated, was the lack of a 
platform or a leader. Mr. Speaker, how could anyone, especially 
the former Liberals, accept the snow job performed by the 
Tories. No platform, no leader, no conscience, and then loudly 
proclaim their acceptance of this merger is beyond my 
comprehension. Why would they forsake their principles, their 
beliefs, their commitments to their constituents, to join a group 
whose sole purpose was power? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Humboldt took a long time to 
decide her allegiance to the Tories. When she did finally decide, 
a platform was in place, a leader had been elected, and she 
never offered to resign, run in a by-election, and give her 
constituents an opportunity to endorse or not endorse her 
actions. Mr. Speaker, it is indeed a sad commentary that this 
government must contemplate introducing legislation to protect 
constituents from this type of action. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on March 15, 1999, Elwin Hermanson, now the 
proud leader of this group of people, made an interesting 
observation. It particularly affects the former Liberal members 
who now sit with the Conservatives. Mr. Speaker, he claimed 
that the five Liberals who crossed the floor were not pressured 
to resign their seats, and we all probably agree with that. 
 
According to Mr. Hermanson though, only the Liberals crossed 
the floor. The Tories did not abandon their party; they did not 
double-cross the Conservatives when they took on a new name. 
Mr. Speaker, the former Liberals must find these statements 
rather disheartening. The Tories were only taking on a bit of 
camouflage while the Liberals were abandoning their principles. 
Mr. Speaker, a sad commentary to say the least. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have been hearing a lot of rhetoric from the 
Leader of the Tories. Here truly is a great leader for the motley 
crew spawned in the darkness of midnight with subterfuge and 
intrigue as the true characteristics of this band of former 

have-beens. Have been champions of equality and justice; now 
are purveyors of fearmongering and division. Have been 
guardians of public health; now advocates of American-style 
health care, where 40 million cannot afford decent health care 
and the wealthy enjoy the privilege on the backs of the poor, the 
ill, and the weak. Have been financial gurus . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order, order. Order. Now the 
hon. member for Swift Current is doing his best to present his 
remarks in the debate on the response to the Speech from the 
Throne. And there are a number of other members on both sides 
of the House who seem to be enthusiastic about getting their 
remarks into the debate. I’ll encourage all members to use the 
opportunity to put their remarks on the record when their turn 
arises, and in the meantime to allow the hon. member for Swift 
Current to continue the debate uninterrupted. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Here were the 
have-been financial gurus who tried demonically, deliberately, 
to destroy the economy of this great province during the `80s. 
And, Mr. Speaker, to their discredit, they succeeded to the 
extent that our children’s children will have to carry this 
burden. There was not one whimper from the member from 
Moosomin as this was occurring. 
 
These are the ones with a new financial plan, with another 
vision to bring chaos to this province. Never will the people of 
this great province forget or forgive these former machinations. 
This is the group that Mr. Hermanson will lead not out of but 
into the wilderness of political oblivion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am proud of the Speech from the Throne. It truly 
reflects the aspiration and hopes of the citizens of this 
wonderful province — the feeling of hope, fiscal integrity, 
honour, and a feeling of accomplishment. Mr. Speaker, not the 
doom and gloom of the members opposite who besmirch the 
accomplishments of the Saskatchewan people at each and every 
turn. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will not be supporting the amendment. In fact, 
I’d be surprised that anyone would support the amendment. But 
I certainly will support the Throne Speech so ably moved by the 
member from Redberry Lake and brilliantly seconded by the 
member from Battleford-Cut Knife. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Langford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
enter into the debate on the Throne Speech. I’m very happy to 
be here and have the opportunity to represent my constituents. 
 
First, Mr. Speaker, I would like to commend you in to keeping 
order in the House, and I want to tell you that it’s well 
appreciated by older members that come in here . . . are talking 
about the respect that they have for the House now. So I want to 
commend you on that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Langford: — Also I would like to express my thanks to 
the Deputy Speaker for his job he’s doing in the House. He’s 



March 22, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 143 

doing a very good job. 
 
I would also like to welcome the pages for their work that’s 
being done by them. Also the Sergeant-at-Arms, I’d like to 
thank him for another round. I’m sure he’ll do a good job. 
 
I would like to also say that . . . glad to be back with my 
colleagues on this side of the House, as well as the other side. I 
want to say I’m glad to see them back. 
 
I would like to also to wish a couple of my former colleagues, 
Robert Mitchell and Eddie Tchorzewski, who both moved on to 
other challenges . . . we’re sure that they’re new challenges 
they’ll be working for the people of Saskatchewan and Canada. 
 
(1500) 
 
I also would like to say that I know after the next election we 
will . . . this is the last time we got a colleague from Regina 
Qu’Appelle that I’m sure we’re going to miss when she leaves. 
Also the member form Regina Northeast who has done so much 
for the government and done a very good job. 
 
I would like to also welcome the member form Saskatoon 
Eastview who is here for her first time and I know she is doing 
a very good job . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — A very good job today in question 
period. 
 
Mr. Langford: — You bet — a very good job in question 
period today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I would also like to welcome the member from Athabasca who 
showed us how to do the honourable thing by running for the 
New Democrats in the constituency. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also like to talk about my constituents for 
a minute. First of all, about our community. We have now in 
our community the broadcasting in two different cities, which is 
Choiceland and Birch Hills, that will be watching the 
proceedings of the House this time — for the first time. 
 
I’d like to describe to you the new constituency. I believe I did 
before but I want to do it again, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I have the national park to the north in my constituency, and the 
RM of Shellbrook, the north part that runs out to Canwood, and 
also the southwest. Also to the west of me is the Sturgeon Lake 
Reserve. And south, my constituency runs to Macdowell and St. 
Louis and Birch Hills, and east towards Kinistino; and also 
north towards White Fox. We take in a couple of parks too as 
well, provincial parks. 
 
I have five reserves, Mr. Speaker. That is Sturgeon Lake, 
Wahpeton, Little Red Reserve, Muskoday, and James Smith. 
 
The constituency is made up of a number of different resources. 
Of course I mentioned before the national park which is 
probably one of the best parks throughout Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
We have a number of lakes there. There’s fishing, boating, 
cross-country skiing, camping as well. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, we have a number of saw mills from small 
saw mills to large operators throughout the whole forest fringe. 
And a number of jobs that are created by these small saw mills. 
 
We also have a pulp mill, post treating plants, shakes and 
shingles, as well as we have a huge agriculture base. There’s 
lots of diversification as well. Specialty crops, canola, peas, 
flax, milling oats, malting barley, canary seed, mustard seed, 
red clover — that’s just part of some of the specialty crops. 
Also like the member said, we also have a lot of excitement 
about diamonds happening in that area. We also have feedlots, 
Mr. Speaker, elk farming, ostriches, bison, hog operators. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I feel very good about the diversified constituency 
I live in. I want to thank the people in that area for the hard 
work they’re doing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to speak on some agriculture issues. 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, I just want to speak a little bit on debate we 
had on agriculture, on the AIDA (Agriculture Insurance 
Disaster Assistance) program. We debated quite a bit about who 
should pay. 
 
I just want to tell you about federal Liberals, what had 
happened, and also the Tories. We go back to the argument our 
Agriculture minister made when the federal government asked 
for a 60/40 split. I want to tell you, I’ve got a quote here from 
an article from the High Plains Journal in the USA (United 
States of America). It begins, “Being there for ag”: 
 

On Thanksgiving as we give thanks for a rich harvest and 
plenty of food to go around, we also give thanks that we 
will live in a country where time and again our fellow 
citizens come together to lift each other up. 
 

It goes on farther to say: 
 

That is why President Clinton was able to take a strong 
stand on behalf of the nation’s farm families holding out 
for a relief package that would make a difference in the 
lives of farmers and ranchers, who face severe hardship 
because of the current farm crisis. 
 

Mr. Speaker, it shows that the federal government in the USA, 
President Clinton, gave to farmers there $7 billion for the 
disaster program. Seven billion, Mr. Speaker. That is why a 
province like Saskatchewan can’t compete with the federal 
American treasuries and the Europeans. We here in 
Saskatchewan . . . or in the USA, you don’t hear of North 
Dakota or South Dakota trying to put out the money for 
agriculture or federal agriculture problems, it’s the federal 
government doing it. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Thanks to Elwin Hermanson, not here. 
 
Mr. Langford: — Right. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Thanks a lot, Elwin. 
 
Mr. Langford: — Mr. Speaker, it goes on to say, quote: 
 

The relief package is a reminder that, as a nation, we are in 
this together, when people who produce our food hit rough 



144 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 1999 

times beyond their control, we will be in there for them as 
they are there for us, working day in and day out to provide 
us with our rich agricultural (products) . . . 
 

So, Mr. Speaker, it shows that the Americans do think a lot 
more federally, a lot more of their farmers than our federal 
government does. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, I want to just talk for a minute about our 
highways. Mr. Speaker, we look at our highway system. We’ve 
got one of the . . . most highways in all of Canada. We’ve got 
enough miles to put end to end to go around the equator four 
and a half times. 
 
The province has committed 2.5 billion over the next 10 years. 
The provincial government has committed to completely 
twinning No. 1 and 16 highways within the next 15 years. If we 
. . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — All by ourselves. 
 
Mr. Langford: — All by ourselves. If we had the federal 
government commit some of the money, we could probably do 
it in half the time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, rail line abandonment is another problem we have 
in the area. Meath Park to Choiceland, they have lifted the rail. 
We also see that on the tracks it’s running the line now between 
P.A. (Prince Albert) and Saskatoon, which, thank God, at least 
they are still operating that line. 
 
The next one that the railroad company is wanting to pull out is 
the one to Birch Hills. And of course we’ve been able to stall 
that. But what we’re doing is asking that the railroad companies 
stall off on abandoning rail lines for a while until such time that 
the communities and the farmers can see that whether they can 
take them over or run a short line. So we’ve asked the federal 
government to back off. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to talk about the Estey report. Just a 
brief comment on it. One of the things we kept fighting about 
was the cap on freight. The Estey report recommends that the 
freight be removed — and the cap. And we’re saying that we 
need to keep the cap on to show that until such time that it 
shows that the freight rates will go down. Our argument is the 
cap should not mean anything to the freight rates if they’re 
going down. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, I would like to speak now a little bit about 
health care. We have two health centres in my constituency — 
one in Birch Hills and one in Smeaton. Those two health 
centres, Mr. Speaker, today give a number of different services, 
and we need to thank those communities that work so hard at 
looking at the needs; that they do have need in those areas and 
they are coming up with a lot of new ideas and a lot of different 
care that’s happening there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we should really look at what is happening in 
areas such as Alberta. Let’s have a look at it, Mr. Speaker. 
According to Mr. Black’s paper, Mr. Speaker, there is 123 
accounts are in arrears. Approximately 370,000 people are not 
paid up, Mr. Speaker. They owe over $80 million, and 40 per 
cent of that, Mr. Speaker, people cannot afford to pay, either 

because of income or whatever. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they also now, what they’re doing is they’ve got 
collecting agencies going out there trying to collect the money, 
harassing people. Can you imagine that being in Saskatchewan? 
I couldn’t. We care too much for our people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve got a couple of things I would like to do is 
talk about our Crowns. One is the sales of our Crowns, the 
Cameco shares. If we look back to when in ’91, when the 
Tories and Liberals were trying to force us into selling — you 
remember that? —and that was they were wanting us to sell 
shares, Cameco shares for $14.75 apiece, Mr. Speaker. And 
guess what? In 1995, we sold them for $74 a share, Mr. 
Speaker. They’ve never been so high since. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, the Husky upgrader. Remember the Tories 
and the Liberals telling us we should sell off the same time that 
Alberta and the federal government sold off? 
 
An Hon. Member: — What’d they sell it for? 
 
Mr. Langford: — Seven cents on the dollar — 7.5 cents on the 
dollar, Mr. Speaker. That’s what they sold their shares for. 
Seven point five cents on the dollar. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we didn’t listen. And you know what? We gained 
all our money back plus $10 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1515) 
 
Mr. Langford: — Mr. Speaker, also there’s been a study done. 
The study found — by a firm from Toronto — the study found 
that SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) insurance is 
one of the cheapest in . . . is the cheapest in all of Canada here 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
If you compare our insurances to Toronto and Montreal, their 
car insurance or their insurance would be $2,351. That’s more 
than half of what we pay for the same vehicle. And if you look 
at Calgary, they are 53 per cent higher, Mr. Speaker. So we 
know that we are on the right track. 
 
I guess in closing, Mr. Speaker, in closing I want to commend 
the member from Redberry, the member from Redberry for the 
Throne Speech — I will be supporting the Throne Speech — 
and also the mover from Battleford-Cut Knife. I want to say 
what an excellent speech. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Thank you. 
 
Mr. Langford: — You bet. And so I’ll be supporting the 
Throne Speech and I won’t be supporting the amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Ward: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise on 
behalf of the Estevan constituents to add my support to the 
Speech from the Throne. 
 
I’m also pleased to welcome you to this session and to 



March 22, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 145 

compliment you on your outreach with the young people of this 
province. And it is my hope as well as yours, I’m sure, that 
having heard your presentation that they will understand the 
importance of democracy in this great country. 
 
I also want to welcome the towns of Bienfait and Midale to the 
parliamentary channel, and I hope that they enjoy the viewing. 
 
The hon. member over there suggested when I rose, Mr. 
Speaker, that this may be my last speech in this House. I don’t 
seem to have the same faith in that remark as he does and I 
don’t think the people of the Estevan constituency do. But if he 
happens to be right, Mr. Speaker, I would just say that having 
stood here and spoken and voted the way I have in this House 
for my constituents, I certainly have no regrets. And I would be 
able to sleep very well at night knowing that I wouldn’t get up 
and sleepwalk into the wrong political door some night. 
 
It appears from the question period, Mr. Speaker, that we’re in 
for a healthy session. I want to take this opportunity to welcome 
the pages to the Chamber, and I’m sure it will only increase 
their enthusiasm for politics. 
 
I would also like to welcome my new seatmate who through his 
courage and conviction set a standard for changing parties so 
high that the opposition members were unable to clear it or even 
try. 
 
I want to thank my constituents for their support over the past 
year, and I hope that some of the announcements made relevant 
to my area will assure them that I’m working on their behalf not 
only for their benefit, but for the overall good of the province as 
a whole. 
 
One of the major issues in my constituency last election was the 
emissions from Boundary dam. And after I was elected it was 
one of the first issues I raised with the minister of SaskPower, 
the then member from Prince Albert Northcote. And I was very 
pleased to be at the announcement last spring with the 
Environment minister stating that the work would begin this 
year. And I’m told that it is under way. 
 
This Throne Speech sets the direction that the government will 
continue to take this province in the new millennium. It will 
continue to give the people of Saskatchewan the balanced 
approach of tax reductions, service enhancement, and debt 
reduction as surpluses allow. 
 
Debt reduction — now there’s a topic for you, Mr. Speaker. 
We’ve had the challenge to reduce the ratio of debt, the GDP 
(gross domestic product), from 70 per cent to 40 per cent — and 
it was not an easy challenge — and also to grow the economy 
and employment at the same time. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the opposition doesn’t think this is enough. 
But they remind me of the small boy who was taking the 
difference between optimism and pessimism at school. He came 
to his mother with a half a glass of water and asked if it was 
half full or half empty. She said, I’m much too busy, son. Go 
ask your grandmother. So the little boy took the glass to his 
grandmother and asked her the same question. She looked at the 
glass and very wisely said, it depends on whether I’m drinking 
or pouring. 

Now the only reason I mention this story, Mr. Speaker, is to 
help explain the difference between the opposition and the 
government. Now the government has tried very hard to build 
the economy of this province and provide better services and 
reduce the debt. In other words, Mr. Speaker, to try and fill the 
glass for future generations. And I believe we are slowly getting 
there. 
 
But you know what, Mr. Speaker? The opposition has noticed 
this. There’s a little water in the glass and what do you suppose 
they want to do with it? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Drink it. 
 
Mr. Ward: — That’s right. They want to drink it. They don’t 
care about the children and the grandchildren and the future of 
this province. All they care about is satisfying their thirst for 
power — now. And I think this illustrates the difference 
between us and them, Mr. Speaker. We’re the pourers and 
they’re the drinkers. 
 
As I said earlier, there’s been a lot of questions about health this 
session. So maybe we should take one more look at the facts, 
Mr. Speaker. The first fact is that they — those people over 
there — planned the expansion of the General and Pasqua 
hospitals. They committed this province to $80 million of 
expenditures. They knew there was no money available to do it, 
but did they care? No, because they knew they were on the way 
out and that this government would have to clean up their mess. 
 
And how have we done on health care, Mr. Speaker? Let’s look 
at a few of the facts. How do patients rate the health care 
system? Ninety-one per cent rate it good or excellent. How does 
the public rate the health care system? Seventy-five per cent — 
good or excellent. How does the media report the health care 
system? Ninety-five per cent negative, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But what have we done? What has happened with surgeries, 
Mr. Speaker? They’re up 18 per cent — 91,773 surgeries 
performed last year. 
 
Cataract surgeries up 80 per cent — 10,500 performed last year. 
Hip and knee replacement — 1,850 done last year, an increase 
of 30 per cent, Mr. Speaker. And angioplasties which now have 
no waiting list, Mr. Speaker, an increase of 109 per cent. 
 
And there’s more, Mr. Speaker, what about our spending? 
We’ve increased it 14.5 per cent. And, Mr. Speaker, we did all 
this while unfortunately the federal government decreased their 
spending by 42 per cent on health care. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, you know they’ve asked questions and they 
say more and more about health care and hospital closures and 
so I think it’s interesting to note what did their leader have to 
say about hospitals in our province, Mr. Speaker. Well let’s 
have a look at what he said: 
 

We had governments that liked to build monuments; that 
liked to build hospitals. We probably have more hospitals 
per capita in our province than anywhere in any other part 
of Canada. 

 
Elwin Hermanson said this, and he continues: 



146 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 1999 

Unfortunately we now have no money to operate those 
hospitals. Our priorities were probably wrong; in fact, I’m 
sure they were wrong. 

 
That’s what Elwin Hermanson has to say about hospitals in 
Saskatchewan . . . (inaudible) . . . I agree, that’d be a good idea 
Bob. The hon. member thinks they should cut their leader. Of 
course, it would be nothing new for that group over there to cut 
a leader, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Ward: — So I think overall, Mr. Speaker, dealing with an 
increased workload, funding reductions, and the fearmongering 
by the opposition parties, this government and the workers in 
health care system have done a remarkable job. 
 
I know they say they’re telling the truth, not fearmongering; but 
when they say they were closing rural hospitals, that is 
fearmongering. And while I’m on this topic, Mr. Speaker, let’s 
just go on to a few more facts. 
 
We now have new health benefits in Saskatchewan. Just 
recently announced, Saskatchewan Health is investing 2 million 
in family health service . . . or health benefits this year. After 
three weeks over 14,500 families have signed up indicating a 
positive response to this popular initiative, and by the end of the 
fiscal year family health benefits are expected to help out 
23,000 families including 46,000 additional children. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, while opposition parties are always 
expected to give the government of the day a rough ride, the 
recent attacks on medicare by both the Tories and the Liberals 
show just how far they will go to put their political gain ahead 
of the well-being of the province. 
 
People who were around in 1947 and ’62 will remember what 
outrageous attacks and allegations the Liberals and Tories made 
when hospitalization and later medicare were first introduced. 
They told anyone who would listen — and this certainly 
included the media of the day — that the CCF (Co-operative 
Commonwealth Federation) had a secret plan to destroy the 
province. Life and services as were known then would certainly 
come to an end if the CCF were allowed to change health care. 
 
Obviously none of the attacks made by the Liberals and the 
Tories in ’47 or ’62 had any basis in reality, but it didn’t matter. 
They knew that emotions could be stirred and anxiety raised 
without the aid of facts. 
 
Today the Liberals and the Tories are following in their 
predecessors’ footsteps and have both been announcing to the 
media that the government will be closing rural hospitals. 
Where did they get this idea and what do they base it on? 
 
They have created it to get media attention. They know that 
health care is an important issue on which Saskatchewan people 
have very, very strong opinions. By claiming that health care is 
coming to an end, they know they will get media attention and 
hopefully a few more votes in the process. The opposition is 
being irresponsible and misleading on their attacks on our 
health care system. 
 

Our government has no plan to close rural hospitals. The future 
of hospitals in Saskatchewan is not dependent on their average 
daily census. 
 
Your NDP government is committed to continually improve 
health services in both rural and urban Saskatchewan. We will 
continue to work with communities and district health boards to 
help them improve services offered at their facilities. Services 
will be enhanced to meet communities’ needs. And local 
people, not offices in Regina, will determine what those needs 
are. 
 
Why would the opposition make statements that are not true? 
 
An Hon. Member: — All because they’re a bad bunch. 
 
Mr. Ward: — They are. And we are drawing closer to an 
election. Tories and Liberals have been unable to convince 
people to support them on their own. So they have not been able 
to convince people to support them on their own merit so they 
are now trying to scare people into voting for them by 
fabricating a bogey monster named health care changes. 
 
By undermining the public’s confidence in our health care, the 
opposition is trying to open the door for private American-style 
health care which has been their preference all along. Their 
fondest hope . . . that people will believe medicare is falling 
apart and so pave the way for the promoters of non-health care. 
 
Don’t be fooled. Health care will continue to improve in this 
province, just as it did in ’47 and ’62. But also, as in the past, 
Tories and Liberals will continue to raise the spectre of fear and 
anxiety over health care if they think it will do them any good 
politically. 
 
(1530) 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s been some issues raised and part of their 
platform is about Indian taxation. And I think it’s important that 
we clear up this issue before the next election in both the rural 
and urban areas. And the people of Saskatchewan know the 
truth about Indian taxation. 
 
Aboriginal people do pay taxes and here are the unvarnished 
facts, Mr. Speaker. There are three groups of Aboriginal people 
in Saskatchewan: Metis, non-status Indian, and status or treaty 
Indians. The Metis and the non-status Indians pay exactly the 
same taxes as other citizens — no special exemptions. Treaty 
Indians pay all taxes except in two situations: first, they do not 
pay the PST for on-reserve or off-reserve purchases — this has 
been so since the inception of this tax; second, they do not pay 
either federal or provincial income tax on income earned on the 
reserve — this is federal law. But status Indians do pay fuel and 
tobacco taxes on both on-reserve and off-reserve purchases. 
These taxes are collected at the wholesale level and included in 
the purchase price. Saskatchewan is the only province in 
Canada where this is so, Mr. Speaker. 
 
If treaty Indians were forced to pay the E&H (education and 
health) then the province could become totally responsible for 
their education and health costs. If we change one part of the 
current arrangements, we would lose the other, and we’d collect 
more from fuel and tobacco taxes than we lose in PST 



March 22, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 147 

exemptions. 
 
Fifty per cent of treaty Indians live and work off-reserve. They 
pay the same income and property taxes as everyone. 
Corporations owned by individual Indians or Indian bands pay 
provincial corporate taxes. 
 
In short, there is no special tax status for two of the three groups 
of Aboriginal people. The income tax exemption applies only to 
a small percentage of the 50 per cent of treaty Indians living on 
reserves. Any imposed change to the current structure would 
lose more in financial terms than it would gain. Changes to the 
current system are being negotiated, Mr. Speaker, not imposed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard from the opposition parties, the 
Tories and the Liberals, about income taxes and tax relief and 
how wonderful Alberta is. And the Alberta myth is, Mr. 
Speaker, mostly a myth. An example of this myth is that things 
are better in Alberta than in Saskatchewan. That concept often 
accepted as fact is more myth actually, Mr. Speaker, than 
reality. It is not that Alberta is bad; every province, including 
Alberta, has its attractions. But the knocks against 
Saskatchewan when compared to Alberta are unjustified. 
 
A common expression are that things are so much cheaper in 
Alberta because Alberta does not have a provincial sales tax. 
But it would be equally correct to say that health care is much 
more expensive in Alberta because everyone there must pay 
hundreds of dollars in health care premiums each year, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The fact is that every family pays over $800 per year for health 
premiums in Alberta. The average family in Saskatchewan pays 
about $750 in PST. The Alberta advantage of no sales tax is 
clearly, clearly cancelled out by health premiums. 
 
An Hon. Member: — And a quarter of a million of them have 
no coverage. 
 
Mr. Ward: — That’s right, Mr. Speaker. The hon. member 
from Regina just points out that the Alberta advantage is that 
they didn’t have Grant Devine for their premier for nine years, 
and the members opposite should maybe try to remember that. 
 
A further point of comparison that many people refer to is 
income tax. It is true that a typical family earning 50,000 a year 
will pay about 1,100 more per year income tax in 
Saskatchewan. But what is usually not mentioned is that the 
Alberta family will likely have to pay about $900 more per year 
for car insurance. 
 
As far as utilities go, our home heating bills and the cost of our 
telephones are about the same. We pay almost 200 per year 
more for electricity but rent is $1,200 a year less in Saskatoon 
than it is in Calgary, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Housing prices are of course 30 to 40,000 more in Alberta cities 
than here making mortgage payments substantially higher there 
than here. 
 
And let’s not forget about our struggling students and their 
parents. University tuition is 400 to 600 more at Alberta 
institutes than it is at our fine universities. 

So, Mr. Speaker, the next time you hear someone trying to put 
Saskatchewan down compared to Alberta, you can tell them 
they’re likely only aware of half the story. 
 
And just recently they announced some tax changes in Alberta, 
Mr. Speaker. What did those people get this year? Nothing. 
Absolutely nothing. No tax reduction at all. An 11 per cent flat 
provincial income tax by the year 2002 — that’s four years 
away. They haven’t even started to reduce their taxes and we 
have done that consistently for four years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Ward: — Maybe just a note on highways. Mr. Speaker, I 
really wanted to address, to address their great highway contest. 
The one they had I think three . . . When they ended it, they had 
315 entries or something out of all the people in Saskatchewan. 
Sure an overwhelming support for their contest. 
 
But it was this letter from Mr. Drew in Carrot River, Mr. 
Speaker, that I think summed it up very well: 
 

Surely the hands down winner has to be Dr. Grant Devine 
who had the Saskatchewan people travel down his 
ideological highway of deceit, deficit and debt. 
 
If my memory serves me correctly this adventure began 
with the sale of our provincial highway equipment as soon 
as the Conservative government took office in the 80’s. 
And we wonder why our highways have deteriorated over 
time. 

 
I think, Mr. Speaker, that sums up the highway contest, the 
problem with our highways, and it’s unfortunate that those 
members opposite can’t remember that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to just touch for a minute on some 
agricultural facts. They’re always complaining over there that 
we don’t do enough. 
 
An Hon. Member: — You don’t do anything. 
 
Mr. Ward: — We don’t do anything. Well the agricultural and 
Agri-Food Canada farm income financial conditions and 
government assistance and Statistics Canada census says this, 
Mr. Speaker: provincial government expenditures in support of 
the agricultural sector on a per capita basis, ’97-98, 1997-1998, 
Saskatchewan, top of the list — $309 per capita for our 
agricultural sector, Mr. Speaker. More than any other province 
in the country. 
 
Alberta, who they purport to be supporting over there, came 
second at $139, Mr. Speaker. That’s a far cry from what we do 
for our agricultural sector in Saskatchewan. And their leader, 
again, Mr. Speaker, their leader, when he was in the House, 
once said in a vote . . . here’s a headline from The Western 
Producer, Mr. Speaker. It says: 
 

As the committee voted June 18 to approve the 
departmental spending estimates of 1.8 billion for the 
current fiscal year, Reform agricultural spokesman, Elwin 
Hermanson suggested three cuts to the agricultural budget. 

 



148 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 1999 

To the agricultural budget of Canada, Mr. Speaker. And they 
purport to be supporting agriculture and their leader is trying to 
get the money cut . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, that’s not 
what he saying. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would just like to wrap up with a few economic 
comparisons because I know there’s other members that want to 
speak on this debate. I think that some of the economic 
comparisons of the prairie provinces is interesting, Mr. Speaker. 
From ’92 to ’97, Saskatchewan’s personal income grew by 11 
per cent, Manitoba by 9, and Alberta’s by 9. 
 
We led the three Prairie provinces in personal income growth, 
Mr. Speaker. The average weekly earnings were 12 per cent; 
Manitoba, 7 per cent; and between ’92 and ’98, Saskatchewan’s 
average weekly earnings grew by 14 per cent compared to 
Alberta’s 13 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And how do women do, Mr. Speaker? How do the women do in 
the Saskatchewan Party’s evaluation of our economic . . . 
Women in Saskatchewan earned 60 per cent of what men 
earned in ’96. In Manitoba, women earned 64 per cent of what 
men earned; but in their Utopia of Alberta, Mr. Speaker, their 
Utopia, 58 per cent of what men earned. 
 
And child poverty, Mr. Speaker, it’s just about as deplorable in 
Alberta as it is in Manitoba. And Saskatchewan leads the three 
provinces in that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s interesting to realize how well the Saskatchewan economy 
is able to weather drops at the price of economies, the wheat 
price and oil. But we have done enough diversification, Mr. 
Speaker, that we’re able to weather some of these storms. And I 
think that in the long run the people of Saskatchewan will 
recognize that, and I hope that eventually, perhaps, Mr. 
Speaker, even the opposition will recognize that. 
 
You know one other thing about the opposition, Mr. Speaker, 
just before I sit down. It occurred to me the other day that we 
have three parties in Saskatchewan. And we have the 
Saskatchewan Liberal Party that sits over there and we have the 
Saskatchewan New Democratic Party that sits here. Over there 
we have the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Now the other parties have been able to have enough foresight 
and thought to put a name between Saskatchewan and party and 
so it becomes the Liberals, the NDPers. But what will happen to 
them, Mr. Speaker? Are we going to have to call them the 
partyers? Like I have no idea what the short form is going to be 
for them . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The masquerade party, 
the hon. member shouts. 
 
Anyway, Mr. Speaker, I think I’ve taken about enough time 
from this Assembly and I will give the other members an 
opportunity to proceed. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you. Thank you very much, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. I have been watching and listening to the 
debate this afternoon on the Throne Speech and, as a matter of 
fact, for the last few days since it was read early last week. But I 
think some of the comments that were made today by members 

of the government side really did move me to enter the debate. 
 
And I want to tell you why, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because I 
think there were two elements that became very, very clear to 
me as they talked about the past performance of the former 
administration, the Tories, who now call themselves the 
Saskatchewan Party. 
 
It told me very much that we need to be very cognizant and 
very careful about the future of this province; and that the 
people of Saskatchewan need to continue to be very diligent in 
terms of the government that they elect and the kind of 
government that they have come to expect if we’re going to 
continue on the track of sound fiscal management and debt 
reduction and in general, good government. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to say a few words about the past 
before I talk about the future, a future which I think holds a lot 
of very bright lights for young people in Saskatchewan, for 
seniors in Saskatchewan, for families of Saskatchewan. We’ve 
got a very bright future. 
 
We’ve got natural resources that are I think unparalleled 
anywhere in Canada. We’ve got oil and gas. We’ve got the 
finest agricultural land in northern Saskatchewan. We’ve got 
minerals in northern Saskatchewan that I and many believe are 
vastly untapped. So there’s an opportunity there for job growth 
and business growth. We’ve got a forest industry that’s got vast 
potential to create hundreds of jobs for Saskatchewan people 
and businesses — new businesses, growing businesses. 
 
But I think, Mr. Speaker, most importantly, what we have here 
in this province is we have a million people who understand the 
nature of a good, sound fiscal base for their kids, who are 
honest and decent hard-working people, who have done a lot to 
help grow this economy, and who see the future as a place 
where we can be expanding opportunity. 
 
And that’s not to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we’re not going 
to go through some difficult times in Saskatchewan, because we 
will. We’re going through some difficult times right now with 
the depressed price of oil, with the depressed agricultural prices. 
 
But you know, we’ve been through that before, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. This is a scene that has been replayed. Just the last 
decade of the 1980s, the mid-1980s, we had similar problems. 
We had low oil prices; we had depressed agricultural prices; we 
had drought. 
 
(1545) 
 
And we had governments in the 1980s that tried to manage that. 
And when I talk about the future, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s 
why I think it’s really important to talk about the past and to 
just hearken back to what the Tory government of that 
administration was not able to achieve. 
 
We had difficult times in the mid-`80s, and we’ll grant them 
that. It’s difficult when the commodity prices are low and when 
you have drought here in Saskatchewan. But that’s all the more 
reason for government then to be more diligent and to be more 
focused on the future, because the actions of today really are the 
results that happen down the road in a short, short period to 



March 22, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 149 

come. 
 
So after some difficult times in the 1980s, what happened to 
this province? What happened to us as a people? 
 
Well year after year the Finance minister, the Tory Finance 
minister under Grant Devine’s administration would stand up in 
this House and talk about a promising future and deliver debt 
and deliver debt. Fifteen billion dollars of debt they delivered 
over those periods of time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and that’s the 
future of the 1990s. That’s what we inherited from the 1980s. 
 
The number of people, young people, that left this province was 
staggering —30,000 people a year. 
 
Deficits and increased debt. And no one will deny that it was a 
difficult time to govern because of all the things I mentioned — 
depressed oil prices, agricultural prices, drought. Those were 
tough times and we’ll give them that. 
 
But look at the difference between what’s happened in 1990s 
under a New Democrat administration and that administration 
of the 1980s. Six balanced budgets, Mr. Deputy Speaker, six in 
a row, and more to come. A reduction of the debt — not an 
increase of the debt but a reduction of the debt. 
 
And what’s happened with respect to the major expenditures of 
government? Health care, which is near and dear to all of us and 
to all of our families — $1.8 billion spent annually and 
increasing, in spite of the cut-backs from the federal Liberals. 
Over a billion dollars delivered and spent on educating our 
young people. 
 
And all the time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government has 
managed to live within its fiscal means, balancing each and 
every year their budgets, and at the same time paying down 
debt. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I think that the people of Saskatchewan 
understand that that’s no small feat. That’s no small feat 
because some difficult choices and some very difficult 
decisions have been made by members on this side of the 
House. This caucus has put a lot of thought into each and every 
budget and they poured their hearts into those budgets because 
they’re concerned about the future of their kids and their 
grandchildren. 
 
And so I want to say, Mr. Speaker, the people in this province 
have had a very, very close look since 1991 at the operation 
under this Premier. And they’re going to have a chance to pass 
judgment shortly. Maybe this June or maybe in October, I don’t 
know. Or maybe next June, but for sure within a year they’re 
going to have a chance to pass judgment on this government. 
 
And what are their choices, Mr. Speaker? They’ve had a look at 
what we’ve said we would deliver — a balanced approach to 
tax reduction and to debt reduction and program enhancement. 
And I think we can mount a very strong argument that we’ve 
been able to deliver on all of those areas. 
 
And I think they’re going to have a chance to have a look at 
what we’ve done and where we want to lead this province in the 
future as well. And part of that, Mr. Speaker, will be delivered 

by the Minister of Finance when he brings down yet another 
balanced budget. 
 
We’re going to have the opportunity, as a matter of fact the 
responsibility, to choose between a re-election of this 
administration, or choosing to replace it with the parties 
opposite. So what are the choices, Mr. Speaker? I say, one, 
between a proven track record of integrity and responsibility 
and good, sound management. 
 
But I think it’s fair to say that on the other side it may be a little 
more abstract when they’re going to make their choice. And I 
want to speak about why I think it’s going to be a little more 
abstract in terms of the choice of this Tory Party that calls 
themselves the Saskatchewan Party because they can’t handle 
the record of the 1980s when they were Tories. So they’re 
going to have a chance to have a look at them. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about the opposition, 
the Saskatchewan Party. I want to talk about who these Tories 
are, and why the people of Saskatchewan will have a 
responsibility to look at the integrity of the people that make up 
that party. Because I think that’s important. 
 
It’s one thing to talk about reducing taxes and being able to 
deliver, and being able to believe that that would actually 
happen under that kind of an administration. And it’s another 
thing to talk about delivering a better quality of health care at 
the same time you talk about freezing, for five years, the health 
care budget. It doesn’t add up, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And I want to tell you why it doesn’t add up. Because there 
isn’t an administration in this country that hasn’t had trouble 
struggling with, maintaining, and enhancing health care services 
at a time when prescription drug costs are going up, new 
technical instruments are coming on stream that cost many 
millions of dollars. Where there are demands on salaries and 
salary levels, it’s a very difficult budget to freeze. But this 
operation says and tells the people of Saskatchewan, we can 
freeze this budget for five years and still, still deliver the best 
quality health care system in Canada. 
 
Well, I ask you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I ask the people of 
Saskatchewan the question, whether this group of Tories — this 
group who were responsible for the election of the Devine 
government in 1981 — can in actual fact or would even try to 
pull that off. 
 
I tell you, Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t add up. So you ask yourself in 
terms of integrity, can you believe what they say with respect to 
health care? I would say to you, Mr. Speaker, that you 
shouldn’t. You should be very wary. Be very wary. 
 
And I want to say as well, that this is the same group of people 
who are going to freeze the education budget for five years, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. They’re going to freeze the education budget 
but they’re still going to allow for the universities and SIAST 
and the K to 12 system to be able to buy the materials to 
educate our kids, to be able to fund the capital projects that are 
going to be required. But they can freeze the education budget 
for five years and they can still make it all work. 
 
I say to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there isn’t one of them over 



150 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 1999 

there. They can’t do it individually and they can’t do it 
collectively — it’s not possible. And what you need to do, and 
what the people of Saskatchewan I think would expect from 
government in this province, is to take a balanced approach. Put 
their budgets together based on need, based on the ability to put 
the money to the priority areas the people of Saskatchewan 
have told us they care about and that’s mainly health care and 
education. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, 
they’re going to promise tax cuts as they did under the Devine 
administration when he was elected in 1981, but people aren’t 
going to be fooled because you can’t square that circle and 
people know it. 
 
People understand that we’re still paying $2 million a day to 
service a debt that was built by them and the political party that 
they represent. Those are the people and that’s the legacy, and 
that’s the kind of integrity that people understand, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I want to talk a little more about integrity and I want to talk 
about how this particular political party was formed. I want to 
tell you firstly why it was formed. It was formed because the 
leader — the member from Kindersley — of the Saskatchewan 
PC (Progressive Conservative) Party knew they didn’t have a 
hope of ever forming government under the Tory banner. And 
his colleagues that sat in here as Tories knew that as well. And I 
want to tell you as the Liberal Party disintegrated, the Liberals 
who were sitting there, knew that they didn’t have a chance. 
And the people wouldn’t trust where they were coming from 
when they hatchet their party — their own party — internally in 
the middle of the night. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — So they stole together in the middle 
of the night, never told their constituents other than they were 
loyal to their political affiliation and their political persuasions, 
but all of a sudden the Saskatchewan Party was born. 
 
But I want to say to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, born of what? 
I’ll tell you what it was born of. It was born of Progressive 
Conservatives; Tories who were part and parcel of the political 
force that elected Grant Devine and built a $15 billion debt. 
That’s part of where it was come from. That’s part of where it 
came from, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and no one should deny that 
that’s the case. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, there’s going to be more 
evidence of this in days to come because you’re going to see 
former Progressive Conservatives who are going to show their 
head just above the horizon a little bit. Enough to say, well, 
Saskatchewan Party, maybe they won’t recognize me. 
 
And I say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they’re there in the wings and 
they’re waiting and they’re going to surface — and we will see 
them here. And I want to speak about one in particular that I am 
personally convinced is going to be surfacing as a candidate for 
this Saskatchewan Party, this, this old Tory Party with a new 
name. 
 

I want to talk about the member — the former member from 
Thunder Creek. You mark my words, Mr. Speaker, mark my 
words, mark my words that this old Tory leader is going to 
surface as a candidate for this operation. 
 
And I’ll give you another one, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 
president of the Saskatchewan Party in the community of 
Melville, one Grant Schmidt, former minister of Social 
Services. I wouldn’t . . . honest to goodness, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I’ll bet you he’ll surface as well. I believe it. Because 
they want the political power that they had in the 1980s. They 
want the political power that they had, and they know that they 
can’t have it under the Progressive Conservative banner. 
 
And they know that they can’t run in as a Tory, so they got a 
new name; so they got a new name. But I tell you what they 
haven’t got, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they haven’t got credibility. 
And I want to say that they haven’t got the integrity that many 
members of this House have. 
 
And I just want to talk a little bit about an Act that’s before this 
. . . before this House, that speaks about the development and 
the building of a political party, and when a member of the 
legislature should find himself at odds with the philosophy or 
direction of the party that he’s sitting with. And it spells what 
would be I think accepted by the people of Saskatchewan, 
endorsed in rural and urban Saskatchewan by every 
Saskatchewan voter, is that you should go back to your riding, 
resign your seat, and seek re-election, flashing your true colours 
to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I want to tell you that it’s not . . . Well, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, they’re getting a little upset here. But it’s not only 
members of this side of the House who believe that. It’s not. 
 
I just mentioned the former member for Thunder Creek, Mr. 
Swenson, who I think is going to be seeking the nomination 
under this banner, this new Tory banner, the Saskatchewan 
Party. And I want to just talk a little bit about where he was, 
where he was when he still thought there was hope for the 
Tories in this province when a member crossed over from this 
side of the House to the other. 
 
And I want to quote and I want to tell the House, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, exactly where he was. This is in 1993, the Moose Jaw 
Herald, September 18, page 4, and I want to tell you what he 
said, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I’m quoting from the paper and 
it says: 
 

I believe an MLA who chooses to leave the party under 
whose banner they were elected should step down and seek 
re-election under their new choice of party banner, or sit as 
an independent member. Anything less is unfair. 
 

An Hon. Member: — Who said that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Who said that? Some of my 
colleagues are asking who said that. That was the then leader of 
the Progressive Conservative Party of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Swenson, and that’s what he said. 
 
The headline is, “Turncoat MLA defects with little credibility.” 
And that’s what the then leader of the Conservative Party said, 



March 22, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 151 

Mr. Speaker. That’s what he said. And I see some colleagues of 
his sitting here. He says they’ve got no credibility. He says 
here, in 1993 in the Moose Jaw daily Herald that some of his 
former colleagues have no credibility. That’s what he says. 
 
And he says they’re being unfair. He says rather than sit as an 
independent, to resign your seat. Anything else would be unfair. 
 
(1600) 
 
So I say to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what 
credibility, what credibility can these members have when their 
former leader says they’re being unfair, and that they should sit 
as independents or should resign. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when the people have 
the opportunity to choose between being represented by a 
member — and my colleague isn’t here, I don’t see him here — 
but the member from Cumberland . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. I must remind the 
member that you cannot make reference to whether the 
presence or absence of a member in the House. I would remind 
the member of that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I want to apologize. 
I’m been here long enough to know the rules and I do apologize 
for mentioning a member’s absence. He’s missing, as well, a 
pretty fiery speech I think, but anyway. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to go on because I think this is important. 
We’re talking here about credibility and we’re talking about 
integrity and we’re talking about a choice for leadership for the 
future of this province in the upcoming election. 
 
I’ve talked a little bit about the freezing of health care budget; 
I’ve talked a little bit about freezing of the education budget and 
I think that’s important. 
 
But I want to talk about the personal comments that some of the 
members opposite have made with respect to the changes and 
crossing the floor and moving from one party, one political 
affiliation to another. Because I think that too is important. It 
tells us something about the makeup of this political arm, this 
old Tory Party with the new name. 
 
And I think the people of Saskatchewan need to be reminded of 
where these members have been and the kinds of comments that 
they made with respect to the direction that they would take as 
MLAs representing people who elected them under a political 
banner whether it be Liberal or Conservative. But I think that’s 
important because it says something of the nature of the 
makeup of this political administration, this political party. 
 
Member from Moosomin: 
 

I stood for election as a Progressive Conservative and I’ll 
continue to stand for the same ideals. It wouldn’t be fair to 
the people who . . . 
 

“It wouldn’t be fair” — same words, same words as his former 
leader said. 
 

It wouldn’t be fair to the people who elected me for me to 
suddenly say I now stand for something else. 
 

That’s what he said. 
 
That’s in November of 1996. Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s 
a short time ago. It’s not that long ago. That’s not even one full 
term of government. And I want to quote some more: 
 

I would like to inform the people of Saskatchewan, in 
particular those in Liberal constituencies, that we are 
continuing our loyalty and support for the cause of the 
Liberal Party of Saskatchewan. Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 

This from the member from Kelvington-Wadena who now sits 
as a Tory. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know if I should go on because it’s 
just one after another after another. One member says, I’m a 
Liberal and I’m proud of it. As a leadership candidate I want to 
stress very emphatically that I want to bring back that sense of 
trust in a politician. And that is what I stick with. He knows 
who he is. I don’t need to mention a name, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And this one here who even went halfway: 
 

It’s my intent to remain sitting as an independent for the 
time being. As the election approaches I’ll further consider 
my long-term political career. 
 

Well I want to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think the people from 
Humboldt will choose the direction of that member’s political 
career in a very short period of time. And it’s because of the 
makeup and the development of this political arm, this arm of 
Tories who are masquerading under the name Saskatchewan 
Party, who’s only goal is to grab a hold once again the reins of 
power in this province. 
 
But I think people, Mr. Deputy Speaker, have a very, very good 
memory with that in mind. And I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
they’re going to have ample opportunity in the next weeks and 
in the next days and in the next months, to make a very 
reasoned choice based on the past of members on that side of 
the House and their actions, and based on this government’s 
record. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is no doubt in my 
mind, there is no doubt in my mind that the people of 
Saskatchewan are not going to march to the past and re-elect a 
group of people who served them so poorly in the 1980s. 
 
I would suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, they’re looking for the 
future, they’re looking to the future with optimism. And the 
reason is, is because they’ve had a government that’s been able 
to work with them in a partnership, to be able to lead that 
direction. And I want to commend each and every one of my 
colleagues for the work that they’ve done in that regard in the 
last . . . since 1991, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I said that I 
wanted to talk a little bit about the future, and I do. I want to 



152 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 1999 

talk about the future and what it holds for all of us. And I tell 
you, Mr. Speaker, I’m no crystal ball reader. I can’t look into a 
crystal ball and say with any certainty exactly what this 
province is going to look like in five or in ten years from now. 
 
But of one thing I’m certain. People are looking for a 
middle-of-the road, pragmatic approach to governing and I 
believe they’ve found it and I believe they see it in this New 
Democrat government. I don’t think they’re looking for a 
right-wing ideology from the member from Kindersley or his 
group. And I don’t think they’re looking for a Tory 
administration that they know and remember so well from the 
1980s. I think they understand where that brought us and I think 
they also understand what the 1990s have done for this 
province. 
 
And we’ve made our mistakes as a government. And we will — 
we’ll continue to make mistakes. But I think on balance, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, what we said we wanted to deliver we have. 
We said we wanted to get a hold of the deficit budgeting . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . And the member says the worst 
health care in Canada. 
 
I say to that member, I say to that member we have got the best 
health care, we’ve got the best health care in Canada. I want to 
say to you that this is the only administration that is developing 
a new health care system that’s going to be sustainable and it’s 
going to be affordable. 
 
And I also want to say, Mr. Speaker, we’re doing it in spite of 
the absolutely irresponsible debt load that that member was part 
of developing in this province — $2 million dollars a day to 
service the debt alone, Mr. Speaker, $2 million a day. Can you 
imagine what we could do with our health care and our 
education and our highway system if we had that $2 million a 
day? 
 
That member, Mr. Speaker, has little to say, little to say in 
terms of criticizing any program because of the fact that he’s 
responsible for the $750 million a year that we spend just 
servicing his Tory debt of the 1980s. So I say to you, Mr. 
Speaker, he has little to say. 
 
But I said I wanted to talk about the future. And I do and so I 
shall. Mr. Speaker, I said at the beginning of my remarks that 
this administration, recognizing the people of Saskatchewan, 
recognize the potential of growth of this province. We’ve got 
oil, natural gas. We’ve got uranium. We’ve got coal, Mr. 
Speaker. We’ve got hundreds of years of . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Now we have several 
simultaneous speeches going on here, but there’s only one 
member who has the floor. Order, order. And I refer to hon. 
members on both sides of the House. And I’ll ask for the 
co-operation of the House to allow the hon. member, the 
Minister of Energy and Mines, to continue his address response 
to the Speech from the Throne. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker, and I do appreciate your role and the role you’re 
taking in terms of trying to maintain decorum in the House in 
spite . . . 
 

The Speaker: — Now, now. The minister is a veteran member 
of the House and is well aware that . . . Order! The minister is 
well aware that commenting on the conduct of the Chair is out 
of order, and I’m sure that he’ll want to return to his remarks 
and engage in the response to the Speech from the Throne. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I do 
apologize. I become so enthusiastic when I get back into the 
legislature — and this is my first speech of the session — I have 
a very difficult time in sometimes remembering the rules. But I 
will focus a little more on that and give that much more 
diligence with respect to that particular issue. 
 
But I want to say, Mr. Speaker, I was talking about the future of 
the province. You know, the last few years we’ve been able to 
make some very dramatic moves in this province in spite of the 
fact that agriculture has been depressed and the price of oil has 
dropped 11, 12, $13 a barrel. You know what? We’re still 
seeing a growth in this economy. And I think that bodes very, 
very well for the enthusiasm that the business community and 
the working men and women in this province have for our 
economy and developing it, because it says to me we’ve 
diversified. It says that there are other elements of our economy 
that are offsetting the negatives that we experience from 
depressed gas price or oil prices and . . . So I say, Mr. Speaker, 
that’s one of the reasons that I’m totally and absolutely 
convinced we’ve got a very bright future. 
 
You know, the oil and gas sector had a record year in 
Saskatchewan here in 1997. And part of it is because we, as a 
government, were able to sit down and work in a partnership 
arrangement with them to develop a royalty and a taxation 
structure that would attract investment so that they can invest in 
drilling oil wells and gas wells here in our province. They done 
a heck of a job. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the partnership that we’ve been able to build 
as a government has been able to allow PanCanadian to come to 
this community and take a depleting oil resource, develop new 
technology, put new technology to it, inject billions of dollars 
— a billion-plus dollars — and extend the life of that particular 
project for 25, 30 years, creating jobs and spinoff benefits for 
businesses that serve that operation. 
 
And there are exciting things on the horizon coming, Mr. 
Speaker. Oil and gas companies are talking about developing 
small battery-located upgraders so that our heavy crude can be 
moved into the system. And that means dollars and it means 
jobs. 
 
In the potash industry IMC (International Minerals and 
Chemical Corporation (Canada) Ltd.), as an example, is 
committing to $481 million in investment between three to five 
years in upgrading their existing mines. 
 
And there’s more. And I think that speaks for the confidence for 
the future of this province, jobs for young men and women in 
Saskatchewan. There’s two new uranium mines coming on 
stream up North. Millions of dollars being invested in 
exploration and development. And I think that speaks well for 
the future of this province. 
 
There’s millions of dollars being invested investigating 



March 22, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 153 

kimberlite tubes that are normally host to diamonds. And 
they’re excited about the opportunity to perhaps find and locate 
a diamond mine here in Saskatchewan. And I think that’s 
exciting. 
 
But you want to know, Mr. Speaker, what is more exciting and 
what is most exciting? I think what is even more exciting, Mr. 
Speaker, is the enthusiasm I hear from young people about the 
future of this province in spite of what members of that 
opposition party will say. And they can preach gloom and 
doom. And they can do that. 
 
But I want to say, Mr. Speaker, and I can speak from personal 
experience because there’s a young man and women who are 
planning a marriage in Prince Albert in August who plan to 
spend their lives here in Saskatchewan in business, and I want 
to say, Mr. Speaker, they’re not alone. They’re not alone. My 
son and his fiancée plan on establishing a business in Prince 
Albert and they’re making Prince Albert their home. And I’m 
proud of them for that. 
 
But I want to say, Mr. Speaker, they’re not alone. And the 
statistics with respect to Saskatchewan’s population and jobs 
and job opportunities for young people bear out that they’re not 
alone. We’ve had job growth in this province year over year. 
We’ve had retail sales growth year over year in spite of the fact 
that they can bring out an isolated number once in a while that 
will show a little dip and a little downturn. It’s a natural thing; 
that’s how business works. But what you’ve got to do is look 
over the longer haul. 
 
(1615) 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, people are looking over the long 
haul. And they know that this is a good place to do business. 
It’s a good place to raise your family. And they’ve got trust in 
the government and the businesses that create those kind of 
opportunities — so unlike the mood that was there in the 1980s 
under the Devine Tory administration, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of my colleagues suggests that the former 
premier has decided to run again, and that could be. And if he 
were, I’d welcome him here, Mr. Speaker. And I think a safe 
place for him would be in the opposition benches with all his 
other Tory colleagues. 
 
And I think it’d be a great idea for the former member from 
Melville, Mr. Schmidt, to join them over there. And the 
member from Thunder Creek, Mr. Swenson, the former leader, 
to join them over there. And Grant Devine to join them over 
there because you know something, Mr. Speaker, they’d be 
right at home. They’d be right at home, and they should be, 
because it’s the some old Tory. 
 
An old friend of mine said one time you can’t change the spots 
on a leopard, and I think that’s the absolute truth, because you 
can’t. And a Tory is a Tory is a Tory. 
 
And they can fiddle with the polls and do selective polling and 
come up with a number that makes them feel good when they 
go home. But I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, the people of this 
province will not and do not accept them for anything more 
than what they are and what they were, and that’s Tories. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — And I think, Mr. Speaker, I think, 
Mr. Speaker, a lesson has been learned by all of us and it’s not a 
lesson were about to repeat. What have we delivered, Mr. 
Speaker? We’ve reduced personal income tax. We’ve been 
reducing the sales tax. We’ve selectively reduced the taxes on 
manufacturing and processing. We’ve reduced the number of 
Tories, which is probably the best thing that we’ve done in the 
last decade. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, we’ve got no intentions of 
turning our direction with respect to tax reduction or Tory 
reduction because we’re bent on moving in that same, same 
direction. 
 
And I know, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite are a little 
testy today and I can understand that. I’ll tell you, if I were an 
old Tory — if I were an old Tory sitting in the benches here and 
someone was bringing up my record, I can I tell you, I’d be a 
little uncomfortable as well. 
 
So I don’t blame you. No one can hold you to fault for that, Mr. 
Speaker. They shouldn’t be held at fault for that at all, it should 
be understood. And even we should be understanding about 
that. 
 
But I want to say . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . oh, now they 
are creeping higher in the polls. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, when you’re down here and you creep up to 
here, you haven’t moved a long way. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, when you’ve got a legacy, and 
a record of Mulroney and Devine and governments — Tory 
governments of the 1980s — you should be excited about a 
small move from here to here, because you’re not likely to see a 
bigger one. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to close my remarks by again saying to the 
people of Saskatchewan and particularly to the people of Prince 
Albert Northcote, who I’ve been fortunate enough to represent 
since 1986, that I appreciate their confidence in this 
government. And I want to say that we will continue to work 
hard in the areas of debt reduction, and tax reduction, and 
program enhancement, and ensuring that the future of this 
province will house good opportunities for their children and 
their grandchildren, because that’s why we were elected. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we weren’t elected on a platform of unreasonable 
promises. We were elected on a platform of balanced 
government, fair government, and reasonable government, and 
that’s what we’ve continued to strive towards. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said before, we’ll make our mistakes. 
We’ll make plenty of them. There are hundreds of decisions to 
make every day and we don’t all make the right ones. But I can 
say to you, Mr. Speaker, and the members opposite are very, 
very concerned about health care and I recognize that. And the 
comments that we’re hearing from them would tell me they’re 
concerned about it. But then what they should do is re-look at 
their platform. Because I say to members opposite you can’t 
freeze the health care budget for five years and maintain a level 



154 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 1999 

of service. You can’t do it. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Now the . . . Order. The 
hon. minister is a veteran member and he knows that debate in 
the House is properly directed to the Chair. And I think we’re 
seeing much evidence of what happens here when hon. 
members direct their remarks directly to other members on the 
other side of the House. Order. Order. And I’ll encourage the 
hon. minister to continue his debate but to direct his remarks 
through the Chair. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, you’re right and again 
I apologize. And I shouldn’t make excuses but it’s like a 
magnet, Mr. Speaker. And I think you can understand that, after 
being a seasoned member of this legislature as well. But I will 
focus my remarks through the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Now the hon. minister is well 
aware as well of course that it’s improper to draw the Speaker 
into debate. And I’m sure that he’ll want to avoid doing that as 
well as he proceeds with his remarks in the debate and response 
to the Speech from the Throne. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, you are 
right. You are right. I want to talk about health care, Mr. 
Speaker, and I want to talk about the former administration and 
their record — the former Premier Devine. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, before I talk about the health care I 
can recall very vividly a debate that took place between the 
former premier, Mr. Devine and myself. And we were going on 
one evening and he was trying to justify the debt based on all 
the projects that he put together and indicating that that’s why 
we were having some success as a government in the 1990s. 
And he went on to tell us that the debt was there because he had 
done the right things and in putting that debt in place he was 
actually doing well for the young people of this province. Mr. 
Devine — that was the thesis of his remarks, that’s what he was 
suggesting was what this is all about. 
 
And you know what, Mr. Speaker, they got the message. I 
didn’t because I didn’t buy his theory. But they do and what are 
they out promising? They’re out promising tax reduction, tax 
relief, and you wait. They’re not done. They’ve done a little, 
they talked a little bit about the PST but you’ll hear more. 
You’ll hear lots more, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan are going to hear irresponsible 
promises like the removal of the fuel tax. And it was good 
politics. It was great politics but it wasn’t long-term economics. 
And Grant Devine and those Tories were out campaigning in 
1982 and again in 1986 and they tried it again in 1991. 
 
But people wouldn’t buy it because, Mr. Speaker, people are 
sophisticated. The electorate are a sophisticated lot and they can 
use a computer as well as anyone and they know you can’t 
promise tax reduction, enhanced expenditures on highways by 
the hundreds of millions, perhaps billions, and still balance 
budgets. 
 
Because people have a very, very strong memory of the former 
premier, Mr. Devine and Mr. Schmidt, and Mr. Swenson and 
those that sat with him and those that are likely to come back 

with this group. They have a good, good memory of that. And I 
say, Mr. Speaker, you don’t change the spots on a leopard. They 
can’t hide who they are; they shouldn’t try . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . One of my colleagues says probably the most 
appropriate comment would be just to say I’m sorry. And that 
may in fact be the truth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to close my remarks by again saying that 
people of Saskatchewan are very enthusiastic about this 
province. 
 
And what I find encouraging as well is people outside of this 
province are looking at what we have done in Saskatchewan in 
amazement. When I have the opportunity to travel in other 
provinces and other jurisdictions who follow what’s been 
happening, what the Devine legacy left us here and how we’ve 
been able to turn that around since 1991, I come home very 
encouraged. People of this country understand what we’ve been 
able to achieve as a people in the province. And the only 
people, Mr. Speaker, who are somewhat ashamed — I would 
suggest to you — of who they are and what they are, are the 
members who will not even run under their true political name 
and who they are and what they are. 
 
But I’m not going to dwell on that because I think people 
understand that and I want to say to you that the future of this 
province is very bright. And members on this side of the House 
are going to continue to work, as we’ve never worked before 
through these difficult times, to ensure that we remain a 
province with balanced budgets; and that we have the best 
education system anywhere in Canada; and that we have an 
infrastructure that can house and be a home to economic 
development and job creation. And that the great people of this 
province who know and understand their province so well, 
we’ll continue to work with them to ensure that Saskatchewan 
does have a great future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to close by saying that I’m very much 
looking forward to the next election because I think the people 
of Saskatchewan are very excited about going to the polls. 
They’re excited about going to the polls because they have a 
chance to reaffirm and to reconfirm their beliefs, their beliefs in 
the future of this province, and they’re not going to go back to 
the Devine administration of the ’80s and those that worked 
with them and those that surrounded themselves with that 
administration. They’re not going to go back there. 
 
They’re looking for an enhancement to what they already know 
is a bright, bright future and a bright place in this province of 
ours. And so I want to say to all of my colleagues that I will be 
not supporting the amendment to the Throne Speech. I will be 
endorsing and wholeheartedly supporting the Throne Speech. 
And I very much look forward to the Finance minister’s 
delivery of what I know is going to be a very well received and 
a very positive budget for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well it’s been a 
really good time to come into the debate after having had a 
couple of days of listening to both sides sort of getting at it and 
discussing the Speech from the Throne. 
 



March 22, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 155 

First of all, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that I’m glad to be back 
and glad to see you in the chair again and echo all those kinds 
of remarks that we always can be depending on not being able 
to give to you for your fine work. 
 
People out in our constituency fortunately, too, have had a 
couple of more opportunities to watch the Assembly and its 
delivery through our television system. And I want to thank you 
for your part in that on their behalf. I’m sure they appreciate 
what you’ve done along with the other folks to bring these 
messages to them. A couple of folks have called in and said that 
they are enjoying watching each day, especially question 
period, and those parts of the day. 
 
As I motored in today from the Cypress Hills on No. 1 
Highway, I found myself, Mr. Speaker, down to . . . a little 
under the speed limit because it was very foggy in places. And I 
found myself having therefore a little more time to concentrate 
on the important things of daydreaming and thinking about the 
Speech from the Throne and the things that had gone on in it. 
 
The reality being, of course, that the speech itself could very 
well have been one that I’ve heard maybe two or three times 
before, maybe every time that we’ve come here. And if you 
aren’t really, if you aren’t really, really listening, you would 
find yourself wondering if there was anything in the speech at 
all or why we even bothered to come and listen to it, to be quite 
honest with you. But it does make sense to do these procedural 
things, and the pomp and ceremony is all part of the system. 
And for new folks coming in the first time or two I’m sure that 
it was very enjoyable for them. 
 
But the reality is that from a political point of view and if 
you’re looking for some substance, there wasn’t any. There 
wasn’t anything different in this budget than we’ve heard time 
and time before. And I’m really hoping that the budget day will 
come up with some new incentives and new initiatives for our 
province. But we don’t need the same old rhetoric, we don’t 
need the same old complaints, and we don’t need the same old 
suggestions that it’s somebody else’s fault in the past. 
 
This government’s had two terms now, just about finishing that 
second one. It’s time they got on their own back feet and stood 
up and did something for themselves. Quit whining and 
complaining about the legacy they have, and get on with the 
future of your own lives and your own determinations and your 
own plans, if you have any. And I’m starting to wonder if there 
are. 
 
But maybe in the budget speech we will see that, and I’m 
hopeful that that will happen, because it is dearly important to 
our province and to the constituency of the Cypress Hills. 
 
A couple of people have alluded to the fact, Mr. Speaker, that 
we haven’t talked very much about agriculture, and a lot of 
folks of course don’t have an agricultural background, as I’ve 
noted. They’ve spoken to the speech and they haven’t 
commented on the crisis in agriculture because of course 
they’re not farmers. 
 
But I am and I represent a rural community, and although oil 
and gas and those industries are important to us, agriculture is 
very important. And so I want to take a couple of minutes to 

talk about the agricultural crisis and how it alludes to the 
Speech from the Throne and how it of course impacts my 
constituency in the province. 
 
(1630) 
 
Mr. Speaker, without agriculture this province of Saskatchewan 
cannot continue. It cannot continue even after the sort of slow, 
mundane pace that we are rolling along at. It’ll simply become 
a desert wasteland without agriculture because we have to have 
something as a basis, something that is solid, and that’s what 
this province is all about and has been. 
 
I was very disappointed the other day to read an article that 
came out of one of our newspapers, I believe it was the 
“Crossroads” — comes out of that Rosetown country up there 
in Kindersley . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Kindersley Clarion. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Yes. And there you go. The Kindersley 
Clarion, carrying an article talking about how Mississippi is the 
poorest state in all of the United States and that there isn’t one 
province in Canada that is as well off as Mississippi. I find that 
to be very disheartening, to find out that we rank so low on the 
scale as compared to our neighbours. 
 
And then when you take a look at the Canadian situation, we 
find ourselves lagging behind eight of the other provinces, and 
there’s some doubt about Newfoundland even being, you know, 
poorer than we are any more. And there’s no need to go into 
that except to reflect on the reality that if we are looking at 
those kind of comparisons, we are in serious trouble — serious 
trouble as a country, serious trouble as a province. Trouble that 
we don’t have to tolerate or put up with because what we have 
to do is work on our basics and our fundamentals, which is the 
industries that are the bottom line of our country and our 
province. In Saskatchewan, that’s got to be agriculture. It has to 
be. 
 
I was really disappointed as well this morning when I received a 
letter from the Minister of Agriculture federally. And in his 
letter he explained how our new crisis program is going to 
unfold. It is an absolute disaster, a total joke. There is no help 
for most of our farmers. A few pig growers are going to get 
some money. 
 
I talked to an accountant the other day. He said to me if you 
took all of the money that has been promised and you put it into 
a formula and divide that formula out using 25 bushels to the 
acre wheat in Saskatchewan and you only applied it on the 
wheat acres that have potential to grow, you’d have a 25 bushel 
crop; it would come out to 16 cents per bushel is what the entire 
subsidy would be. And that’s nothing for the hog producers or 
all the other agricultural producers. 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, is more of an insult than a help, because 
in reality if you do help a few people — and I’m glad if they get 
it and I’m glad if they have the help — but it won’t put us into a 
competitive position with the Europeans and the Americans. 
 
And we are into a serious problem with the subsidy war with 
the Americans and the Europeans continuing to battle for a 



156 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 1999 

marketplace and bigger share when the reality is that, as we go 
on, there are still lots of hungry people, and we only have to 
work on the economies of the world in order to find ways to get 
the poor people to have access to the grains that we can 
produce. 
 
We cannot overproduce. We cannot overproduce for the amount 
of people in the world that will gladly eat the food that we can 
grow. What we have is a problem with the politics of our 
country and the politics of the world. 
 
So in this aid program, I’m saying to the members of the 
government, through you, Mr. Speaker, that we’ve got to 
rethink this whole approach. We’ve got to get back down to 
Ottawa and we’ve got to start talking about something that 
makes a real difference. Unless we want to end up like 
Mississippi or if we want to end up like maybe North Dakota 
where you have 600,000 people left and farms where you can 
watch your dog run away for three days and he hasn’t even got 
to the neighbours yet. And that’s the sort of thing that we’re 
heading for in Saskatchewan. 
 
We’re going to have an absolute devastation of the rural 
population if it continues to drop. We’ve got people talking now 
about whether or not you can maintain a municipality with so 
few people. What is the magic number? How few people can 
you have in an area before you cancel the municipality as a 
result of no population? How few dollars for income from the 
assessments before you cancel the municipality because there’s 
no longer a tax base there and maybe even no need for the roads 
that are being built? 
 
When that happens, Mr. Speaker, we are heading for some 
serious problems. 
 
So in agriculture I think we have to take a look at what SARM 
(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) has come 
up with. And I just happened to be reading The Rural 
Councillor the other day and in that Rural Councillor they 
talked about a new approach which would be an old approach in 
a lot of areas of the world, especially the United States, and that 
would be to have a set-aside program. 
 
Now as I’ve said, I don’t believe that we have a surplus of food 
and I don’t believe that, in good conscience as Christian people, 
that we should not produce food for people that are hungry. But 
if the world is determined to say to us that they don’t need the 
product that we’re growing, if they’re serious about that, then 
about a set-aside program as people in SARM have been 
suggesting. 
 
How about a set-aside program where we pay people $20 an 
acre not to plant an acre? Now you’re going to have to start at 
something as substantial and something that’s realistic because 
it is going to cost a farmer so many dollars just to maintain an 
acre because of the tax structures and the pressures that we have 
in terms of necessary payments that we incur as producers, 
agricultural producers, whether we grow a bushel of wheat or 
not. We all start out the year owing so much per acre for our 
input costs whether we do anything or not. And that is land 
taxes and those kind of things that are fixed costs. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I think that it’s high time that our Minister 

of Agriculture took a hard look at some of these alternatives — 
alternatives that people in other countries are using — and stop 
worrying about whether or not it’s going to show up as green in 
some international dispute. Because obviously what the other 
people are doing is not green, if they want to use those colours 
as definitions. 
 
They’re not treating us fairly. They’re not working on a level 
playing field. And they’re not playing fair. 
 
So we have to do what we have to do to survive. And I think we 
have to look at some of these programs like going to a set-aside 
program. Or at least we’re going to have to put up enough 
dollars so that in reality people get enough money to be able to 
survive. 
 
Now the older farmers, Mr. Speaker, again if they’ve had their 
bills paid in the 1980s, they’re going to have them paid in the 
1990s, and they’re going to be fine and they’ll survive until 
they retire or die. But the younger farmers are not going to be 
able to come into this industry and they will not be able to 
survive. 
 
And any farmer that had debt in the late 1980s has not had 
enough time in the relatively good years that we’ve had — the 
few of them that we have had — to pay off the debts they 
incurred in the ’80s. And that’s one of the crunch problems in 
this whole crises. 
 
Those people that didn’t have their land secured are now in a 
position where they are losing it. We’re going to see auction 
sales again in the southwest, although we don’t have that many 
people left. You kind of wonder how come we can keep on 
having auction sales with so few farmers, but they still are 
showing up and they’re showing up in bigger numbers again. 
The most unsuspecting farms are coming up for sale. It’s just an 
absolute shock to find out that people are going out of business 
and going broke once again. It’s into the same old cycle of what 
goes around comes around. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, if the members opposite want to have 
somebody talk about agriculture and the problems in 
agriculture, believe me we can stand here and talk for a few 
days. 
 
But I want to suggest to the other members that if one of them 
wants to speak for a few minutes, that I will be talking about a 
few more points and then they can be ready to get at it and go at 
it too. Because I think we need to all share our opinions on 
these issues. 
 
I want to deal a little bit with some of the health problems that 
have happened especially in southwest. And I want to suggest 
some alternatives and some ideas perhaps that the government 
might want to use. 
 
We’ve had a couple of circumstances in the southwest; one at 
Frontier where a young man had to go to Medicine Hat for an 
operation and they couldn’t seem to get the air ambulance. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m suggesting to the government members 
that they have to take a look at redesigning how they run the air 
ambulance system. 
 



March 22, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 157 

Apparently one man sits in Saskatoon and has the say of 
whether or not the plane flies or where it goes. That to me has 
to be corrected. Now I can see somebody making a decision 
because of weather problems, but to make a decision based on 
the fact that it’s a long ways away is simply not going to wash 
in this day of age because everything is a long ways away, 
especially where you’ll need an air ambulance. 
 
And we definitely have to take a look at that alternative for 
people in rural areas. We have to look at getting air ambulance 
more and more, as we have fewer and fewer hospitals with 
fewer and fewer of the very necessary services. 
 
Can you imagine being a farmer working in southwest 
Saskatchewan, a hundred miles from anyplace, and then finding 
out you can’t even get an air ambulance with your leg cut off or 
some other tragedy occurring. And I know I’ve talked about 
these things before but we have to repeat some of this because 
it’s very serious out in rural Saskatchewan and it does need 
attention. 
 
When you find yourself suggesting to your constituents, as I 
have done in the past six months, that the best alternative 
they’ve got is to find a doctor who’s receptive to getting you to 
Medicine Hat as your alternative to health care, then I say we 
are in serious trouble. And certainly we are in that serious 
trouble because that’s exactly what is going on. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that in our small towns we 
oftentimes take life for granted and the goodness of life for 
granted. And I suppose that there are times in every small town, 
and maybe it happened all over the province this year, but 
we’ve run into times when we lose a lot of our local residents to 
death. And it happens in our community all too often this last 
while. And I wanted to just mention this because it has a 
tendency to drag down a community a bit and it’s difficult to 
sort of get up and get ready for spring. 
 
We had six deaths in our community in recent days, not related 
whatsoever. In recent weeks, starting off with the former mayor 
of Gull Lake who was the principal in our school. Just the best 
fellow you’d ever want to meet. And he passed away suddenly 
and we were all just shook right up. He was instrumental — 
Gerry Elmslie was the gentleman I’m talking about — 
instrumental in getting the football program going in Gull Lake 
that has resulted, of course, in the fact that the Gull Lake Lions 
are known all over the province as the football town. 
 
Yes, and then Redvers took a dumping from Gull Lake 
Greyhounds the other day too, in hockey. So we managed to 
show them both in hockey and in football. 
 
I wanted to though, Mr. Speaker, to seriously talk about the 
losses. And of course Mae McLavish passed away in our town a 
couple of weeks back, and she of course was my landlady when 
I went to school, was my surrogate mother, and I dearly loved 
her and will miss her. 
 
And of course my Aunt Marie, she passed away, a 
family-oriented person, and we were so glad to have her as an 
example in our community of a woman who was a 
Christian-based person that dedicated her life to her children 
and to her Christian beliefs. 

And then we had of course Bud Mortensen, a local fellow that 
was a farmer and worked in the oil patch who helped me so 
much to understand the need in past years for farmers and the 
oil industry to be able to work together and to share the land 
and to share the two resources and the benefits that would come 
to our community. And so I will always remember him and 
always be saddened by the fact that he left us so quickly. 
 
And then of course we had Al Nyen, our John Deere dealer, 
who worked for years in our community and who always had a 
smile on his face, no matter how bad things were at home. He 
was always there to help the community and he was always 
there with a good idea, always there willing to do and help and 
serve others. And his untimely death, even though he was older, 
was a great shock as well to our community. 
 
And just last week, of course, Ken Logan passed away, a 
younger man, younger than myself, died of cancer, and fought 
valiantly but was respected by all of the people in our 
community. And I’ve often said that Ken was probably a little 
bit further to the right than Mark Clary, the mayor from Leader, 
and I called Ken often as a mentor to get his advice and his 
input into how I should conduct myself here in this Assembly. 
And I will truly miss him as well. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I know that we don’t always take a lot of 
time on individuals in our Assembly, but there’s a collective 
thought here, a collective thought of how we’ve lost so many 
good people in our community in such a short time, and that 
thought of course being that it’s a terrible shock to us all. But I 
also want to take this opportunity to recognize that it probably 
happens to other communities, and I’d like to offer my 
condolences to the families of all of the people who have lost 
loved ones and friends over this past winter. I’m hoping that the 
spring suns will bring this to an end and that spring will finally 
be here and that we can watch the crocuses grow and enjoy 
going out to watch the gophers and the geese before long and 
not have to dwell on our losses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a situation in Saskatchewan where we are 
looking at going into spring work with an awful lot of farmers 
wondering, what should we plant? Should we plant anything? It 
is really devastating to have to listen day after day on the 
telephone to people asking, how is this aid program going to 
work and what should I seed? And I haven’t really got any 
advice for them. I just absolutely don’t know because I haven’t 
got a clue what to seed on my own farm. 
 
But I do know one thing: that if the input costs weren’t so high 
in this province, then it would be easier to take less for the 
products we sell. And one of the areas that came to my attention 
here this other . . . the last couple of days is fertilizer prices. 
Fertilizer prices, I was told at a Pool meeting, have gone down 
just a little bit from last year but basically they’re going to be 
about the same, I was told, and they’re going to stay there. 
 
Well I hope that’s wrong. Because realistically if farmers have 
to continue to pay the escalated costs of inputs along with trying 
to balance everything else at a time when their sales are low and 
not only low because of the strikes — the west coast and that’s 
a whole other subject and we could get into that for a long time 
— but the reality is that farmers definitely need to have some 
lowering of input costs and the way that this government can 



158 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 1999 

help is so significant. 
 
They don’t realize it but there are a lot of good areas that they 
could work on. They can work on education land on property. 
For example, now if a bigger percentage of the education were 
paid for through other vehicles instead of on property tax, that 
would lower the input costs for farmers. It may not be the best 
way in the world to do it but it’s available to this government, 
and it’s available now, and they could do it now and they could 
do it effectively to put some dollars into the hands of farmers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is important that this government understand 
that reducing taxes is not such a bad thing. It’s a leap of faith I 
know, and it’s always hard to have that when things seem to be 
going against you. But you’ve got to sometimes take a leap of 
faith and do these things to reduce taxes to stimulate economies. 
 
While reducing costs for farmers may take some dollars out of 
the government’s pockets immediately, but in the long run it 
will pay off because we’ll still have those people here to buy in 
our retail markets and just to be a part of our social structure 
using the health care, the education, and all the rest. 
 
If all of the farmers are gone, what are those schools going to 
do? They have to do only one thing — close. The same with our 
hospitals. If we lose the population we have to have the base, 
and lowering these prices and these costs are things that can be 
done by this government. And they can do it now, and they 
could do it with balance and with some degree of integrity. 
 
(1645) 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I was disappointed in 
something that seems very small, I suppose, to a lot of people, 
which is one of the Bills that we received today, an Act 
respecting the Prairie Agricultural Machinery Institute and the 
changes that are going to be there. 
 
I had hoped, Mr. Speaker, that the government and the 
Department of Agriculture would be looking at some of the 
things that our neighbours are doing in these areas, the things 
that are happening in Manitoba for example, and Alberta, with 
regards to lowering or rather increasing the warranties on 
machinery. 
 
A simple thing like that and this government misses it. It’s like 
it just hit them right on the head and bounced right off. And 
I’ve written them letters and people have talked to them. 
 
In Manitoba they have passed laws that extend warranties on 
farm machinery, and people that sell self-propelled equipment 
have to extend warranties on $250,000 combines for two years 
instead of one. 
 
It’s almost amazing. Some people just blink and shake their 
heads. And they say you pay $250,000 for a combine and you 
get one-year warranty; $200 in fuel; back in the shed. And it’s 
not guaranteed next year when you pull out in the field. 
 
Well that’s the way it is. If the motor falls out of it, you’re the 
farmer. You pay 20 or $30,000 for a new motor on a machine 
that’s hardly worked at all. And you hold the bag all by yourself 
as a farmer. 

In Alberta and Manitoba they’re addressing those kind of 
questions. In Saskatchewan all we worried about is how we can 
dupe enough people into voting for us the next election. And 
that is why we are getting behind in this province. It doesn’t 
matter how long we exist. We will always have a government, 
and it will always be electing somebody. 
 
The reality is though that the province continues to shrink and 
to get smaller and to get poorer. And we become even worse off 
than we are — worse off than Mississippi, the poorest of the 
poorest. The poorest state in the whole union of the United 
States of America. And we’re poorer than they are, and even 
poorer than the other provinces. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture has got his work 
cut out for him. And in the days to come I hope that through the 
budget debate and all the rest of the estimates that we will take 
enough time to talk about all the agricultural problems. 
 
There are many that I haven’t touched on. There’s lots of things 
in the oil and gas industry that I haven’t touched on today that 
need to be talked about, especially in terms of how they affect 
my constituency and the people that live there. And the ones 
that are left are truly the best. And the ones that have moved 
away — thank goodness they come back and visit once in a 
while or we’d really be getting lonely. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I think I’ll conclude my remarks for 
today. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad to have 
the opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to reply to the Throne Speech. 
Although being my short tenure in here about three, three and a 
half years, it has to be without a doubt the flattest Throne 
Speech that I have ever heard. 
 
And I’d like to talk on each specific area, Mr. Speaker, that the 
Throne Speech touched on. And the first one I’d like to talk 
about is agriculture. I think if I remember right, in the Throne 
Speech there had to be at least one whole line about agriculture 
in the Throne Speech. 
 
Farm aid, Mr. Speaker, I think was lacking. The comment about 
lacking in the Throne Speech, about what is needed in 
agriculture, what farm aid we need out there. 
 
And I’d like to go through some of the reasons I feel we’re in a 
position we’re in. A lot to do with what the provincial 
government has done, or not done. And a lot to do with what 
the federal government has done and not done. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to go back to when we went down East 
last fall as an all-party committee, the Minister of Agriculture, 
myself, and I believe it was the member for Thunder Creek. 
After we lobbied the minister to put an all-party committee 
together he finally agreed, and down we went. 
 
What happened down there, Mr. Speaker . . . and I found this 
interesting because I’m a farmer from Saskatchewan. Never 
been to Parliament Hill and especially had never met with the 
Standing Committee on Agriculture. What it was really, was 
about 12 MPs (Member of Parliament) of all parties gathered 
there, and we made a presentation. And by we, I mean the Ag 



March 22, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 159 

minister gave a presentation on behalf of Saskatchewan, the 
only presentation that was allowed. 
 
There was a gentleman from Quebec gave a presentation on 
behalf of the Quebec farmers. I believe he was the union leader 
of the farmers’ union in Quebec — a very interesting little 
gentleman, Mr. Speaker. He looked to me to be about 4 foot 5 
and yet after he spoke he looked like he was about 6 foot 9. 
They listened to every word that man said; it was just the way 
he put it across. 
 
And once again, I think it’s the way they listen to people in 
Quebec over us. And I think we all have a problem with that, 
but that’s the way the system seems to work. 
 
The Agriculture minister gave our presentation. I actually 
believe, Mr. Speaker, he gave a very good presentation on 
behalf of Saskatchewan and farmers. But after giving him that 
compliment I have to stop there, Mr. Speaker, because what 
happens is after you give your presentation the MPs have the 
chance to question the members giving statements. 
 
So it went around. Each MP had their questions and finally it 
came to one of, I believe it was one of the Liberal government 
side MPs, and his comment was and I quote, “Mr. Agriculture 
Minister from Saskatchewan, have you balanced your books in 
Saskatchewan?” And our ag minister said, oh yes we have, and 
his buttons bounced right out and his shirt tightened right up 
and said, you bet. In fact, he said, we’ve even got a surplus here 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
Or the guys . . . the MP from down there, Mr. Speaker, said, 
well, and I understand you right you’re down here asking for 
farm aid for your farmers. And our ag minister said, yes we are. 
 
Well the MP said, you know we balanced our books and we 
have a surplus. Are you willing to put some of your surplus in 
for farm aid for your farmers? And our Agriculture minister 
right away said, no we’re going to be stubborn in 
Saskatchewan. We’re going to lobby hard. It’s your problem, 
we’re not going to put any money in; it’s totally a federal 
responsibility. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I noticed — and I believe the member for 
Thunder Creek will agree with this — that at that point I believe 
we lost their interest. They weren’t all that sure they wanted to 
help us because they weren’t all that sure we wanted to help 
ourselves. And they weren’t all that sure there was actually a 
crisis in Saskatchewan because we weren’t willing to help 
ourselves. 
 
And what do we see at this point with a farm aid plan that’s 
been made up by bureaucrats in the federal Department of 
Agriculture with no input from Saskatchewan because we 
weren’t at the table with any funding for our farmers. 
 
Why would they listen to us, Mr. Speaker, when we weren’t 
willing to do anything for our farmers. They were not willing to 
let us get to the table, have input into a plan that had some 
meaning such as a seeded acreage payment. 
 
And what do we have? We’ve come up now for farmers in 
Saskatchewan with a 70 per cent income-based program that I 

honestly believe will help hardly any farmers, least of all the 
ones in the most need. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, let’s for an example use the farmers in the 
North Battleford . . . northwest corner. These farmers have had 
four or five very dry years. Their income has been very low for 
those four or five years. And now what we see and to qualify 
for aid you have to take a three-year average and be 70 per cent 
of that before you qualify. The people probably the worst in the 
province are not going to qualify for 1 cent of aid. So what 
good is a program like that? 
 
Once again I say if we’d have paid an acreage payment, yes, we 
may have touched on farmers that didn’t need it as bad as 
others. No. 1, the money would be out there, Mr. Speaker, and 
no. 2, everyone would receive help in this province that needed 
help. 
 
Accountants, Mr. Speaker, I believe are the main ones going to 
benefit from this program. Because what I hear today is that a 
number of accountants are charging anywheres upwards of 800 
to a thousand dollars to put through this Mickey Mouse 
program that we’ve came out with. But it’s very complicated. It 
takes a long time to put all the numbers together to see whether 
you qualify. And you can’t do it on your own; it’s pretty well 
impossible. I believe the accountants in this province are the 
only ones that are actually going to benefit the most from this 
program. 
 
And don’t get me wrong. I have nothing against accountants. I 
have a very good friend that’s my accountant. But I believe he’s 
one of the people that are going to come out with at least a 
dollar out of this program. I know farmers in my area in the 
Yorkton and Saltcoats area, are not looking forward to what this 
program is going to get for them. I believe they have actually 
gave up on it. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, I feel that as a provincial government, 
we’ve missed the boat here because what we’ve came up with 
. . . because we didn’t have input into it, is somewhat of a 
bureaucratic nightmare. Now I know, Mr. Speaker, that the 
provincial government, the Agriculture minister, the Premier, 
I’ve heard them go around the province and say, well we can’t 
afford it. Well I believe we cannot afford not to be part of that 
program, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I go back to 1992, and this government’s record on agriculture 
has been very dismal, to give them the most credit I possible 
can. But let’s touch once again on the GRIP (gross revenue 
insurance program) program, and let’s look at the numbers that 
the Provincial Auditor, Mr. Speaker, came out with, the 
finalized numbers on GRIP. The Provincial Auditor’s numbers, 
I believe: the province put back into general revenue $193 
million out of the pockets of our Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
That’s not the worst part, Mr. Speaker. In doing that they 
allowed the federal government to take back $324 million of 
federal money they had already budgeted for agriculture and put 
back into their general revenue. So it cost the farmers of 
Saskatchewan, cancelling GRIP, $517 million. That’s more 
than we’re putting into the two years total farm disaster package 
between the federal and provincial governments, Mr. Speaker. 
 



160 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 1999 

I might go on, Mr. Speaker, that I was very disappointed in our 
Premier through this whole process. He seemed to me to be 
completely absent for many of the discussions and negotiations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would just like to quote for you, and it’s a 
column by Mark Wyatt of the Leader-Post. I believe it’s 
November 6 of ’98. But it goes back speaking about what the 
Premier, some of the comments he had made when he was in 
opposition in the ’80s. And I quote, Mr. Speaker: 
 

According to Roy Romanow, an important yardstick by 
which the Saskatchewan premiers should be measured is 
how much farm relief they can pry out of Ottawa. 
 
It was a standard Romanow developed during the early 
1990s while serving in opposition to former Conservative 
premier Grant Devine. 
 
According . . . 
 

And again, I quote, Mr. Speaker: 
 

According to the Romanow ruler, a Saskatchewan premier 
must obtain the full amount of assistance demanded by the 
producers (or, in reality, the president of Saskatchewan 
Wheat Pool). 
 
One hundred per cent is the only passing grade and there’s 
no acceptable excuse for coming up short. 
 
“I did my best” doesn’t cut it. Budgetary constraints are 
irrelevant. Long-term solutions don’t address today’s 
problems. You either bring home the entire lump, or you’re 
a chump. 

 
And I quote. I quote, Mr. Speaker: 
 

By Romanow standards, Devine was a chump. 
 
Sure, farmers got a $1-billion dollar federal bailout in 
1987, following that infamous midnight phone call 
between Devine and former primer minister Brian 
Mulroney in the midst of the 1986 provincial campaign. 
 
Sure, the feds coughed up another $850 million in drought 
relief in 1989. 
 
OK, there was also $800 million in emergency aid during 
the 1991 fall campaign. 
 
But in Romanow’s humble opinion, it was too little, too 
late. 
 

And I go on to quote father down in the column, Mr .Speaker: 
 

During the 1991 campaign, Romanow predicted by taking 
a more adversarial approach, he could lever more money 
out of Ottawa than Devine could through his buddy-buddy 
relationship with Mulroney. 
 
Since then we’ve had numerous opportunities to compare 
Romanow against his own criteria. 
 

Soon after taking office, Romanow led 150 farmers on a 
trek to Ottawa in order to squeeze an additional $700 
million out of the Mulroney government. 
 
Other than convincing Mulroney to rearrange his schedule 
in order to see him, Romanow accomplished nothing. He 
went there to twist arms and came home with his tail 
between his legs. 
 

Well, Mr .Speaker, they touch on . . . Mark Wyatt touches on 
the buddy system and I believe there’s also a buddy system in 
place now. But this buddy system is our Premier, and it’s also 
the Prime Minister, Mr .Chrétien. And I had wished and had 
asked for a number of times but we never receive, our Premier 
to use that friendship to lobby for aid for Saskatchewan farmers. 
And where was our Premier? In his bubble as usual when it 
comes to farmers in this province and fighting for agriculture in 
this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have had . . . I believe the provincial ag 
minister made the comment at one time that the crisis was over 
because wheat went up 40 cents a bushel. And I knew at that 
point we were in big trouble because even the Agriculture 
minister didn’t understand how bad the problem was. Mr. 
Speaker, the problem is so bad in rural Saskatchewan that 
farmers even have to have their own tomcats because farms are 
getting so far apart. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s many areas in agriculture that are hurting 
right now. But I was very disappointed to see our Finance 
minister, when talking about the 1999 budget, took the entire 
farm aid money that he needed from the budget for ’99 and 
2000. Instead of taking it from the ’99 and 2000-2001 budget, 
took it all out of the ’98 budget, which I believe what he was 
doing was covering up for the deficit that this government has 
ran. To break their own rules about deficit financing, and then 
turned around and blamed the farmers of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, because they couldn’t balance the books. Broke their 
own balanced budget legislation. 
 
And how, Mr. Speaker? How did they . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order. Order! Order! It now 
being 5 o’clock, pursuant to rule 3 this House stands recessed 
until this evening at 7 o’clock. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 



 

 


