





























































Hansard: April 23, 1999


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 725 
 April 23, 1999 
 
The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I have a petition to present on behalf of farmers 
concerned about the farm safety net program. The prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
demand that the federal government work with 
Saskatchewan to put in place a farm aid package that 
provides real relief to those who need it, and that the 
provincial government develop a long-term farm safety net 
program as it promised to do when it cancelled GRIP 
against the wishes of farmers. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will every pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition come from the 
communities of Langenburg and MacNutt. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As well to present a 
petition regarding the farm safety net program. Reading the 
petition: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
demand that the federal government work with 
Saskatchewan to put in place a . . . 
 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Now the Chair is having some 
difficulty being able to hear the petition being presented and I 
ask for co-operation from members on both sides of the House. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll begin by reading the 
prayer again: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
demand that the federal government work with 
Saskatchewan to put in place a farm aid package that 
provides a real relief to those who need it, and that the 
provincial government develop a long-term farm safety net 
program as it promised to do when it cancelled GRIP 
against the wishes of farmers. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the petition I present is signed by individuals from 
the Saltcoats area. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I present petitions this morning 
from residents of the Northwest asking that the provincial 
government move to alleviate the unsafe highway system to the 

entrance of the city of North Battleford in order to alleviate the 
congestion. 
 
Your petitioners come from North Battleford, Battleford, 
Cando, Mayfair, and Medstead. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 
petitions on behalf of citizens that are concerned about our 
highway system in the province. The prayer reads as follows, 
Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call on federal and provincial 
governments to dedicate a significantly greater portion of 
the fuel tax revenues toward road maintenance and 
construction so Saskatchewan residents may have a safe 
highway system that meets their needs. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Those who’ve signed these petitions, Mr. Speaker, come 
from the communities of Avonlea and Kayville. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the petitions presented at the 
last sitting have been reviewed and found to be in order. 
Pursuant to rule 12(7) these petitions are hereby received. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
with pleasure that I invite hon. members to join me in 
welcoming 20 adults who are in your gallery and in the top 
two rows of your gallery, Mr. Speaker. They are here to 
observe the proceedings for a while and tour the building. 
They’re accompanied by their teachers, Warren Gervais and 
Linda Holowaty. 
 
I invite all members to join me in welcoming these students 
to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s just a 
wonderful pleasure to be able to introduce to you and through 
you to all my colleagues, 81 grade 4 students seated in the west 
gallery. Mr. Speaker, these students are part of a partnership 
with SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation). They and their school have helped to develop the 
Web site for the legislative building project, and they’ve been 
involved in the history of Regina and are doing more work on 
that as well. 
 
They are accompanied today by teachers, Betty-Ann Faber, 
Kathy Achtemichuk, and Kate MacLean. And risking 
someone’s embarrassment, Mr. Speaker, I also have to say that 
they have among them a member of my family. And I so rarely 
get to introduce family here that I wanted to also say a warm 
welcome to Lauren Shiplack who’s with them today. 



726 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 1999 

I ask all members to join me in welcoming 81 students from St. 
Marguerite Bourgeoys School in the constituency of Wascana 
Plains. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce 
to you and through you to all members of the legislature my 
nephews. These are my sister’s children and her husband James 
Lokken, and I’m going to ask them to stand up so that you can 
see them when I introduce them. So James Lokken and in his 
arms is the youngest, Knut, and then Nils, Olaf, and Torbjorn. 
They live in the constituency of Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
And accompanying them are their friends from here in Regina 
who are people who live in my constituency, and that’s Sylvie 
Roy, along with her children Gabe, and Orion, Leilani, and 
Angela. 
 
Let’s all give them a warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is 
my pleasure to introduce to you and through you to the 
members in the legislature a young constituent of mine who is 
in the west gallery with the students from St. Marguerite 
Bourgeoys, young Stephen Yee. Stephen I see sitting there. 
Stephen is a grade 2 student at St. Mary’s and is here with his 
aunt to get out and see the legislature, so please welcome 
Stephen to the legislature this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Flavel: — Mr. Speaker, I want to take this opportunity to 
introduce to the Legislative Assembly through you and to the 
other members a farmer from the Craven area that’s sitting in 
the west gallery this after . . . or this morning. He’s a 
community leader, Mr. Alfred Wagner. He’s been a Sask Pool 
delegate and a community leader out in that area and still is. 
And I would like to ask all the members of the Assembly to 
please welcome him here this morning. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure 
to introduce to you a couple of young ladies in the west gallery, 
Lori Currie and her daughter Jackie. Jackie is visiting from 
Saskatoon and with Jackie is her friend Tim Funk. And I would 
ask all members to welcome them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

First Nations/Department of Education Agreement 
 

Mr. Flavel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday I had the honour of attending the signing of a historic 
agreement. This agreement between the Sask Central School 
Division, the Gordon, Muskowekwan and Day Star First 
Nations and Saskatchewan Education established a unique 
partnership arrangement at the George Gordon Education 

Centre. 
 
The Gordon Education Centre is located on reserve land and 
owned by the Gordon’s First Nation. It is administered like any 
other school in the Sask Central School Division and the local 
band education council has the same voice as other school 
councils in the division. 
 
This agreement allows the bands to make their own decisions 
about off-reserve educational options for their children. This 
partnership also shows the government’s commitment to quality 
education for everyone. The Department of Education has 
provided $30,000 to the Sask Central School Division, double 
last year’s amount, to provide support to Indian and Metis 
children in the school division. 
 
Our government believes that we can best meet the needs of our 
children by working together. Together we can equip our young 
people with the skills, knowledge, and abilities they need to 
succeed in school and later in their adult lives. 
 
I would like to congratulate Chief Brian McNabb, Gordon First 
Nation Chief Lloyd Kinequon, Chief Ernest Moise, and the 
Sask Central School Division Chair, Gary Orthner, for this 
historic agreement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Ace Pilot Award 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, recently the Canadian Aerial Applicators Association 
presented their 1999 awards at a function in the city of 
Winnipeg. 
 
A young pilot from Invermay was presented with the Ace 
Award. Jeff Dean, the son of Richard and Irene Dean, is just 22 
years old but has been a pilot since 1995 but only an 
agricultural pilot for one year. 
 
His employer, Michael Yaholnitsky, of Miccar Aerial 
Applicators indicates, and I quote: 
 

Because of his great regard for safety for himself, his 
co-workers, and the environment, Jeff completed his first 
year as an ag pilot with no drift claims, no accidents or 
incidents, and no complaints from customers or 
co-workers. 

 
Mr. Speaker, Jeff has proved himself quite a tenacious young 
man. 
 
The Dean family lives just a short distance from our farm and I 
have watched him grow up and become the fine gentleman that 
he is. 
 
I also note, besides his parents, Richard and Irene, that his 
grandparents, David and Doreen Dean of Canora must be 
extremely proud of Jeff. 
 
Congratulations to Jeff Dean, winner of the 1999 Ace Pilot 
Award. 
 



April 23, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 727 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Soil Conservation Week 
 

Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This week has 
been proclaimed Soil Conservation Week in Saskatchewan, a 
week to recognize the importance of protecting the thin lifeline 
of topsoil on which so much of our lives and livelihoods 
depend. This week is also designed to recognize what is being 
done in protection and education in order to continue and 
improve our stewardship of the soil. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, yesterday was Earth Day, a day set aside for 
us to realize that this earth is ours to protect. 
 
Saskatchewan producers lead the way in protecting the soil. 
Nearly 25 per cent of Saskatchewan’s cultivated acres are 
seeded using low-disturbance seeding techniques and many 
producers use tillage practices that actually improve the land. 
 
The Saskatchewan Soil Conservation Association deserves our 
thanks for its work in creating awareness of conservation 
concepts and practices. Mr. Speaker, knowledge of the needs 
for conservation should begin early. And I congratulate the 
departments of Agriculture and Education for developing soil 
conservation kits as part of the grades 5 and 8 science and 
social studies curriculum. 
 
Education, public awareness, sound practice, all are necessary 
to preserve the earth that nurtures us. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

New Telephone Exchange for Ormiston 
 

Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This week the 
government released its annual reports for Crown corporations. 
Once again they’re back at it — helping the NDP (New 
Democratic Party) collect taxes through the back door. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in their efforts to raise taxes and dole out NDP 
patronage, the Crowns have lost their sense of purpose. It’s time 
the Crowns returned to providing universal access to service, 
jobs for Saskatchewan people, and ensuring that dividends are 
created that are used to provide health care and to help fix our 
roads in this province. 
 
In my own constituency, Mr. Speaker, there’s a recent example 
of how the NDP-run Crown corporations have forgotten their 
sense of purpose. SaskTel offered 88 of my constituents a 
chance to decide what they wanted done with the Ormiston 
phone exchange which straddles Thunder Creek and several 
other constituencies. They asked whether they wanted to keep it 
or move to the Assiniboia exchange. 
 
Well just like every other Crown consultation, especially rate 
reviews, the NDP limits the options. Despite the fact that most 
of these Thunder Creek residents do their business in Moose 
Jaw or Avonlea, they weren’t given the option of moving to 
those exchanges. 
 
Well I recently wrote them and I gave them another ballot with 
the option of Moose Jaw and other exchanges, and among 

dozens of residents who responded the vast majority of those 
preferred the Moose Jaw option and I’ll send these letters over 
to the minister. 
 
And in closing, it’s time this NDP government got the Crowns 
back to doing the job of serving and listening to its customers. 
Please listen before the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, the hon. member’s time has expired. 
 

Canada Book Day 
 
Ms. Murray: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I’d like to 
propose a new kind of celebration. Just as we give chocolates to 
our loved ones on Valentine’s Day, I propose that all members 
give Canadian books to friends and family today as it is Canada 
Book Day, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In a world of the Internet, on-the-spot television news, and 
increasingly Hollywood-style entertainment, a book is a 
welcome relief from the daily barrage of often useless 
information. 
 
Today is a chance to recognize the writers, editors, producers, 
and sellers of quality Canadian books. The best way to 
congratulate these Canadians is to purchase their books and 
show your support close to home. A book day fair held tonight 
at the MacKenzie Art Gallery will include writing workshops, 
music, Aboriginal storytelling, and readings by local authors. 
 
But the most important goal of this day is to stimulate our 
thoughts, Mr. Speaker. Reading encourages intellectual fitness 
and opens the windows of our minds to new ideas and 
exploration. Canada has been the breeding ground for many 
famous writers in the past, and it is up to us to promote 
Canadian writers of the present. 
 
Please join me in supporting the goals of Canada Book Day 
today and every day. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Prince Albert Business Awards 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. At the risk of offending members of the opposition 
who hate hearing good news, I want to this morning in my place 
congratulate a number of Prince Albert businesses who were 
recipients of the awards at the ninth annual Samuel McLeod 
Business Dinner held Wednesday, and I was pleased to be able 
to attend. 
 
I want to make a special comment to those who received the 
awards under the different titles. Job creation, Green Tree 
Fencing Supplies Ltd.. The legacy award went to Art Hauser, 
P.A. Bottlers. New business was presented to the Academy of 
Learning. The service industry award was received by Hunt’s 
Foods (1985) Ltd. Marketing, to Leisure Sports, Prince Albert 
(1985) Ltd. Investment, to Mann-Northway Auto Complex. 
Community involvement, to Davidner’s Clothing & Western 
Ltd. 
 
And the business of the year, Mr. Speaker, went to a new 
company, Green Tree Fencing Supplies Ltd. The owners are 
Keith and Carol Ross. I want to make a special comment with 



728 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 1999 

respect to their role in our community, the development and the 
building of that business that is creating new jobs for 
Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal people. 
 
So to all of the award winners, but in particular to Green Tree, I 
want to mention and say congratulations. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hockey Week in Prince Albert 
 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Hello Canada and hockey fans in 
Saskatchewan. It’s hockey week in Prince Albert. This week a 
Canadian AAA midget championship, also known as the Air 
Canada Cup, is being held with six teams competing in the . . . 
It reminds me at least, Mr. Speaker, of Foster Hewitt’s fantastic 
hockey broadcast — used to be held on Saturday nights. 
 
Each team here represents a different region of Canada and I’m 
proud to note that Saskatchewan’s got two teams competing — 
the Prince Albert Mintos and the Regina Pat Canadians. The 
round robin started on Monday with Prince Albert winning its 
first game, 2-1 over Cape Breton. The final game will be played 
on Sunday and will be televised live on TSN (The Sports 
Network). Young players in the championship have reason to 
be excited about the tournament because scouts from the NHL 
(National Hockey League) are off in the stands. 
 
And some NHL greats that have played in the Canada Cup 
include Joe Sakic, Al Macinnis, Wendel Clark, and Patrick Roy. 
So I’d like to congratulate and thank all of the people on the 
hosting organization for bringing this event to Saskatchewan 
and I’d like to wish all of the players good sportsmanship and 
good luck. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Cheque Presentation at Estevan Energy Training Institute  

 
Mr. Ward: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I want to tell 
the members about an announcement made at the Estevan 
Energy Training Institute last week. I had the pleasure of 
presenting a cheque of $5,000 to the early safety training 
program on behalf of the Department of Labour. This money 
will boost the safety training fund so it can provide 
opportunities for young people to learn about safety in the 
workplace. 
 
The money will be disbursed evenly amongst 50 young people 
to help them pay for some of the courses they will be taking. 
The courses at the regional college deals with hazardous 
materials in the workplace, first aid, CPR (cardiopulmonary 
resuscitation), and transportation of dangerous goods, and many 
other safety-related issues. 
 
This program was encouraged by local people who saw the 
need for safety training especially considering the types of work 
done in the Estevan area. Local businesses also chipped in with 
the department to help young people pay for the courses that 
they might not be able to afford otherwise. 
 
Please join me in recognizing the efforts of the early safety 
training program. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Negotiations with Nurses 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
for the Premier. Mr. Premier, once again SAHO (Saskatchewan 
Association of Health Organizations) and the nurses are not 
talking. Health services across this province are in jeopardy and 
the health of Saskatchewan people is at risk. 
 
Mr. Premier, it’s mass confusion over there on your side and 
everyone is pointing the finger at you. The nurses say you broke 
your word. SAHO doesn’t know what direction to take. And 
now the mediator’s report shows that both sides are still miles 
apart. 
 
Mr. Premier, ever since you stepped into the negotiations two 
weeks ago the nurses’ dispute has gone from bad to worse. In 
light of today’s complete breakdown in talks, what are you 
doing to ensure that patient care and health services are 
maintained? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m going to 
be tabling after question period — which I think is in 
accordance with the rules — a copy of Mr. Stephen Kelleher’s 
report which outlines the bargaining positions and indicates, as 
I indicated to the journalists earlier this morning, a very wide 
gulf in the negotiations. 
 
Our position is the following: we believe in Mr. Kelleher’s 
recommendation that there should be a cooling-off period and a 
consideration of these issues is wise. And we still hold the view 
that the memorandum of understanding, which was freely 
signed and entered into voluntarily by the SUN (Saskatchewan 
Union of Nurses) people and by the SAHO people in the 
presence of the Government of Saskatchewan, those signatures 
count for something, and we believe that it is the basis of a 
settlement. 
 
So what we’re going to do is we’re going to take the weekend, 
have the parties consider the Kelleher report; have the public 
understand where everybody’s really coming from in this 
regard; and work on the basis that the MOU (memorandum of 
understanding) is still the best way to protect patient care; and 
urge the parties to do so quickly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, 
the NDP’s health reform process has left Saskatchewan’s health 
system in a shambles. After eight years of NDP government the 
operative word in health is chaos. And now the NDP is using its 
same techniques to create the worst health care crisis in 40 
years. We are on the verge of another nurses’ strike because the 
NDP has stopped listening to the nurses. 
 
Mr. Premier, nurses don’t know who they are talking . . . who 
they should be talking with. By your own admission, Mr. 
Premier, neither do you. The other day you were asked who was 
in charge of the nurses’ negotiations. Your response was, Mr. 
Premier, quite frankly we haven’t figured this out yet. You went 



April 23, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 729 

on to say the strike has exemplified that there needs to be some 
heavy thinking about our relationship. 
 
Mr. Premier, who should the nurses be negotiating with? Is it 
SAHO? Is it the Health minister? Or is it you, Mr. Premier? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, this is another example 
of the Sask-a-Tory party misrepresenting wildly, statements 
made by parties in this operation. 
 
To answer the question clearly and consistently — as I always 
have — there are two parties to this dispute. One is SAHO, the 
Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations, who are the 
negotiators on behalf of the employers; and the Saskatchewan 
Union of Nurses, who are the negotiators on behalf of the 
employees. 
 
SAHO has negotiated successfully contracts with SEIU 
(Service Employees’ International Union), CUPE (Canadian 
Union of Public Employees). There are good negotiations going 
on with SGEU (Saskatchewan Government Employees’ Union). 
Only one union yet remains outstanding to be resolved. 
 
The Government of Saskatchewan will do all that we can in 
terms of helping out, in terms of meeting with people to avoid 
the difficulty of a strike. I think we’ve contributed in that 
regard. The answer lies with the two parties getting around the 
table, as Mr. Kelleher points out, and honouring the spirit and 
the intent of the MOU. That is the best basis of settlement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Premier 
says that other health unions have successfully negotiated; they 
have not yet ratified. Mr. Premier, the mediator’s report on the 
nurses’ dispute clearly shows that the two sides are still miles 
apart. Nurses are very angry with you and with the NDP. SAHO 
appears to be confused about what their mandate is on how they 
are to negotiate. 
 
You keep making cameo appearances in the process that takes a 
bad situation and makes it worse. Saskatchewan people are fed 
up with the whole thing and worst of all the health of 
Saskatchewan families is at risk. 
 
Mr. Premier, you say both sides need a cooling-off period. You 
need to use that cooling-off period to figure out whether or not 
you should be in these negotiations, and you need to ensure that 
health services are not disrupted again. 
 
Mr. Premier, what steps are you taking to ensure the 
continuation of health services for Saskatchewan families? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, note the fundamental 
inconsistency of the Sask-a-Tory party. On the one hand and in 
the two preceding questions, the essence of those questions 
were, you, Mr. Premier, made things worse after a strike notice 
was given and after the patient safety was in endangered. That 
was their advice. That’s what they would have us do. 
 
Thanks but no thanks to people in this province who expect the 
Premier always to get in, regardless of ideology, when patient 
safety is in danger. On the one hand they say get out, get out, 

and in this question what does he say? Get in. Get in and do all 
of these things and do all of the negotiating. 
 
What is it? Are you coming or are you going? Are we in or are 
we out? What’s your position? Or is it zap, you’re frozen for 
five years in health care? Zap, your nurses frozen; zap, the 
health care system freezes under the Sask-a-Tory party. Is that 
your position? Of course it is. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, 
the people of Saskatchewan want to know whether you’re in the 
negotiations or whether you’re out of the negotiations. You 
seem to be a little confused about whether you want to even be 
Premier. 
 
Mr. Premier, you set up the health boards five years ago so that 
you could hide behind them when the going got tough. You 
thought you could deflect the responsibility for difficult 
decisions by blaming them on the health boards. Well it hasn’t 
worked, Mr. Premier. Your health reform process is a bust. 
 
Thanks to the NDP, Saskatchewan is in the middle of the worst 
health care crisis in 40 years. It’s time to admit that you’ve 
failed, Mr. Premier. Whatever the NDP has been doing in health 
it hasn’t been working. 
 
People have lost confidence in the health care system and 
nurses are on the verge of staging an outright revolt. Thanks to 
your interference, SAHO can’t figure out which end is up. 
 
Mr. Premier, will you finally take the responsibility and admit 
you messed up? Will you commit to come clean with the nurses 
and get this labour dispute resolved? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Here we go. The first two questions, 
we’re blaming the Premier of the province of Saskatchewan 
after strike notice. And by the way, we know factually, within 
hours after the notice, the strike took place. We’re blamed for 
trying to get the strike resolved. 
 
Now the argument is, will you get in to make sure that the 
health care situation isn’t further exacerbated? What is it? Or is 
it really what your agenda’s all about? And what it really is all 
about is this — they want to butt out of health care funding . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order on both sides of 
the House. Hon. members, I ask for the co-operation of 
members on both sides of the House to permit the Premier’s 
response to be heard. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, so there is mass 
confusion on the Sask-a-Tory party with respect to the question 
of negotiations. 
 
But one thing there is no mass confusion about is where they 
stand on their platform on health care funding — pull out of the 
Canada Health Act. That means no national standards, no 
national funding. Americanize the health care system — 
two-tier health care; put deterrent fees; and butt out of 



730 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 1999 

negotiations when patient safety and health care is at stake. That 
is clearly where the Sask-a-Tory party is at. 
 
You’re doggone right — somebody’s going to be making a 
decision as to where you stand sooner than you like, and they 
are going to reject your destruction of the medicare system 
because you are opposed to medicare. You never supported it 
and you don’t now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Retention of Physicians in Province 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is to the Minister of Health seeing as the Premier has 
great difficulty and seems to have some confusion as to how we 
address the problems here in Saskatchewan regarding health. 
 
Madam Minister, over the past number of weeks, and certainly 
the last few weeks have not certainly clarified the issue in 
regards to the availability of doctors in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
As we indicated, doctors in the community of Maple Creek are 
leaving the province. And why are they leaving the province? 
Mr. Speaker, they are leaving the province because they are 
tired of the high tax burden and the failure of this government 
to address a very serious problem — that of incorporation. 
 
Madam Minister, what are you doing to address the availability 
of . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Now the Chair is having . . . 
Hon. members will recognize the hon. member from Moosomin 
is not located far from the Chair. Order. And the hon. member 
had begun his question; I’ll ask the hon. member to give his 
question again. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, when 
are you going to take leadership and let us know what you are 
going to do to address the concerns of the doctors in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — I’m going to answer this question on 
behalf of the government because the hon. member prefaces this 
— if you can believe the audacity of this — that they’re leaving 
Maple Creek because of high taxes. 
 
We know what the Sask-a-Tory position says, zap — you’re 
frozen in health care; zap — you’re frozen in education; zap — 
you’re frozen in every expenditure. But I tell you what they 
promised the people of Saskatchewan. They promised, in order 
to meet that member’s requests, tax reductions which will leave 
us in a $2 billion deficit. 
 
We did that in the 1980s under the Tories — been there, seen it, 
done it. It nearly bankrupted the province. And the province 
will never go back to the Sask-a-Tory position of doing it again 
— never. You’re to fault for that situation in Maple Creek. You 
are. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as I 
suspected, the finger pointing was going to come out again. Mr. 
Speaker, the unfortunate part is the government has not 
recognized the complexity of the problem and one of the 
serious concerns of doctors in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Madam Minister, when your government signed 
its last contract with doctors in February of 1998, you signed a 
letter of understanding that promised to give the doctors the 
right to incorporate. Maybe the doctors should ask the nurses 
what they think of the NDP’s letter of understanding. The 
nurses signed a memorandum of understanding with the NDP to 
end the nurses’ strike in exchange for good faith bargaining on 
a new collective agreement. Today we find out what that means 
to the nurses. 
 
Madam Minister, the doctors have an agreement signed in 1998. 
To date we have seen no movement on your part to address that 
concern. Madam Minister, why hasn’t your NDP government 
introduced legislation to allow doctors to incorporate so they 
won’t continue to run from NDP Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, doctors are not running 
from NDP Saskatchewan, contrary to what the hon. member 
says. And we have a rural physician retention and recruitment 
program that the ministers of Health have packaged together — 
an excellent one; emergency room coverage program; rural 
practice establishment grants; undergraduate medical bursary 
programs; medical resident bursary programs; rural 
enhancement training programs; locum service programs; 
weekend relief programs; re-entry training programs — all of 
these are specifically designed for rural physicians. And rural 
physicians — there are more of them in Saskatchewan today 
then there have been in quite some time. 
 
These programs are working. It is absolutely incorrect, the 
member’s questions. And they’re incorrect because his answer 
would be to health care — the Sask-a-Tory answer — zap, 
you’re frozen, no national standards, no Canada Health Act; zap 
you’re frozen in order to put us $2 billion in deficit. You should 
be ashamed of yourself with that position. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Retention of Nurses in Province 
 

Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
wonder if the Premier has ever heard of Global Career Services. 
Well if he hasn’t, plenty of Saskatchewan nurses have. That’s 
because Global Career Services is a head-hunting firm that 
specializes in recruiting nurses for jobs in other countries. They 
look for nurses who want to work elsewhere. They look for 
nurses who are unhappy in their current situation. And guess 
what, Mr. Premier, they struck gold right here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Global Career Services have told us they have taken on up to a 
hundred nurses as clients — just from Saskatchewan. You don’t 
have to believe us and you don’t have to believe the nurses, but 
you better believe this company. Nurses are voting with their 



April 23, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 731 

feet, Mr. Premier. Nurses are taking you up on your take it or 
leave it offer, and they are leaving. 
 
Mr. Premier, will you admit that this company’s success of 
recruiting almost a hundred nurses from Saskatchewan is an 
indictment of the complete failure in managing health care in 
this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I am advised by the 
ministers of Health — and I said this to the House yesterday — 
that during the strike, the Regina District Health Board actually 
hired nurses. And I want to tell you that of the nurses who are 
recruited, we’re finding more coming back. Of the ones that 
have been hired, the $9 million expended by the ministry of 
Health, we see them coming from all parts of Canada and the 
United States of America. 
 
I never listen to this show but I was told a report about a show 
— what’s his name on NTR (News Talk Radio), former 
Conservative MP? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Gormley. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Gormley. Gormley — the former 
Conservative MP who runs a hotline show — he gets a Florida 
recruiter, the kind that you’re talking about, on the hot . . . you 
get the transcript. He’s making out the big case about how bad 
it is in Saskatchewan. Can’t get the answers because the Florida 
recruiter says, higher cost of living, all kinds of difficulties in 
Florida. Then he’s asked one final question. So what’s your big 
sales pitch about getting nurses to Florida? He says, well 
frankly, the big sales pitch is beaches. That’s what he says. 
Gormley says, sorry, you’re off the air. 
 
You take a look at the facts and do not go into those kinds of 
areas as to what we’re doing. We have a retention and 
recruitment program that’s contained in the MOU. We’re 
addressing the issue of nurses. We understand their needs, and 
they can solve it by going back to the MOU. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
was surprised to hear the Premier say that the strike was a 
positive way of recruiting nurses. Mr. Speaker, today I received 
a letter from Cécile Jessie, a nurse in Regina with 10 years 
experience. She writes: 
 

I am a registered nurse working in Coronary Care in the 
Pasqua Hospital. I was born and raised in Saskatchewan. 
Most of my family live in Saskatchewan. 
 

Mr. Speaker, she goes on to say: 
 

On Friday, April 9, 1999, I have faxed my resumé to a 
nursing recruitment company called (Global Career 
Services) who deal in placements to Australia. 
 

Mr. Premier, what are you going to do today to keep this nurse 
from leaving this province? 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, individual nurses will 
make decisions, as in this case, their own decisions for a variety 
of reasons. I can tell you that we have people coming from 
California back to Saskatchewan for nursing. We have people 
from Newfoundland, as members opposite say. 
 
We need more nurses. We need to make sure that the workplace 
is work-friendly. The MOU has retention programs, recruitment 
programs, and a special amount of money dedicated specifically 
to answer that question that you ask in the general 
circumstance. 
 
But if you give me an isolated example, we’ll give you isolated 
examples of nurses coming back. That is not the way that it’s 
going to work. It’s not going to work by the Liberals out there 
saying nothing about any of these issues at all except spend, 
spend, spend, and defy the law. 
 
Tell me if you support your leader saying to defy the law, and 
tell me if you support your leader’s position that the nurses 
deserve 22 per cent. And if they do, where are they going to get 
the money from? Tell me that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, this nurse goes 
on to say, and I quote . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Now the Chair is having 
difficulty being able to hear the question being put. Order, 
order. The Chair asks for co-operation from members on both 
sides of the House and all the caucuses, all the caucuses. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This nurse goes 
on to say, and I quote: 
 

My two (colleagues), Beverlee Zieffle . . . who has five 
years’ experience, and Michell Janes, who has ten years’ 
experience, also sent their resumés (in). 
 

She goes on to say: 
 

. . . we are all accepting positions in Australia. 
 
Mr. Premier, we know you’re getting flooded with calls and letters 
from nurses the same as we are. This is no coincidence. You’ve 
created this problem, Mr. Premier. This is all on your shoulders. 
Don’t you have that infamous plan B to entice nurses to stay in 
this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I note and I guess I 
can’t get the answer from the member in his question or anywhere 
else. Maybe the journalists if they’re . . . (inaudible) . . . ask about 
whether or not they endorse, publicly outside the Chamber, the 
call to break the law by the leader and the 22 per cent. Somebody 
is going to have to answer for that question sooner or later. 
 
But more . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, good. You do it; 
you do it. 
Now here’s the specific answer to the question. We have in effect a 



732 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 1999 

worldwide shortage problem of nurses. If you take a look at the 
BBC (British Broadcasting Corporation) Web site for example, 
they are . . . Tony Blair in the United Kingdom is now seeking 
nurses in places like Philippines. It is a worldwide shortage; it’s a 
Canadian shortage. 
 
We are addressing the $7.4 million retention plan and recruitment 
plan. And nurses are coming back; that is the fact. We need more. 
We need to improve the workplace. We’re dedicated to improving 
the workplace. That’s why the MOU is so core and so central and 
forms the basis of the agreement. 
 
And nurses are coming back. And it’s not a question simply of 
money. It’s a question of safe streets; it’s a question of good 
schools; it’s a question of quality of life; it’s a question of a civil 
and decent society; and it’s a question of a government that is 
committed to the fundamental principles of medicare, which this 
government is. That’s why they’re coming back. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, 
let me continue to read from Cécile Jesse’s letter: 
 

Our husbands, also born and raised in Saskatchewan, and 
children are coming with us. Our registration fees, flights, 
housing and utilities are paid for. Their wages are more than 
ours. Why should we stay here for (2, 2 and 2)? 
 

Mr. Premier, as of this morning you are still bargaining through 
the media and saying the nurses want 22 per cent. And you’re 
prepared to give them the MOU, Bill 23, or the back of your 
hand. That’s what you’re prepared. 
 
Mr. Premier, won’t you stop stepping in it, and now step into it. 
Put some money on the table to be competitive with other 
provinces and countries so the nurses stay here, and cut out your 
political games through the media. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Now, now the real truth comes out. 
Now the truth comes out. This is not an issue on behalf of the 
Liberal Party about quality of health care; this is money for nurses, 
more money. 
 
In fact the letter which the hon. member sent over to me ends up 
by saying, “Why should we stay here for (2, 2, and 2) per cent?” 
Nowhere in this letter is there a question of the quality of health 
care. Forget about the letter. I don’t want to involve these people 
in it. They . . . (inaudible) . . . their decisions. But that’s a Liberal 
position. 
 
Money — 22 per cent. Defy the law. Tell us where you’re going 
to get that 22 per cent from. Tell us what you’re going to do with 
SEIU. Tell us what you’re going to do with CUPE. Tell us what 
you’re going to do with SGEU. 
 
Tell the people of Saskatchewan why the cat stole your tongue and 
you are not able to tell the federal . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order, order. Now the 
. . . Order, order. Order. Order. Order. The Chair . . . Order. The 
Chair asks . . . Order. I ask the hon. member from Wood River 
. . . Order, order. Order. Members on both sides of the House . . . 

 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, it’s . . . There he goes 
again. There he goes again. I’m not . . . I’ve given the answer. And 
I’m not going to be in a House, with the greatest of respect to Mr. 
Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. The Chair has 
just asked for co-operation on both sides of the House from all 
hon. members. The Chair has been having some difficulty being 
able to hear the Premier put his response to the question. And I 
ask for the respect for the House to allow all to . . . for all hon. 
members to allow the answer to be heard. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — It shouldn’t surprise me, Mr. 
Speaker, that member’s lawlessness in this House. His leader, his 
party, advocates lawlessness. I’m not therefore surprised that he 
tries to shout me down. 
 
I repeat again — we have $7.4 million committed in the MOU to 
quality of health care, retention and recruitment of nurses. That is 
a very positive step . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . There he goes 
again; yelling at me again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve given the answer. Obviously this person does 
not respect the rules of this House, nor does he respect the rules of 
the law of the land either. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Agricultural Income Disaster Assistance 
Payments to Farmers 

 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
my question’s for the Minister of Agriculture. Mr. Minister, once 
again I want to ask you about your failure to stand up for 
Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
According to parliamentary secretary to the federal Agriculture 
minister, farmers in Eastern Canada are doing very well under the 
AIDA (Agricultural Income Disaster Assistance) program. The 
average cheque being sent out — and listen to this, Mr. Minister 
— to Ontario farmers is $25,000. The average cheque being sent 
out to Prince Edward Island farmers — $38,000. And what’s the 
average cheque in Saskatchewan? Zero. 
 
Mr. Minister, nice program you negotiated. Oh, but I forgot — 
you didn’t go to the negotiations. You declared the farm crisis 
over and took a trip to Mexico. Mr. Minister, can you explain 
why farmers in Eastern Canada are getting huge payouts while 
Saskatchewan farmers are getting nothing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Well he’s resorting to the gutter, Mr. 
Speaker, and that’s fine. 
 
I want to say one thing about this program. We have called upon 
the federal government to administer this program so that we 
wouldn’t have to spend more money duplicating. Ontario decided 
to administer their own. But let’s do the math. 
 
Sixty-six thousand, five hundred farmers in Ontario times . . . he 
says 25,000 a farmer — that’s $1.7 billion. That’s more than all 
the federal government money and all the provinces’ money. And 
then to stand up . . . and then to add 38,000 in Prince Edward 
Island. 
 



April 23, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 733 

Mr. Speaker, I agree with the member, the program is not a good 
program, not the best program. I agree that the administration has 
not been a shining example of how to administer a program. We 
are putting pressure on the federal government. I called on the 
federal minister to extend the deadline. They’ve extended the 
deadline to July 30. And I’ll tell you, the best thing that he can do 
is encourage farmers to try to fill out the forms so that we can 
show the federal government what is wrong with this program. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 213 — The Health Districts 
Amendment Act, 1999 (Block Funding) 

 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill, No. 213, The Health Districts Amendment Act, 1999 (Block 
Funding). 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be read 
a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 216 — The Saskatchewan Health 
Ombudsman Act 

 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move first 
reading of a Bill, No. 216, The Saskatchewan Health 
Ombudsman Act. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be read 
a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 29 — The Health Information 
Protection Act 

 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill 29, The 
Health Information Protection Act now be introduced and read 
the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be read 
a second time at the next sitting. 
 

BILL WITHDRAWN 
 

Mr. Boyd: — Before orders of the day, by leave of the 
Assembly, that the order for a second reading of Bill 219, The 
Crown Corporations Disclosure Act, be discharged and that the 
said Bill be withdrawn. Mr. Speaker, I would ask for leave for that. 
Apparently there was a printing error in that piece of legislation. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
Bill No. 22 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Crofford that Bill No. 22 — 
The Special Payment (Dependent Spouses) 

Act be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this Bill 
that’s before the Assembly is a Bill that’s supposed to address some 
of the concerns that have been raised over the past number of 
years in regards to the disenfranchised widows of this province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think we all agree that this Bill is a long time 
coming. Since April 17, 1995 when discrimination on the grounds 
of marital status was enshrined by the Canadian Charter of Rights 
and Freedoms, there has definitely been an unfairness in our 
province with regards to those people who lost their spouses in 
work-related accidents and then subsequently remarried. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all members of this Assembly have certainly been 
contacted by individuals who are affected by the circumstances 
that this piece of legislation is attempting to address. And, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s hard not to have some compassion for the 
individuals. You see, every one has a different story. Every one has 
a different need. And there’s no doubt they have been significantly 
affected by the move to take away their pension benefits as a result 
of remarriage. 
 
And for individuals who have remarried since April 1985, they 
haven’t had that factor to deal with. And it certainly has been a lot 
. . . it made it a lot easier for them in moving ahead with their 
lives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we look at the legislation, there’s certainly 
some areas that we have some major concerns with. Mr. Speaker, 
we realize that it’s time the issue was dealt with; it’s time that the 
disenfranchised widows at least had an understanding of where 
they may be going or what they could expect from the 
government. It’s time that this Assembly dealt with the issue. 
 
And through the legislation the government is attempting to 
finally deal with the issue and sweep it under the rug or, if you 
will, Mr. Speaker, say that it’s now completed and ended and say 
that everyone’s received the best that they can. 
 
We understand and realize, Mr. Speaker, as I indicated earlier, 
that there are still many widows who are going to actually lose 
under this piece of legislation. 
 
While the legislation puts in place an $80,000 payout to the 
individuals who are affected as a result of the changes made in 
1985, the unfortunate part is $80,000 to one person may not be 
enough for the trauma and the hurt that they have experienced 
over the period of years; whereas to some of the other individuals 
$80,000 might be quite appropriate, maybe even a little more 
than would have really been necessary or even that the courts may 
have awarded, had the ability to go to the courts been allowed. 
 
But we cannot ignore the fact that this is a vast improvement over 
the position the government took with the disenfranchised 
widows under the former Minister of Labour where little progress 
was made. And so we appreciate the work that the current 
minister has been doing to advance this cause to her colleagues 
and the fact that this needs to be addressed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the different roles I’ve held as an opposition 
member — and certainly the positions of Labour and as well of 
Justice — I can remember the debates over the past number of 
years in this Assembly in regards to the former minister of Justice 
and raising this issue year in and year out, and the ongoing 



734 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 1999 

comments or the commitments by ministers of Justice through the 
years to address this issue. So we certainly feel that it’s — and 
we’re pleased to see — that the current Minister of Labour has 
finally decided it’s time to do something about the issue in 
bringing forward the legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since 1985, and in particular the last two or three 
years, this group of dedicated widows have fought hard to bring 
this to the attention of the provincial government. People like 
Rose Polsom have lobbied successive Labour ministers to correct 
the unfairness. 
 
And while this Bill may go some small way in addressing the 
unfairness, but to the disenfranchised widows group it doesn’t go 
far enough, and I’d like to bring their concerns. And as I indicate, 
that $80,000 figure is a major concern. I guess the concern that 
we have specifically with the Bill is the fact that the Bill limits the 
ability of widows to receive any compensation whatsoever if they 
go to the courts and the courts rule against them. 
 
My guess is that . . . in talking with a number of the widows, in 
following the examples or the circumstances that have taken place 
in British Columbia where they’ve gone to the courts, where the 
courts have ruled in their favour, I believe there is a fine legal 
argument for the widows to go to the courts to seek 
compensation. And it would seem, Mr. Speaker, that it would be 
only fair that individuals in a democratic society do have that 
opportunity. And you’d then rely on the courts as the last 
judgment process, if you will, or an opportunity to hear your 
concerns raised before them, you rely on their good judgment. 
And it seems to me, Mr. Speaker, through the years, that the 
courts have been more than fair. And that’s a fair way of 
addressing the concerns. And it’s a fair way, I believe of addressing 
the concerns that the widows have got to the floor of this 
Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while $80,000 in most people’s minds seems to be a 
large and a good sum of money, I would think if any logical 
person, even looking back to the fact of how many years some of 
these widows have been without a pension, regardless of how large 
that pension may be, if you were to add up the years that they 
would have been collecting the pension had the pension continued 
on, $80,000 is going to be a pittance for some of these individuals 
who have struggled. And in many cases we have had individuals 
who have struggled all their lives as a result of that change. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, why have they struggled? They’ve struggled 
because a very dear person to them was killed in an accident. And 
I believe just recently we recognized individuals hurt, injured, or 
died in the workplace. 
 
And we’re talking about individuals who have lost spouses who 
were the main wage earner in that home, in the workplace. And 
that spouse, when that spouse was taken from them, who had 
looked to and thought they had a fair and equitable pension plan 
and compensation though the Workers’ Compensation Board, 
and then found out when they remarried and tried to get their 
lives back together and situations where maybe even the income in 
the home wasn’t that large, that this spousal benefit would 
certainly be added to that income. And then all of a sudden it’s 
taken away from them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while we have a number of reservations, we continue 
to ask . . . and I think the widows have some fine points as well. 
We just noticed the other day in the Regina Leader-Post the 

Workers’ Compensation Board is handing out rebates to firms. 
Last year it had a larger than expected $52.4 million surplus in 
their accounts, so now they’re returning some of that back to 
employers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when you look at that, and when you see how the 
board has run over the past number of years, you see the surpluses 
they have created, one begins to wonder exactly what the role of 
the board is. 
 
I think it’s . . . I believe, Mr. Speaker, workers expect that the 
board will be there to meet and to protect them as a result of 
injury. And we recognize the fact that the business community 
pays for the operations of the boards. And so the fact that they’re 
paying some of the surplus back to the boards . . . or to the 
business community, their partners, is appropriate. There’s no 
reason they should be building a big surplus and just raising the 
surplus and keeping the rates high if indeed the number of injuries 
are down. I think the business community should certainly benefit 
from that. 
 
But on the other hand, we hope that while the refunds are going 
to the boards, that there aren’t more and more individual workers, 
injured workers who are suffering as a result of the board’s 
handling of some of the circumstances such as the disenfranchised 
widows. 
 
And that’s . . . well I guess one of the concerns we have originally 
is why is the government legislating something that . . . when they 
should be standing up for injured workers and for the spouses of 
the injured or in this case deceased workers. 
 
(1100) 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, while we have some reservations with this Bill, in 
particular we’re concerned that the government is using this 
method to further erode the rights of individuals by bringing in 
specifically this clause about access to the courts. And that’s an 
area that we certainly would like to and are looking forward to 
addressing with the minister when we get into Committee of the 
Whole. 
 
So while I’ve raised and my colleagues and other colleagues have 
raised some of the issues, raised some of the concerns, Mr. 
Speaker, we believe that through the years we have indeed tried to 
be objective. We’ve tried to be very truthful and honest. We’ve 
tried to listen very carefully to the disenfranchised widows as well 
as the board — Workers’ Comp — and we understand some of 
the complexities of this program and why this Bill is coming 
forward. 
 
However we feel that it would be more appropriate for us to be 
able to get down to some of the real questions and to raise those 
questions with the minister in Committee of the Whole so that we 
can begin to understand a little more clearly rather than just 
debating it in second readings. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, having said that, we would allow this Bill now to 
move to Committee of the Whole and address our significant 
concerns in committee. Thank you. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 



April 23, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 735 

 
Bill No. 21  The Coroners Act, 1999 

 
The Chair: — I would ask the minister to introduce his 
officials please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’m please to 
have with me today: Dr. John Nyssen, who is the chief coroner 
and pathologist at Royal University Hospital; Roger Pick, who is 
the administrator of coroner services in the Department of Justice; 
and Madeleine Robertson, who is Crown counsel of the legislative 
services of the Department of Justice. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Chair, and welcome to the Minister of 
Justice and his officials this afternoon. 
 
Mr. Minister, as was stated previously by myself I’m very really 
relieved and happy to know that this Act is coming into play, 
because as I’ve stated in the previous years we’ve had some major 
problems with deaths of children in this province and certainly 
not enough review or mechanisms in place to review the 
circumstances surrounding those deaths. There is no possible way 
we can know how to prevent deaths of especially our children if in 
fact we don’t have a comprehensive review and reporting program 
in place. 
 
In respect to this particular Bill, Mr. Minister, I note that part I, 
section 3, subparagraph (e) of the Act — I’ll just repeat that — 
part I, section 3, subparagraph (e) of the Act states that the 
coroner system: “publicizes, and maintains records of and the 
circumstances surrounding, causes of death.” 
 
In respect to that clause, I’m concerned not so much with the fact 
that there’s a statement here that will say that the coroner will 
publicize and maintain the records — that is really very good. 
What my concern is, is how in fact the coroner will access 
information surrounding the circumstances of a child’s death. 
Because it seems to me that the coroner will have to have 
information at hand in order to maintain a record in order to 
come to some determination of whether that death was necessary 
or how to classify that death. 
 
Mr. Minister, for instance caseworkers in this province, child 
protection workers, are stating already that they have caseloads 
which are much, much too heavy. If it’s up to the child protection 
workers or the social worker of any kind to maintain or to 
document circumstances about a child and their care, especially 
those that are in the care of Social Services, and in fact they don’t 
seem to have time right now to even follow up on the placement 
that they have done of children in foster homes, etc., if they don’t 
have time to follow up, it stands to reason that they won’t have 
time or they won’t be able or there won’t be any documentation 
of what is happening in that child’s life. 
 
So if it is not up to the child protection workers to document 
what kind of care that child is getting by the social worker doing 
repeated visits, who is it up to, and how will the coroner ever 
possibly get into their hands any information about what’s 
happening in those children’s lives? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think part of the answer to your 
question is part (a) of that same section 3 which talks about the 
investigations that are done by the coroners and the coroner’s 

office. And so there is a process of investigation, an interview of 
people to get the kind of information that you’re talking about. 
 
There’s also an obligation under section X where thereby the 
social workers are obliged to advise the coroner about these kinds 
of situations. And so I think that practically when there has been a 
death that requires an investigation, then the people within the 
coroner’s office do the investigation. 
 
And then a further part of that is, if there are circumstances which 
require an inquest, then you have the whole inquest process as 
well to gather the kind of information that you’re talking about. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I hear what you’re 
saying. My concern is that a proper investigation or even an 
inquest, by the time it comes to pass, would be incumbent upon 
having material information from someone that was monitoring 
the life of the child. If social workers right now, and they have told 
me that they are so worn thin because of the lack of numbers that 
they need to have to effect their job properly, how are they 
possibly . . . if they’re worn that thin that they’re not even doing 
follow-ups many of them, on children that are placed in — under 
the care of Social Services — in foster homes or whatever, how 
can they possibly document what’s happening? 
 
And how can there be a meaningful investigation or inquest if 
there’s no information to access to assist them in making a 
determination? How can they possibly do that without 
information coming in from those people that work or are 
supposed to be working closely with those children? They don’t 
have time to document. They don’t have time for follow-up visits. 
Where’s the information going to come from to have a 
meaningful inquest? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I think the 
member’s question is based on some sense that there isn’t a 
concern within the Department of Social Services about incidents 
that happen where a child dies. 
 
I think what we know is that in the Quill report there were many 
recommendations which have been implemented and others that 
are being worked through to try to deal with some of the concerns 
around how you look at some of these cases. 
 
One of the advantages of this new Coroners Act, and the whole 
coroners’ process, is that it does allow for the investigation of 
deaths of children — and others as well obviously — but 
specifically in this area of children. It does provide information 
that is part of some statistical record which can be analyzed. It also 
does investigate specific deaths and the circumstances. And 
ultimately if there’s an inquest — which often there is when a 
child dies — there are recommendations that come from the jury 
in the inquest, and those things can then be used to address what 
may have been a problem in that particular circumstance to help 
us create a better system. 
 
But I think what I would say very clearly is that I don’t think 
either one of us would want to say that social workers aren’t 
concerned when a child died. I think that they work to prevent 
that in every situation that they can. And that what we need to do 
is help them further identify the problems or areas where there’s 
concern. 
 
And so, so that’s what this process is all about. 
 



736 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 1999 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, the 
recommendations in the Quill report are good recommendations 
— absolutely. The intent of child protection workers and social 
workers throughout the province, the intent is admirable. The 
lack of numbers in those areas of social workers and child 
protection workers, the lack of numbers to do the job efficiently 
and effectively with high morale — those numbers are lacking. 
If those numbers are not in place there’s no way, I don’t 
believe, that the recommendations can be followed through in a 
very effective and meaningful manner. 
 
So I guess what this is coming to is that I see that there’s a 
process put in place but I don’t see that we have got the avenues 
out there to make sure that the process can effectively work. We 
do not have the workers in place and we need to have that. 
 
We have to have reporting mechanisms coming from day one 
when a child is placed and those reporting mechanisms would 
come from child protection workers that have to follow up. And 
in order for that to happen, we have to have workers in place to 
do it. Because if they are . . . if the numbers are insufficient, our 
workers’ numbers are insufficient and they feel like they are 
strained, there is not a possibility that they can possibly even 
get to those homes for follow-up, and they wouldn’t be 
reporting on it. 
 
So in the event that a child died in one of those foster homes, it 
seems to me that here we are with a gap trying to determine 
what the circumstances were surrounding that child’s death. 
We’d have a big gap, and to do a proper investigation would 
seem almost minimal to me. 
 
Mr. Minister, I just wanted to ask you another question 
surrounding the publicizing and maintaining of records. Who 
would have access to those records, and is this determined by 
the coroner? Who is able to get access to those records? 
 
(1115) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I’ll answer your question. First the family 
always has access to that and the Chief Coroner. It’s determined 
by the Chief Coroner. That’s who has access to these records. 
 
But I’d like to correct a couple of comments that you’ve made 
previously about the Department of Social Services and social 
workers. In response to some of the recommendations in the 
Quill report, 50 more staff were hired in the child protection 
area and the caseloads are coming down as they work in that 
area. 
I think the member also knows that more money has gone to the 
child’s advocate so that they can have a process of examining 
children’s deaths and so that this work is continuing. 
 
But I would suggest, Mr. Chair, that the questions in that area 
may be better held for the estimates for the Department of 
Social Services because I think that’s what it’s for. But I also 
understand your concern and how it relates to this. 
 
But practically I think what we should see here is that this Act 
and the procedures set out in this Act is another part of making 
sure that we can identify — if a child unfortunately does die — 
why that happens and how can we prevent it from happening 
again. But it doesn’t in any way diminish the necessity of also 

doing all the other things that we do to protect our children. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I won’t go 
on at length about this Bill any further because I recognize that, 
you know, everything is set out in this Bill to meaningfully 
effect ensuring that children’s’ deaths are prevented in the 
future and that there is a process whereby the coroner can 
investigate. 
 
But my concern is still the same. We need to make sure that 
there is enough information for the coroner to do a good 
assessment on. We need to make sure that at ground level we 
have child protection workers in place that will in fact 
document the ongoing care of a child in a foster home or 
otherwise, and I don’t believe that we have enough child 
protection workers in at this time. 
 
I have received — like I’ve mentioned to you before — a call 
from child protection workers that are certainly of the belief that 
of the 50 child protection workers that you added, many of 
those went into the young offender system. And I know that 
you’ve stated in this House that that is simply not true, but child 
protection workers are out there in the field and they seem to 
have to a different understanding of that. 
 
So I would just fully recommend to the minister that we make 
sure that we have the people at ground level, out there in the 
field, the numbers of people that we need so that proper 
reporting can be done on a continual basis. 
 
I thank you, Mr. Minister, and I thank your officials. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 71 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’m very pleased to 
make that recommendation but first I would like to make a 
special point of thanking the officials who are here but also 
others who work with them, as well as the whole of 
Saskatchewan who’s participated in the consultation around the 
changes to this Act over the past couple of years. I think we all 
are pleased that this can proceed and provide new rules as we 
go into the next century. 
 
And with that I would move that we report this Bill without 
amendment. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

Bill No. 5 — The Municipal Hail Insurance 
Amendment Act, 1999 

 
The Chair: — I would ask the minister to introduce his 
officials please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I am pleased to 
have with me Brent Prenevost from Department of Justice, legal 
services; and also Mr. Jim Hall who is the Superintendent of 
Insurance. And we’re ready for questions on this Bill. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker; and I just 



April 23, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 737 

want to welcome your officials here this morning, Mr. Minister. 
Maybe to start with, Mr. Minister, could you kind of give us 
overview of what you are trying to accomplish with the 
amendments in the . . . that you came out with. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — This is quite a simple Bill. These were 
changes identified by Municipal Hail Insurance — the 
organization itself — and they’re fairly technical and simple 
that modernized the Bill and actually sort of raised some of the 
amounts that are required for the reserves and things like that. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, so I guess what 
you’re saying is the municipal hail association actually had 
input and took part in these changes that you have made here? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think the simplest way to say that is that 
it was a specific request from them that we do this. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Minister, I guess if I’m always been 
cautious when I hear of things going into regulations rather than 
being up front. And if I understand, what you’re changing here 
is the amount that can be invested by the association with 
two-thirds vote of the members. It is actually being removed 
from the legislation and put into regulations. Why is this 
happening? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The answer to that relates to the fact that 
as hail companies expand — they’re in the insurance business 
— they write more and more insurance, then the reserves that 
they have to meet the work that they’re doing have to increase. 
And what’s happening I guess is that some of these businesses 
are doing quite well and so they’re expanding their book faster 
than we can change the legislation, and so if we have it in the 
regulations and they have a big jump in one year, well we can 
move that up so that they’re in compliance with rules around 
insurance. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and that’s what I 
thought probably we were doing here. I guess the only other 
question I would have then — and I think I very much agree 
with what you’re doing here — what amount do you feel might 
be put in then now to start off with in regulations? Do we have 
a number in mind at the present time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — This year the amount will increase from 2 
million to 3 million, which is the amount that goes into their 
subsidiary. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and that’s really 
all the questions we have on this Bill. I think we’re in agreeance 
with what you’re doing here and want to thank you for your 
answer. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you. I’d just like to thank Mr. Jim 
Hall, who’s the superintendent of insurance for his work in this 
area, and I’ll save my thanks for Mr. Prenevost until we’re 
finished with the next Bill. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 
Bill No. 20 — The Business Corporations 

Amendment Act, 1999 
 
The Chair: — One new official that I’ll ask the minister to 
introduce, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’m pleased to 
have with me Mr. Phil Flory, the director of the corporations 
branch, along with Mr. Brent Prenevost of legislative services. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 
welcome to the new official, Minister. 
 
Minister, would you briefly give us an overview of the changes 
that are being contemplated and the reason in this Bill, please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — This Bill and the changes are more in the 
nature of law reform, catching up with a few different things 
that have been identified by different lawyers or different 
people running corporations who say, this is a problem for us; 
can you fix it? And we had a few of those items and we decided 
we’d bring those forward this year because they were irritating 
people. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. And certainly we’re in 
favour of removing irritants except for the government. You 
understand that of course. 
 
Minister, I assume that in addition to consulting with lawyers 
specializing in matters relating to corporations, have you also 
consulted with corporations themselves? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Chair, I think the simple answer to 
that one is all of these problems have arisen from the 
corporations. It’s just that they use their lawyers to identify the 
problem and forward suggestions on how to correct it to the 
corporations branch. So I think practically every particular, 
everything that we’re dealing with here arises from the 
corporations. 
 
(1130) 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. Minister, has there 
been, in your review resulting from these irritants, has there 
been any consultation with neighbouring provinces? Do these 
kinds of suggested changes bring our corporation regulations 
more in line with other provinces, or is this pretty much a local 
set of issues? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The answer to that is yes, because we 
always do that. And when a particular problem arises, we look 
to other provinces or to the federal legislation to see if they 
have a solution. And so practically all of these changes have 
been vetted and compared to what happens in other provinces. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. Certainly the 
comments we’ve received from the corporation sector has been 
very supportive of the changes you make and we are pleased to 
support them as well. 
 



738 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 1999 

Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 13 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Just before I do 
that I’d like to thank Mr. Phil Flory and all of his staff in the 
corporations branch for the work that they do. 
 
And I also would like to thank the business community in 
Saskatchewan for bringing forward concerns that they have in a 
timely way so that we can correct them. Because that’s what we 
want this legislation to do is to be friendly to the people who 
use it to provide a better economy for this province. 
 
I’d also like to thank Mr. Brent Prenevost for his work in quite 
a number of areas around the various corporations legislation. 
 
And with that I would move that we report this Bill without 
amendment. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 2 — The Municipal Employees’ Pension 
Amendment Act, 1999 

 
The Chair: — I would ask the minister to introduce his 
officials, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. With me is Brian 
Smith, who is the director of the Public Employees Benefits 
Agency in the Department of Finance. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Welcome, 
Minister, and welcome, Mr. Smith. 
 
Minister, in reviewing Bill 2 and Bill 19, there seems to be a lot 
of similarities in terms of the reasons and rationale in these two 
Bills. So I don’t know if it’s totally acceptable but I will 
certainly accept answers that will overlap and, you know, may 
result in not having duplications. 
 
Can you briefly outline the major changes and the rationale for 
proposing them, Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes. Mainly the changes in both Bills are 
of a technical nature. They are designed to update the statutes to 
ensure that they are consistent with other statutes that operate in 
the same area. 
 
They’re designed in some cases to make housekeeping 
amendments to correct names where the wrong name appears in 
the Bill or the name has changed. 
 
They are designed to comply with the Income Tax Act of 
Canada. The reason being that generally speaking for a pension 
to be registered as a registered pension plan and to allow 
therefore the employees to deduct from their income tax the 
monies that are paid on their behalf for pension contributions 
out of their wages, you must be registered with the income tax 
people in Ottawa. 
 

And in order to remain registered, you must comply with the 
Income Tax Act and the provisions of your legislation must be 
consistent with the Income Tax Act. And generally speaking in 
both cases what we’re trying to do is update, do housekeeping 
amendments, make the legislation comply with the Income Tax 
Act so that there’s no danger that these plans will be 
deregistered. 
 
And this seems to be something that we do on an ongoing basis 
in the legislature. I suspect that this has been true for many 
years, that as the Income Tax Act changes or interpretations of 
it change, that we update the pension legislation on a regular 
basis to ensure that we’re in full compliance with the federal 
law and that our plans are, you know, in accordance with the 
Income Tax Act. So generally speaking that is the purpose of 
both of these Bills. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. That certainly is very 
much consistent with the information that we received back, 
and we certainly support making sure that our pensions and 
those technical details of the legislation in this province are in 
keeping with the federal Act. And so therefore we are pleased to 
support the amendments proposed in both of these pieces of 
legislation. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 11 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Before doing that 
I’d like to thank Mr. Smith for his assistance here today, and 
also the member opposite for his question and also co-operation 
in moving the Bill through the House and with respect to the 
next Bill. And with that I move that the Bill be reported without 
amendment. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 19 — The Superannuation 
(Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 1999 

 
Clauses 1 to 10 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, once again, Mr. Chair, I’d like to 
think Mr. Smith for his assistance, and I’d like to thank the 
members opposite for their co-operation. And with that I move 
that the Bill be reported without amendment. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 21  The Coroners Act, 1999 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 5 — The Municipal Hail Insurance 
Amendment Act, 1999 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 



April 23, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 739 

read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 20 — The Business Corporations 
Amendment Act, 1999 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 2 — The Municipal Employees’ Pension 
Amendment Act, 1999 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 19 — The Superannuation 
(Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 1999 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
(1145) 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Highways and Transportation 

Vote 16 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I will invite the minister to introduce 
her officials. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And I want to 
introduce right now my official that’s here with me is Barry 
Martin, the assistant deputy minister of operations division is on 
my left. And other officials are just joining me now. On my 
right is Brian King, the deputy minister of the department; just 
right behind me is Bernie Churko, to my right, senior executive 
director of policy and administration division; and George 
Stamatinos is just directly behind, as director of business 
service branch. 
 
Subvote (HI01) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. It’s certainly a 
welcome to the officials and to the minister, and the opportunity 
to debate issues surrounding Highways in the province of 
Saskatchewan the first time this spring of 1999. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don’t think it would be possible for the 
opposition just to agree to everything that we see out in front of 
us without raising some major concerns, and possibly 
identifying some roadblocks that we keep seeing appearing in 

front of us when it comes to highway, highway maintenance in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And madam minister is quite well aware of the contest we’ve 
had going for quite a while, and we’re still waiting for a 
response from the madam minister in regards to being a judge 
on the worst highway program in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And that’s a question we hope to have addressed 
before we end the debate in Highways estimates this year. 
 
Mr. Deputy Chair, when we look at highway construction and 
we look at highway maintenance, if we look at the Highway 
budget in the province of Saskatchewan . . . and while the 
madam minister is correct and the Premier is correct in talking 
about the fact that this province, as a result of its geography, has 
the largest ribbon of highways in all I believe in all of Canada, 
and certainly it’s an interesting challenge to maintain those 
highways, maintain a quality to the highways, and identifying 
the high throughput roads, and finding the dollars that are 
necessary. 
 
And I certainly can appreciate where officials are at times when 
they, when they have people calling the department and 
suggesting we’ve got a problem over here. We’ve got a road 
breaking up over here and it needs some desperate work, and 
we’ve got another road over here to maintain. 
 
And they look at their budget, and they probably had the 
minister, different ministers over the past number of years 
coming to them and saying we’ve got to cut some more dollars 
out of our budget to address this so-called long-term deficit 
program. 
 
But I think, Mr. Deputy Chair, when it comes to Saskatchewan, 
the public of Saskatchewan look at highways as being a very 
integral part of the ability to commute from point A to point B. 
And it’s unfortunate that over the period of years since the NDP 
have formed government we’ve actually seen a major reduction 
on highway spending and now the current minister is left with 
trying to bring back some of the spending to address the issues, 
very serious problems that have arisen. 
 
Madam Minister, I believe it was two years ago the then 
minister of Finance indicated that the province was going to 
inject $2.5 billion over 10 years into a highway reconstruction 
program in the province of Saskatchewan to address some very 
serious concerns that had arisen, and ongoing concerns 
including completion of the twinning of the No. 1. And we’ve 
seen in the past two or three years specifically some major 
accidents, tragedies that have resulted in areas of single lane 
traffic and also the Yellowhead. 
 
However, Madam Minister, what we see in your budget even 
this year, we are still well behind that commitment. In three 
years now I believe we’re something in the neighbourhood of 
80-some million dollars shortfall in that long-term projection. 
 
Madam Minister, I’m wondering if we could begin to say today 
. . . if you can indicate to us how you intend to achieve a $2.5 
billion injection into highway construction, maintenance, and 
repair in 10 years when you’re already almost a hundred million 
dollars behind in that projection. 
 



740 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 1999 

Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Thank you for those questions. And 
when we made the commitment two years ago on the $2.5 
billion, we made that commitment for over 10 years. And it’s 
one of these things that we’ve been steadily working towards. 
 
In our first budget after that year’s commitment was made, we 
added $20 million to our budget. And actually in that budget 
year we added an extra $10 million during the construction 
season. So there was $30 million added in that first year of our 
commitment. 
 
The next year, to the bottom line of the next year’s budget we 
again added an additional $20 million. Again last fall we were 
able to inject an additional $10 million into the budget, so we 
actually had added then $60 million over two years. In this 
year’s budget, we’ve again increased from last year’s budget 
line an additional $15 million. 
 
So each year, in a sustainable manner, we have been adding 
dollars to our provincial budget in Highways and 
Transportation. 
 
The commitment was over 10 years. There was never ever said 
that we would go up to 250 and keep it straight flat and freeze 
the spending on Highways spending for 10 years. What we’re 
doing is going up in a gradual, sustainable way of adding 
dollars into our Highways budget. We’re into three years so 
we’ve now added, I guess when we put all of those dollars 
together, it has been $85 million added into that budget since 
that commitment. 
 
And I think that’s an increase from two years ago of over 14 per 
cent. And actually since 1995 we recognized we needed more 
dollars in our budget, we’ve had an increase of over 40 per cent 
in our Highways budget. 
 
So when we put together a plan, which we also released two 
years ago which was more dollars into our budget but also good 
planning, we had a strategy that we are implementing in this 
province. We recognize we need more dollars in Highways 
spending and that’s what we are going to achieve. We’re going 
to live up to the $2.5 billion commitment. 
 
We are not behind. Actually if we took an average, if you took 
the 10 years and averaged it out and you’d get a line like this on 
a graph, we’re going right above what that average line would 
be if you’re adding 2.5, if you just took it in division, divided it 
by 10. 
 
So our commitment is to spend 2.5 billion; that’s the minimum 
of our commitment over the next 10 years. We’re certainly 
asking for the federal government to participate in funding in 
our transportation system and we will live up to our 
commitment. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Deputy Chair, thank you, Madam Minister. 
Madam Minister, the figures I have in front of us would be 
indicating to me that you’re still way behind. Well you’ve 
indicated you’ve injected more and as a result of some of the 
construction phase you’ve been able to inject more. 
 
In ’97-98 we have an expenditure of 212. That would be — if 
I’ve got my math correct — about 212 . . . 28, 38 million 

shortfall on the 250. And in ’98-99 — 218; another 32. We start 
adding up fairly quickly. And then of course this year. 
 
Now you say you’ve actually put more money in than what you 
had originally projected. And certainly I think when we look at 
that, Madam Minister, what we see there, if you put more 
money, and some of that has come as a result of if it happened 
to be a good construction year you were able to then take 
advantage of the construction year and then add a few more 
dollars. 
 
However, you have a long ways to go. And while you can say 
yes, it’s a long-term average, just by throwing a little more 
every year as you get into the construction phases, I think 
you’re going to have a difficult time achieving that 2.5 billion. 
 
I think, Madam Minister, you have to look at the long term and 
say, this is exactly where we’re going to be, and make that 
commitment rather than looking at a construction year and 
saying, well we’ll do an extra two miles on this project because 
the weather’s holding out and we’ve got some money we’ve 
found in the . . . we’ve gone to the Finance minister who said, 
we found a few more dollars for you to work with. 
 
(1200) 
 
So when it comes to construction, Madam Minister, we see a 
few miles here and a few miles there. The public in general who 
are having to travel these roads really are asking themselves, 
what are we going to see at the end of the day? Is it achievable? 
Right now we have to just believe the fact that you’re telling us, 
yes it is achievable, and I guess your actions are going to be 
speaking . . . your actions are going to be what the public are 
going to be judging by. 
 
So, Madam Minister, I think you need to begin to project even 
further, higher. You need to begin to look at projects and adding 
actual construction before the fact rather than after the fact. 
 
And I think one of the problems we have here too is contractors 
endeavouring . . . A number of years ago, when the contractors 
. . . I believe when you announced the 2.5 billion commitment, 
contractors had looked at expanding and in fact bringing more 
equipment or adding more equipment to their operations so that 
they could . . . expecting that there’d be more highway 
construction really entered into, and a commitment to more 
highway construction before the fact rather than after the fact. 
 
And when you say you added an extra 14 million or you added 
an extra 10 million in the budget year, it’s difficult for 
contractors all of a sudden to be there. I think most contractors 
would like to see the contracts being let in the beginning of the 
year and know where they are, and then they can bid on projects 
and see where they’re going to be. 
 
So the concern we have and the concern the public has is, how 
are you going to really achieve this? When are you going to 
begin to start sitting down and realistically projecting ahead 
rather than adding monies after the fact — you said we were 
able to do this, and as a result of whether it’s the construction 
you were able to add an extra 10 million. That’s how we’re 
achieving our goals. 
 



April 23, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 741 

I think you need to really set out a long-term goal, and I think, 
Madam Minister, that’s one of the issues the auditor has talking 
about for a long time, too. Not just saying 10 years from now 
we will have achieved this, but saying, this is what you 
indicated three years ago, this is what we intend to achieve, and 
then projecting it and here’s where we’re going. We need to see 
some kind of a line that says exactly where we plan on being 
two years from now. 
 
Madam Minister, that’s what the public are looking for, and 
what is your commitment? Where are we going to be in next 
year’s budget? I believe this year’s budget you’ve indicated 
you’ve increased from 218 to roughly 234 — that’s what you 
plan on spending. Where do you plan on being tomorrow? 
Where do you plan on being two years from now if you still are 
in the position of being able to give directions? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Well thank you. It’s very interesting I 
think on this question because again we have put out a plan. It 
is a 10-year plan. We’ve made a commitment on dollars, and 
we will also put the plan together on how we think that we need 
to develop a good transportation system in the province with the 
planning issues on area planning and all these other areas too. 
 
Now when we talk again about the commitment, and if we’re 
living up to it like I had said before . . . And actually we 
actually shared a graph, and we do with people, showing how 
the graph would look if you just had constant increases, and the 
green line on that graph just goes up. And where we are right 
now is above that green line. Because if you took the 2.5 
billion, divided it by 10 and just did each year that incremental 
increase, if we want to talk about the incremental increases we 
are actually above the $2.5 billion commitment right now in our 
commitment. 
 
When you commit 2.5 billion, knowing that you’re a business 
person and a farmer and so on, in your business you make 
projections for the 10 year and you increase your budget 
accordingly to meet that commitment. 
 
So a commitment of 2.5 billion does not mean in the first year 
you hit 250 million and stay flat for the next 10 years. Our 
commitment will continue to increase the budget to Highways 
and Transportation, and if you do it over a period of time you’ll 
end up at a higher level to get that average at the end of 10 
years a higher level than $250 million per year. We’ll end up at 
a level maybe at 260, 270, 280 depending how big those 
increments are each year. 
 
So I think it’s again, it’s sustainable type of growth that we 
have to put into our Highways and Transportation budget which 
is part of our whole balanced budget approach. And we’re 
working very closely when you say with the road builders, with 
our department, to maintain the best possible transportation 
system that we can. 
 
Now if you’re saying during a year in which we have an 
extremely good fall and so on that the road builders aren’t really 
pleased to have those extra dollars go into our budget in which 
they can continue projects or plan projects and so on, I think 
that they have been extremely pleased that we’ve been able to at 
times being able to add those extra injections of $10 million in 
the previous two years to continue work on our transportation 

system. We are working closely with the road builders as we 
work closely with the department to provide the best 
transportation system we can in this province. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Deputy Chair, thank you, Madam Minister. 
Madam Minister, I didn’t say the road builders don’t appreciate 
the fact that they may be able to continue construction if indeed 
the conditions are right, and to see the funding there. So I just 
want to make that correction. 
 
Madam Minister, as well, you’re talking about a graph. I 
wonder if it would be possible for us to get a copy of that graph 
so we can . . . We’re trying to figure out how in the world you 
can be above 250 when your figures are still well below the 
$250,000. In fact I can see why you’re rising a little bit because 
you dropped it to such a low, that the graph obviously had to 
have a major dip in there and therefore there should be an 
increase in there. But when we look at the numbers in front of 
us, nothing is even close to $250 million yet. And I’m not 
exactly sure where your budget is, where your graph is showing 
you about how you can be above it. 
 
Madam Minister, we would be pleased if you could send us a 
copy of the graph that you’re indicating to us that you have in 
front of you so we can get an idea of exactly where you’re 
going and how you are arriving at the . . . or how you are 
making the comments you’re making, that you’re bringing 
forward, and suggesting that you’re well ahead of that budget 
projection. So if it’s possible we’d be pleased to have a copy of 
that graph sent to us. 
 
Madam Minister, there are a number of issues in regards to the 
department that we would like to raise as well. There are a 
number of issues, some specific issues, that we would like to 
raise in regards to highway maintenance and repair. 
 
I know my colleagues have some questions, and I would like to 
give them an opportunity to bring some direct questions to 
some issues that they have in their area. And so at this time I am 
going to take my place and give the member from Saltcoats the 
opportunity to respond and to raise some direct concerns after 
the minister responds, if she wishes, to the questions and 
concerns I’ve raised. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — There’s one quick response that I would 
get you. I’ll get a copy of this graph. The graph I’m talking 
about is a graph that would show constant growth from the 
budget level that we would have determined when we made our 
commitment for 2.5 billion and how that would go if you 
divided it by 10, each year if you went on an incremental 
constant growth, how you’d reach 2.5 billion. So the lines on 
that graph go up at a steady increase. 
 
Right now because we’ve added above what that constant 
growth would be, we actually would be ahead of the dollars put 
in. We’re not talking about a graph that would add 250 million 
the first year and go flat. That’s what you have been saying is 
that’s how you can get a 10-year commitment of 2.5 billion. But 
that’s not the case. I mean in most cases the 2.5 billion, you add 
it up over the 10 years, see if you’ve spent the $2.5 billion on 
your transportation system, and that would be the constant 
growth that you would need in your budget to achieve that. So I 
know that these math things are a little difficult over there, but I 



742 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 1999 

will give you a copy of the graph to show how we can achieve 
that. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair, and 
welcome to your officials this morning, Madam Minister. And 
also as the member from Moosomin has said, not yet, Minister, 
but very shortly will be. We have a number of concerns in each 
of our constituencies I believe in this province, but the highway 
problem that we have out there is all over this province. 
Everywhere we turn. 
 
I happened to be on a highway the other day, Madam Minister, 
that I’d been on about five years ago. I believe it was from 
Raymore west, I don’t even know the number of the highway. 
And the one thing that intrigued me about that highway is that 
every so far I went it said, broken pieces of pavement, 3 
kilometres. You’d go 3 kilometres and then you’d get another 
sign would say, pavement broken next 6 kilometres. 
 
Madam Minister, that highway was in that condition six years 
ago and it’s actually even worse than it was at that point. So I 
don’t think we’re gaining on our highway system; in fact we’re 
losing. 
 
Madam Minister, in my constituency along the Manitoba border 
I have a number of concerns — 8 and 80. I guess the first one 
I’d like to ask you about is the highway from Spy Hill to 
Langenburg. That highway is actually unsafe to drive on at any 
speed at all. And I was wondering if there’s any chance that 
we’re going to get any work done this year or possibly in the 
near future on that highway. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Okay, thank you. I hope I’ve got the 
right section here. Actually I was out and had met with people 
in that area about some of the roads in that area. I had a meeting 
at MacNutt. 
 
Now from Spy Hill to Junction 22 west, that’s the paved 
surface, now what we’ve got here is in pretty good condition 
but it does need . . . it’s going to have . . . some major spot 
improvements in 1998 were done and there will be overall 
again some more strengthening work to be done this year. 
 
Langenburg to the Junction 10 is 44 kilometres of gravel 
surface. And again some of that is getting some spot 
regravelling and that is . . . part of that whole section in there 
too under area planning has been one of the highways and one 
of the routes that have been discussed. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. And yes 
I realize that you were out in our area and talking about roads, 
and that brings up another concern that I was going to get to 
later but I might as well bring it up now. 
 
Madam Minister, I understand that your department is talking to 
the RM (rural municipality) of Churchbridge and coming to an 
agreement with the RM of Churchbridge to pay X number of 
dollars to have them take over this highway for the summer. 
And I believe that’s the one north, Langenburg north, the one 
you were talking about, the gravel surface. I just wonder if you 
could give me a quick explanation of what point you’ve got to 
with the RM of Churchbridge, because I have some very grave 
concerns of what I see happening here. 

 
(1215) 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Okay. Actually I had again the 
opportunity to meet with the RM of Churchbridge at SARM 
(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) on that. 
And I think again we’re still in discussions with them, and 
we’re certainly just willing to work with the RM to do what 
they feel is in the best interest for the roads in that area. So at 
this point in time we’re still in discussion and we’re doing the 
maintenance work on that road. 
 
Now you also mentioned earlier I think, Highway No. 15 from 
Raymore to Junction No. 20, and that highway is again one of 
the thin-surfaced highways. But that is a highway that we’re 
doing some major work on this year and it’s under the CAIP 
(Canada/Saskatchewan Agri-Infrastructure Program) program. 
There will be upgrading to a structural pavement is planned for 
13 kilometres from Raymore to Semans, and that’s a total of 
$2.6 million is going to be spent on that piece. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I’m glad to 
hear that and I’m sure the people that live in the Raymore area 
will be ecstatic, because I know that highway’s been in poor 
condition for a number of years. 
 
I’d like to go back to the gravel surfaced highway north of 
Langenburg, Madam Minister. I have a lot of concerns here 
with what I think I see happening. My concern is that I see 
father government passing the buck once again to the RMs. And 
I guess my next question would be, how many other RMs in the 
province are you in negotiations with to take over maybe even 
just the maintenance of these roads? 
 
But what I can see, this is the start of something down the road 
that may develop into something further where we may see 
your department handing full responsibility for these roads back 
over to the RMs. And I would caution RMs to be out there to be 
very cautious of what they see happening now and do not jump 
into these agreements because it sounds good right now. In five 
years from now, it may be fully their responsibility. 
 
So, Madam Minister, are there a number of other areas in the 
province that you’re also in negotiations with other than the RM 
of Churchbridge, even if it’s just for the sake of taking over the 
maintenance of highways such as this at this point? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — In response to that answer, I think again 
when we’ve talked about good planning and working with 
municipalities, that’s what it is about. And actually the 
department has told me also that over a number of years, we’ve 
had a number of these kinds of agreements way in the past that 
have worked very successfully. 
 
But I think what is here is talking about partnerships. And 
sometimes there’s various different ways in which we can work 
with RMs and we know the kinds of changes that are happening 
in transportation. And sometimes it’s to their best benefit that 
they do some of the maintenance and we do the funding for 
that, or we work out different types of agreements right across 
the province. In northern Saskatchewan, we’ve looked at 
different kinds of partnerships there also for the maintenance of 
our road system. 



April 23, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 743 

 
And so again I don’t think it’s any kind of plan that we’re trying 
to off-load. What we’re trying to do is actually work together to 
make sure that we can build a system between RMs, provincial 
highways, that meets the new changes, some of the challenges 
that we’re facing, especially in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Madam Minister, but 
forgive me if I’m somewhat suspicious. Because I’ve been 
involved in RMs and I’ve saw the downloading that’s came in 
the last number of years under your government. And a number 
of . . . many RMs are down under 50 per cent of the funding 
they were at before. And I’d hate to see this continue in a way 
by dumping the responsibility for certain highways out there 
back to the RMs. 
 
The highway in question, Madam Minister, from Langenburg 
north, is there anything in your plans — in your five-year plan, 
whatever it is — to hard-surface or pave that highway? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — At this point in time there isn’t any plan 
to put a hard surface on that highway. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, another highway that keeps coming up . . . and 
actually last year your department did repair I believe about half 
of it, from the Wroxton corner at No. 10 Highway north 
towards Kamsack. And I commend you for that. That road was 
in terrible shape. 
 
I’m wondering, is the other half of that highway in the plans to 
be repaired? Because the other half of that highway, really, in 
my estimation — I travel it quite often because that’s part of my 
constituency — the safety factor comes up, especially after a 
rain, Madam Minister. And you may have saw this happen in 
other areas, where the highway is dished out in spots. 
 
That fills up with rain . . . or with water after it rains. And you 
get on there and it’s just like your vehicle planes on it, and all of 
a sudden you’re not sure of where you’re going. Even in the 
wintertime when it’s storming and that, that road is very 
dangerous. 
 
So I commend you for fixing the first half of that road to the 
Togo corner. Is the other half of that road on the slate to be 
fixed in the near future? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — On the rest of that piece of highway, 
there’d just be the regular kind of preservation and maintenance 
work. There’s not major improvements scheduled for this year. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — That’s what I understood, Madam Minister. 
And I guess my other question then would be, my next 
question, is it on the program for the next . . . do you have a 
program or it could be on for the next five years? 
 
The part that you had fixed, to me is just a vast improvement. 
The only concern I might have is it looks to me on the part that 
you’ve repaired, it looks like about 3:1 slopes, and I have a bit 
of concern on how steep the ditches are in some of those areas. 
But having said that, it’s a vast improvement over what we had 
before. 
 

What we’ve done is fixed half of the problem now. But it goes 
to the old saying that, you know, the weakest link in the chain is 
the one that breaks first. And I guess because half of it’s still in 
bad condition, a lot of people are avoiding that highway. And 
there’s a lot of traffic on that highway, as I’m sure your 
department is well aware of. 
 
So is that, you know, in your five-year plan, your 10-year plan? 
Do you have a plan to put that back . . . to fix the other half of 
that highway? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — On this particular highway that you’ve 
identified, as I said, it’s not in this year’s budget to be doing a 
major improvement there. But it’s certainly one that would be 
considered in a five-year plan or in a five-year time period. 
 
Now all of those aren’t identified and we have to . . . we usually 
look at a two-year projection somewhat on major 
improvements. Again it depends a bit on budget level and we 
assess the system each year because sometimes there are other 
areas in the province or other highways that do come up that 
doing a benefit/cost kind of analysis in how we can determine 
those projects. 
 
But this time it’s not on the immediate future, but it certainly 
will be considered like you say, on a longer term, like a 
five-year. But again it depends on budget levels and how that 
will come out in comparison to a number of other highways in 
the province. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. And 
once again I commend you, your department, for what you’ve 
done on the first part of that highway. I would hope you would 
keep it in mind down the road that, you know, that highway is 
good for halfway up there, and then the other half is really, 
really in bad shape as we know others are. 
 
Madam Minister, the one other highway that I — and I get 
probably calls on all of them — but is 15 Highway from the 
junction of 9 to 16. And I’m sure you’ve had calls on this 
highway over the years. 
 
I realize this highway is a very thin membraned surface and it 
breaks up very easy. What is in the plans to repair that road? 
Because I believe, Madam Minister, what we see now out there 
. . . And actually that’s the way I go home every weekend, 
Madam Minister, so I’m very familiar with this road. It has 
gravel surface for 2 miles and then it’ll be hard surface for a 
mile or two and then back to gravel. And that alone is actually a 
hazard for the driving public out there. 
 
Is there anything in the works to repair this highway to any 
degree this year? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — On that piece of road, it is a very low 
volume road. It will receive the regular maintenance. I know 
last year it had some intensive preservation work done on it and 
this year what is scheduled is the kind of regular maintenance 
and maintaining the surfaces the best as we can. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Madam Minister, 
you just talked about low-volume road. Well I think there are 
many highways in this province that you will find low-volume 



744 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 1999 

compared to what they were before because of the fact that 
people have diverted from travelling on those highways as a 
result of the conditions of the highways. 
 
And a good example is right in our area. No 8 from Kipling east 
to No. 9 highway. The amount of traffic and heavy traffic going 
on the grid road that goes right by our community and by our 
farm, is unbelievable compared to what we’ve seen in the past 
number of years. 
 
Most of the semis that move through to the East take the grid 
road rather than going through on No. 48 highway. In fact last 
fall when the pipeline was constructed, they had a truck that 
actually as a result of the conditions of the highway, where a 
truck with pipe had come . . . had slowed down to stop for 
something, and it actually had slid off the road and turned over. 
From that time on all the traffic went down the grid road. 
 
And, Madam Minister, in that particular piece of highway, just 
recently there — and I think it’s called the southeast regional 
transport authority; I’m not quite positive on that — but a 
meeting in Carlyle, they were talking about highways, their 
importance, and grading these highways as to where they might 
be in regards to the highway construction. I guess the factor of 
the traffic flows, the type of traffic that would flow by them. 
That portion of Highway No. 48, Kipling east to No. 9 I believe 
wasn’t even down as a priority piece of highway. 
 
And a number of individual RMs specifically in the Wawota 
area, brought it to the attention of the member I believe. And 
I’m not sure who was there from the department, but there was 
debate down at Carlyle, and the reeve from the RM of Walpole 
had indicated, and reeve from the RM of Wawken were 
indicating how the problems on that highway, and the type of 
conditions the highway was in, and the fact that the ambulance 
from Wawota would be using that highway. 
 
And they were told, well the ambulance from Wawota actually 
has two other areas it could go. It could go south to Carlyle, up 
33 — that is actually out — or it could go north to Whitewood 
and then down the No. 1. 
 
Well, Madam Minister, if an ambulance is travelling from 
Wawota with an emergency situation, to Whitewood and across 
is definitely much, much further and much more out of the way. 
And it would seem to me that it would be more appropriate to 
look at upgrading, and not just upgrading, but constructing. 
Because I think over the past number of years, in the last three 
or four years in particular, there’s been some major breakouts. 
The Highway department’s been in and they’ve actually dug out 
fair sections of the road and filled them in, but that really hasn’t 
improved the situation. That highway is in need of major 
construction. I think I heard another member just a moment ago 
talking about that highway from Raymore indicating that it’s 
kind of in a bog. Well 48 faces that too, and it would seem to 
me that we need to upgrade the whole highway, reconstruct it, 
and put a good solid base under that highway rather than just 
continue to fix. We’ll be always digging out these holes trying 
to improve the condition of that highway and it might be better 
off in the long-run to finally say, let’s get with it and reconstruct 
this piece of highway, because we've got a good chunk of 
highway all the way from Kipling west, the 48 west right to the 
No. 1. It’s been upgraded back through the late ’70s and ’80s 

and maybe it’s time to complete that construction through to 
No. 9. 
 
So, Madam Minister, while I see some other areas of 
construction in my constituency, I would have to ask: where are 
we as far as No. 8 from No. 9 west through to the community of 
Kipling in regards to a long-term commitment to finally 
reconstruct that road and bring it into standard that would 
comply with what we have west of Kipling? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — There’s just a number of things here I 
want to touch on because you raised a lot of issues. 
 
First of all, I was at a meeting in Carlyle but I wasn’t at a 
meeting where some of those things that specifically you 
discussed. And I also have driven Highway No. 48 on the piece 
that you’re referring to there outside of Kipling to junction, I 
think Highway No. 9. 
 
And first of all, I mean a lot of these highways, these were the 
thin membrane surfaces and we will be again putting a fair 
amount of work into the maintenance and routine preservation 
on this highway. This is one, I think, that definitely is identified 
that will need some major upgrading and paving, probably in 
the fairly near future. It’s not scheduled for this year but it’s 
certainly one that we have been working on, seeing it in that 
area as a priority for the province, but also I think also for a 
priority for that area. 
 
But I want to comment on, when you talk about the traffic 
shifting off the roads because they're going to good roads, 
possibly because of the condition of the thin surfaced highways. 
I think there is a lot of factors here that we’ve got to consider. 
 
And we’re seeing with branch line abandonment, more 
consolidation on elevators, we’re seeing also a system change 
in rural Saskatchewan. The thin surfaced highways were not 
built for the heavier type of truck traffic so we’re not talking 
about a system that was in place that all of a sudden is getting 
less volume. Yes, it is getting more volumes because of the 
branch line changes. 
 
If we wanted to upgrade all of our secondary system in the 
province, all of the thin surfaced highways, all the secondary 
system in the province, we’re talking about probably a billion 
dollar expenditure in order to take primary weights. 
 
And so when I talk about good planning, that’s why we have to 
work with area planning, we have to work with municipalities 
so that all of the dollars that we’re spending are being spent in 
the right areas on the road system. And we are going to have to 
organize some of our truck haul routes and so on. 
 
Some of the ideas that are coming forward in local areas is that 
some of those routes may be on a different system. They can’t 
be on the thin-surface highway. They may go on a grid system. 
Municipalities are getting the impact of that. Then the 
Highways department can work with them and help offset that 
cost so that you keep a good thin-surfaced highway for the 
school buses, for the ambulances. 
 
(1230) 
 



April 23, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 745 

All of that is part of the kind of planning that we have to put in 
place. We are also in part of that planning trying to maintain 
more branch lines and short lines and some of those kinds of 
issues also, that we can keep some of that heavy volume and 
weight off of that road system. 
 
And so it’s a time in which the province is absolutely 
determined to put more dollars in at a provincial level, work 
closely with the municipalities so when we’re spending those 
dollars we’re spending them in the best ways possible. We’re 
calling on the federal government to put their dollars in also 
which we desperately need, both for the rural infrastructure and 
the impacts with the Crow benefit gone and the changes there, 
but also the impacts on our national system in which a national 
government should participate in. 
 
And so I think we’ve got to work together on all of these 
strategies. We’re putting a plan together and we’re going to 
meet those challenges. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Deputy Chair, thank you, Madam Minister. 
Madam Minister, I do not disagree with you that we know 
there’s a significant cost factor to bringing a number of our 
roads up into a condition that can handle the type of traffic that 
they will be experiencing. 
 
And certainly, Madam Minister, I think you would have to 
agree — as you indicated you had travelled that section 48 
highway — while we have patches that certainly have taken . . . 
removed the potholes or the breakdown of the highway, as a 
number of individuals who had come to a funeral recently 
travelling from Virden, Manitoba, they had come across. And I 
think, Madam Minister, if you’d followed 48 through and gone 
into Manitoba you would certainly notice there’s a significant 
improvement as soon as you hit the Manitoba border on their 
highway. But I know the comment that was made . . . even 
though we may have removed the breakout areas, just the 
waviness of the highway and the up and down, these individuals 
who had attended this funeral asked me if there was a better 
road back, back east rather than going back on 48. 
 
And I think that’s why it’s imperative, Madam Minister, and I 
hope I heard you right in saying that when you were at that 
meeting in Carlyle you heard a number of the concerns, you’ve 
been on that road, and that some specific action be taken in the 
very near future rather than just continuing to repair those . . . 
the breakout areas which had tended to be — I’m not exactly 
sure what the numbers were; you may have that but I’m not 
necessarily interested in just getting to that in the time being — 
the fact that we need to look at really doing something with that 
roadbed and I think that’s important. 
 
We also talked about some of the other highways in the area. I 
note in . . . south of Moosomin you’ve committed to 
construction to the Pipestone valley I believe. I’m not exactly 
sure on the number of kilometres that that will involve — 
maybe six, eight or ten, it’s in that area. 
 
And, Madam Minister, I guess the first question I would like to 
ask: what, to what grade would you be upgrading that highway 
or roadbed? I believe there’ll be construction on it. I’ve had 
some concerns in regards to them. And the reason I ask that 
because I’ve already had concerns from the people in the area. 

You’ve constructed south of the Pipestone down to Highway, 
Highway 48 on No. 8 right close to the terminal there, and some 
concerns that there’s already breakup on that new section of 
highway, which has just been . . . I believe last year just 
received a surfacing on it. 
 
And the concern is the type or the level of grade that you are . . . 
will be building there. And so, Madam Minister, I’d like to 
know exactly what level of grade, what the public can expect, 
and roughly what cost we’re looking at for that project. And 
whether or not the project’s already been let? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Okay on the piece then that will be 
going forward this year, it’s 9.5 kilometres. And it’s a value of 
about $1.8 million, a little bit over that actually. It might be 
closer to 1.9 million that’ll be spent. It will be a similar standard 
to what the other construction that was just done near Fairlight. 
It might be a wider construction near Moosomin because of the 
greater volumes in that area. 
 
But there’ll be major . . . like the regrading will be done, you 
know the sand and gravel, and then it will be a double seal coat 
put on top of that. So it will be brought up to a good standard. 
 
The point that you mentioned about some of the breakouts that 
you’re already seeing. That happens I guess quite often after 
new construction in the first year or two. You might find some 
spots that we’ll need to go back and do some strengthening. 
And so that’s one of the things that is fairly typical still of a 
new constructed highway. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Deputy Chair. Thank you, Madam Minister. 
Madam Minister, when we talk about the type of grade that will 
be going in, like the one that went in just at the 8 and 48 
junction and north, and then what will be going in just south of 
Moosomin. 
 
A number of years ago there was a grade that was — I believe it 
was around 1990, in the Gainsborough area, if I’m not 
mistaken, on No. 8 — there were a number, I believe around 26 
kilometres constructed. 
 
And I guess what I would like to ask of you, will the 
construction that is currently taking place on No. 8 be 
equivalent to the grade level in that previous construction — 8 
south, in the Gainsborough area? Was that a better grade level 
of construction at that time? And what was the cost at that time 
for that construction? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — We don’t have all that specific 
information here, but it is my understanding that it would be a 
similar type of construction, a similar standard at that. And we 
can get details on that previous work. But it is our 
understanding that it would be at a similar standard as what was 
done at Gainsborough. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Deputy Chair, thank you, Madam Minister. 
Madam Minister, what I would like of your department . . . 
because I’ve been handed some figures as well. And some of 
the figures I have — I’m not sure if we’ve got all the figures — 
and it appears that the construction is much higher today than it 
was. We would expect that over the period of years, it would 
be. But for the level of, and the grade, they just don’t quite add 



746 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 1999 

up. 
 
What I would like is the cost of even the construction that 
currently has taken place at 8 and 48 on that piece of highway; 
and all the figures with regards to the base, the type of surface, 
the total construction for that project as well as that No. 8 south 
to 26 kilometres back in the 1990s period. If you could get that 
for me please. 
 
A further question, Madam Minister, in regards to current 
construction. What is the actual cost — and I guess this would 
have to be based on the type of paved surface that you’re 
putting on. Some is kind of an oil, gravel base firmed up; some 
is a hot pavement structure. I wonder if you could give me a 
cost comparison of the difference for the construction of a base 
and like we’ll be seeing on No. 1, that level of pavement that 
will be going on that, per kilometre, as well as some of these 
thinner membrane or cold surface treatments, by kilometre. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Okay, I wasn’t sure if you just want the 
total cost or if you want it split down to grading and surfacing. 
But on a highway that would be like a national highway, like 
one of the ones that we’re twinning, their per kilometre would 
be — now this isn’t the twinned section, but one . . . like just 
doing like a double-lane on it — per kilometre would be 
$400,000 per kilometre. Grading would be around 170,000; the 
surfacing would be somewhere around $230,000. 
 
If we went back to like a secondary highway or one that’s a 
lower volume highway, we would be in the neighbourhood of 
between 250,000 to $270,000 per kilometre. That would be the 
cost there. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam Minister, 
earlier on you mentioned about the CAIP program. And if I 
understand that correctly, that’s federal funds that are coming to 
the province as a result of the Crow benefit being changed. 
How many dollars has . . . I guess first of all, how many dollars 
has the province received to date; and is there a yearly 
commitment for so many years? How many dollars do you 
expect to receive? And are all those monies going directly into 
highway construction or is some of that shared with municipal 
governments? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — The CAIP funding was funding that 
came back — we could call it federal funding, but it was really 
part of the producers’ payout — it’s the producers’ dollars 
coming back to the province to try to do the impacts, I guess, 
from what happened with the Crow, to help build on the road 
system. 
 
There was a commitment of about $84.6 million in total for the 
CAIP funding. This year we are down now to only $2.8 million 
being left for the province, and I think that . . . oh that’s for the 
provincial highways — the 2.8 million. 
 
Now the funding worked out I think to be about 
two-thirds/one-third of CAIP funding: two-thirds did get cost 
shared with municipalities; one-third could be used on the 
provincial system. And again when it was used on the 
provincial system, there was again cost sharing. Where we 
would use two-thirds of the federal funding, we’d have to put a 
third in for any projects that went on the provincial system. 

 
That was the same with the municipalities — they would get 
two-thirds funding from CAIP, one-third from . . . the 
municipalities would have to come up with. 
 
And then the decision-making process had both the federal 
government, provincial government, SARM, SUMA 
(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) involved on 
picking the projects that would be submitted to go to which 
municipalities would get the CAIP funding and which projects 
would go to the province. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Deputy Chair, Madam Minister, if I 
understand you correctly you’re saying that there was a 
commitment of 84.6 total under the CAIP program. Is that 
correct — 84.6? And right now there’s about $2.8 million left to 
come to the province — that’s correct? Okay. 
 
It would seem to me, Madam Minister, based on these numbers, 
that you didn’t do a very good job of negotiating with the 
federal government. In review of the number of kilometres of 
road, both municipal and provincial, that are going to be left 
bearing the weight of the Crow benefit as it was phased out and 
the fact that municipalities and certainly the province are left 
now having to upgrade a road system . . . and that’s I guess 
where we get into another area of debate in regards to short-line 
rail. 
 
So when I look at these numbers, and based on the comment of 
the cost of a kilometre of road construction, those numbers 
aren’t going to go very far. And I can appreciate some of the 
difficulties we’re facing. 
 
(1245) 
 
I realize we’re also running into time constraints as far as 
today’s debate as well, and I want to get a couple of other issues 
brought before us that have been brought to my attention so I 
don’t forget them down the road. 
 
One of them comes from the town of Ponteix. And a letter that 
was . . . I believe you received in your office, Madam Minister, 
in regards to signage and the concern that the community of 
Ponteix — the signage on highways — there is very little to 
really indicate to individuals when they’re travelling south of 
Moose Jaw where exactly Ponteix is. 
 
And I’m wondering what has been done so far, Madam 
Minister, to address the concerns that have been brought to the 
attention of your department by the mayor in that regard. 
 
It was a letter that was I believe sent to you. It was addressed 
March 31; it arrived in our office, a copy of it on April 6. And 
I’m wondering if your department could indicate exactly where 
we are, from the town of Ponteix, regarding signage. 
 
It says: 
 

The town feels that the request for some consideration of 
additional highway signage is fair and reasonable. In 
particular on Highway No. 4 between Swift Current and 
Cadillac Junction and again on Highway 2 south of Moose 
Jaw at the junctions of 43 and 13, other than on the 



April 23, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 747 

Highway 13 itself, there is virtually no signage indicating 
the town of Ponteix. 
 

I’m wondering, Madam Minister, where your department is, 
whether you’ve had a chance to review the request in this letter 
and what you have done to date. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — In response there was one thing I wanted 
to mention in the response back to the CAIP funding before too 
that we say those dollars are going back to municipalities 
two-thirds, one-third to the province. Also some of that funding 
has also been made available for some of the short-line 
initiative too. 
 
But one thing I wanted to say about the funding that you say we 
didn’t negotiate very well. Well it was one of those things here 
when we talk about the Crow benefit, is it’s interesting to look 
at the parties opposite because it seems to me we were one of 
the only parties . . . government that actually fought of course 
the changes in the Crow benefit. 
 
And I think one of the other points here is that the package that 
was put together from producers, the federal government 
decided to take some of those producer dollars and put it into 
this transportation package. 
 
Now we have called on . . . and actually there’s a letter going to 
Vanclief from the Government of Saskatchewan, but also with 
SARM and SUMA, that we would like to see an extension of 
CAIP, that more dollars should be going into it; it’s not 
adequate the dollars that have been put there. Certainly even 
though the review with Estey recommended that there should be 
more dollars going into our roads system, not only from 
provinces but they certainly mentioned that the national 
government, the federal government, should be involved in this. 
And we would concur that we should have more dollars in a 
CAIP-like fund in which you can get federal dollars coming. 
And we are working on that with the local municipalities at the 
federal level. 
 
The specific question that you wanted to mention about 
Ponteix, yes, I remember the letter just has come in. We’ve had 
actually some discussion with the community already on acting 
on some additional signage. The sign that they would like to see 
I think on the national level highway is one in which we’ve got 
a signing policy that it would not qualify for, but we are adding 
more signs for the community of Ponteix. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Deputy Chair, thank you, Madam Minister. 
Madam Minister, in regards to the CAIP program and short-line 
rail we’ll certainly have some further questions, but there’s 
another area I’d like to get into that’s been raised and brought to 
my attention regarding regulations and the Highway Traffic 
Board. I’m not sure if we can address that. 
 
And it comes specifically in regard to equipment dealers across 
the province of Saskatchewan. And as I understand it, some of 
the concerns they have, they’re not exactly sure what the 
regulations mean, the way they’re interpreting. At one of the 
dealers I talked to, he’s interpreting the regulations as to read 
he’s supposed to have a set of brakes every time he pulls a piece 
of equipment off his lot. 
 

When we talk about trailers — I can see if fifth wheel trailers or 
trailers of that nature — but if you’re pulling a trailer out to a 
farm that’s going to used on a farm site, his concern is that is he 
supposed to all of a sudden install a set of brakes on this trailer 
when he’s pulling it down the highway delivering it? Or the 
other concern — anything of a trailing mode such as your 
cultivation equipment or things like that, if you happen to be 
pulling it behind a truck delivering it, would he be falling 
outside the regulations and face fines by the Highway Traffic 
Board if indeed that’s what the regulations mean? 
 
There’s concerns regarding the length of trailers; there’s 
concerns regarding the brakes when you’re towing equipment 
down the road. 
 
There’s another issue that arises and that’s . . . and I believe in 
reading the regulations as well. A lot of equipment has 
slow-moving-vehicle signs already on the equipment, and if 
you’re towing it behind a truck there’s something in regards to 
the 35 or so kilometres. If you’re going faster than that you’re 
supposed to remove the slow moving vehicle . . . but have the 
vehicle emblem off of that piece of equipment, but as well have 
a clear identification of the equipment. 
 
And there’s a number of issues there that especially equipment 
dealers or people who happen to be delivering or just using for 
agricultural purposes are quite concerned that they may find 
themselves outside of the guidelines and have had Highway 
Traffic Board on their case in regards to this. And I think we 
need a clarification as to what the regulations are really saying, 
Madam Minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Okay, on this specific question on 
lengths, that is under our legislation and there is no . . . Any 
length, I guess, can go on municipal roads but we do have the 
length regulation within the highways . . . within a highways 
Act. And so that, that’s fairly clear. 
 
Now the other questions that you’re asking about brakes on 
these types of trailers and some of the . . . I think we need to get 
more specifics from you. That’s under the jurisdiction of SGI 
(Saskatchewan Government Insurance) and we would need to 
get back to you about those specific pieces on those trailers that 
you’re talking about. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Speaker: — Wishing all hon. members an enjoyable 
weekend in your constituencies and with your families. We 
look forward to seeing you on Monday afternoon at 1:30 
o’clock when this House will reconvene. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:54 p.m. 
 



 

 


