





























































Hansard: April 29, 1999


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 901 
 April 29, 1999 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a 
petition today to present on behalf of people of Saskatchewan. 
The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
abandon any plans to reduce acute care or close any more 
hospitals in rural or urban Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come mainly from the Arcola and 
Kisbey areas of southeast Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present on behalf of farmers in Saskatchewan. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
demand that the federal government work with 
Saskatchewan to put in place a farm aid package that 
provides real relief for those who need it and that the 
provincial government develop a long-term farm safety net 
program as it promised to do when it cancelled GRIP 
against the wishes of farmers. 
 

The communities involved in the petition, Mr. Speaker, are 
Marchwell and Langenburg. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to rise 
again today in this House to present a petition on behalf of the 
people of Saskatchewan and I’ll read the prayer. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call on federal and provincial 
governments to dedicate a greater portion of the fuel tax 
revenues toward road maintenance and construction so that 
Saskatchewan residents may have a safe highway system 
that meets their needs and that they deserve. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition has been signed by the good folks 
from Assiniboia, Glentworth, up into Central Butte, 
Riverhurst, all across the southwest, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
petitions on behalf of citizens that are concerned about the state 
of our highway system. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. 

Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call on federal and provincial 
governments to dedicate a significantly greater portion of 
fuel tax revenues toward road maintenance and 
construction so Saskatchewan residents may have a safe 
highway system that meets their needs. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Those who’ve signed these petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from 
all over the province. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the petitions presented at the last 
sitting have been reviewed and found to be in order. Pursuant to 
rule 12(7) these petitions are hereby received. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
Standing Committee on Estimates 

 
Deputy Clerk: — Mr. Whitmore, Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Estimates, presents the committee’s fourth report 
which is hereby tabled. 
 
Mr. Whitmore: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
move, seconded by the member for Melfort-Tisdale: 
 

That the fourth report of the Standing Committee on 
Estimates now be concurred in. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I would like to introduce to you a former member of 
this Assembly, a cabinet minister, a MLA (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly) from Melfort, a former mayor of 
Melfort, a wonderful person, and a very good friend, Carol 
Carson, who’s behind the bar. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you to the members of the Legislative Assembly, there’s a 
group of people, Mr. Speaker, sitting in the east gallery that I 
would like to introduce to you and they’re from Melville. 
 
Now you may be wondering why I’m introducing some people 
from Melville. It’s because the member from Melville is busy 
working on their behalf in Melville today and he couldn’t be 
here so he’s asked that I introduce them. 
 
What we have, Mr. Speaker, we have 43 grade 8 students from 
St. Henry’s School in Melville. They’re accompanied by a 



902 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1999 

teacher, Fulvia Breda, and I hope I’ve pronounced that right. 
Mr. Speaker, these students have travelled a long way to see the 
proceedings here today and I hope they’ll find it interesting. 
 
I understand that Mr. Osika has provided for them to have a 
drink and hopefully a lunch on his tab, Mr. Speaker. But I will 
say as well that Mr. Osika has . . . or the member for Melville, 
Mr. Speaker, has said that tomorrow or the next day he will be 
going to the school in Melville, if they will permit, to talk to 
these groups. And at that time, I think maybe it would be 
appropriate if the students would ask him to go for the 
milkshake, hamburger route then at a local establishment in 
Melville. So you can tell him I said that. 
 
I hope you enjoy your visit here today, and look forward to Mr. 
Osika, the member from Melville, visiting you in the next day 
or two. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Shooting at Taber High School 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, just one week ago and one day, 
members of this House stood to offer our prayers and 
sympathies to the people of Littleton, Colorado, over the 
horrific events that occurred in a high school in that community. 
 
Today, sadly, we must stand again to offer our thoughts and 
prayers to another community, only this time it is one that is 
much, much closer to home. Taber, Alberta is mourning the 
death of one of its youth in another high school shooting which 
also saw a second student seriously injured. 
 
This shooting has left our entire nation shaken and has every 
one of us asking what we can do to prevent this from happening 
in any other schools. This is a very difficult issue that comes 
with no easy solutions. However every one of us in this 
Assembly and every parent and teacher in this province knows 
that it is a question that must be dealt with. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the official opposition, I want to 
express our deepest sympathies to the family of Jason Lang and 
to all of the teachers and students of W.R. Myers High School 
in Taber, Alberta. May time help heal this community and let us 
truly pray that we will not be called upon to repeat statements 
of this nature ever again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — The government and all members of this 
Assembly express our sincere condolences and sympathy to the 
families, parents, students, school staff, and community of 
Taber, Alberta. This tragic incident tells us that no matter how 
much we would like to believe we are immune, no community 
can guarantee itself against a senseless act of violence. 
 
Preparing to face a senseless act is next to impossible, but we 
pledge to work together to do all we can to make our 
communities safe and to make our schools’ halls of learning 
models of societal decency. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

AgrEvo Canada to Develop Hardier Wheat 
 

Ms. Lorje: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, when the Allan Blakeney government announced the 
creation of Innovation Place in Saskatoon many years ago, the 
doubting Thomas’s of the day made all the expected noises 
about white elephants and government waste. Of course they 
were wrong then and they’re wrong now. 
 
We were given another example yesterday of how important 
Innovation Place and its residents have become to the economy 
and the innovative image of Saskatoon. AgrEvo Canada and the 
Economic Development minister announced funding for a 
research project to develop new methods of breeding hardier 
varieties of wheat. This research will be similar to earlier 
products which led to stronger varieties of corn, canola, and a 
number of other crops. 
 
This project is being assisted by the government’s strategic 
initiatives fund, to encourage the development of new 
technologies and research capacity. This is exactly what 
Innovation Place was designed to accommodate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, AgrEvo employs more than 60 people, has 
another 60 or so on contract, and hires 40 students for field 
work every summer. In one project we have high-tech research 
leading to a value-added product, promising greater income for 
farmers which is already providing valuable employment. I 
congratulate them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Pending Closure of Gravelbourg Elevator 
 

Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, Louis Stringer, a town 
councillor and member of the Gravelbourg-Hodgeville rail-line 
committee is among the many residents of rural Saskatchewan 
who are worried about elevators in their area. 
 
The Wheat Pool and Canadian Pacific have told him that the 
Gravelbourg Pool elevator may stay open. Producers and 
residents of the area would like to see a commitment in writing. 
But both companies so far have refused. 
 
Terminals are being constructed and other facilities are being 
expanded nearby. So Mr. Stringer fears for the future of 
Gravelbourg’s Pool elevator. In the event that the elevator 
closes, the people of Gravelbourg would like to know that 
they’d be given a chance to buy the elevator without conditions 
rather than see it bulldozed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, communities like Gravelbourg are asking for this 
government’s help to make keeping elevators a priority. The 
Liberal caucus has a plan to stop the bulldozing of elevators. 
We want to give them a chance to purchase them, and to assist 
them in this decision by providing financial assistance and help 
for feasibility studies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Liberals have a plan. It’s time the NDP (New 
Democratic Party) started planning to help communities like 
Gravelbourg dodge the bulldozer blade. Thank you. 



903 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1999 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

World Impact Team Builds House in Mexico 
 
Ms. Stanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I’d like to tell 
members an inspirational story about some youths from my 
constituency of Lloydminster. 
 
On March 31, 22 members of the Northern Lites Youth World 
Impact Team left Canada on a mission. That mission was to 
help the less fortunate in the small village of Puenta, Mexico, 
and the surrounding work camps. The team helped out by 
delivering food, clothing, toys, and personal items. 
 
But the most impressive accomplishment of the team was to 
build a home in just two days. It was built in the village for a 
family of four . . . I should say a family of six with four young 
children. 
 
The team returned April 11, tired but very proud of their work. 
They made many friends in Mexico but also saw the harsh 
reality of poverty. Many of the young people said they would 
gladly make the trip again to help more people. 
 
Members of the World Impact Team come from Turtleford, 
Saskatoon, Lloydminster, and even from Alberta and British 
Columbia. I’d like to congratulate the team on their successful 
mission and wish them luck on future endeavours. This is the 
youth of our province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

New School for Kennedy 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This morning 
my colleague from Moosomin and I were able to participate in a 
very pleasant occasion. Finally, the government has relented 
and provided some good news in my constituency. This 
morning the Broadview School Division, the local Langbank 
Kennedy school district, along with the Minister of Education 
announced plans to construct a new K to 12 school at Kennedy. 
 
This is an investment in the future of the youth in the area and a 
much appreciated investment. The children of the area as well 
as the entire community stand to benefit. Schools are important 
centres of community life and the new Langbank Kennedy 
school will help maintain a vigorous and thriving community in 
Kennedy. 
 
I and the member from Moosomin congratulate the people of 
Kennedy and district as well as the Broadview School District 
on an investment in their future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Battleford Resident Master Winemaker 
 
Ms. Murrell: — Mr. Speaker, the Battleford area is not widely 
known as a wine producing centre, but one local resident has 
spent the past 40 years producing exotic wines from his 
home-based wine cellar. If you can call more than 40 years of 
winemaking a hobby, then Joe Degenstien is the ultimate 
hobbyist. 

I’m pleased that my good friend, Joe, was recently featured in a 
full page article in the North Battleford Telegraph community 
newspaper. The article was entitled, “Turning water into wine.” 
 
The article states, in part, when Joe Degenstien made his first 
bottle of wine he never thought it would become a lifelong 
hobby. However, throughout the past 47 years the Battleford 
resident found himself teaching winemaking at Mistikwa 
College and winning many awards throughout the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Joe Degenstien turned 83 years of age this 
January. It has been more than 30 years since his health forced 
him to retire from his very successful farming operation south 
of Battleford. And in spite of having many serious health 
challenges over the past 30 years, Joe has remained an active 
member of his community. He served for many years on the 
Battleford town council and as a representative to the 
Yellowhead Highway association and on the regional health 
board. And Joe and his wife Irene also found the time to raise 
10 children. 
 
I’m sure Joe would agree with me in attributing his continuing 
good health to an occasional glass of fine wine and the 
competent professionals in our health care system. 
 
Congratulations Mr. Degenstien on your many 
accomplishments and best wishes for a successful winemaking 
for many years to come. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Aboriginal Careers Expo 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday my 
colleague, the member for Regina Qu’Appelle Valley, helped to 
launch the second annual Aboriginal Careers Expo here in 
Regina. This year’s expo, Mr. Speaker, is called “Planning 
Tomorrow’s Success Today.” This expo gives teens from grade 
7 to grade 12 the opportunity to get a taste of different career 
fields through various exhibits. 
 
Tourism, science, and the trades are some of the career choices 
on display. These are also areas, Mr. Speaker, of particular 
growth here in Saskatchewan. In fact, as we all know, tourism 
is the fastest growing industry here in the province. 
 
It is really a great time to be a young person in Saskatchewan 
choosing a career, and this career expo is unique because it has 
specific, it has a specific Aboriginal audience in mind 
highlighting Aboriginal heritage and cultural experiences. 
 
Some of the major sponsors include Tourism Saskatchewan, the 
Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations Aboriginal 
Workforce Participation Initiative, the File Hills Qu’Appelle 
Tribal Council, Human Resources Development Canada, and 
the Saskatchewan Indian Training Assessment Group. 
 
I’d like to congratulate everyone involved on their valiant effort 
to make the expo a success, and I’d also like to wish all 
participants the best of luck in choosing a career. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



904 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1999 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Planning for School Safety 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, my question is for the Minister of Education. 
 
Mr. Minister, everyone in Canada was shocked and saddened 
yesterday upon hearing the news of the tragic shooting at a high 
school in Taber, Alberta. Taber is a small prairie town not 
unlike Humboldt or Kindersley or Melfort. And just like they 
were doing in Taber yesterday, we all went home last night and 
hugged our children a little closer than we normally do. 
 
Across Canada, parents and teachers and students are 
wondering about how safe it will be at school today. The 
terrible tragedies at Littleton, Colorado and Taber force us to 
confront the reality that it could happen here too. 
 
Mr. Minister, what processes are in place in Saskatchewan 
schools to identify and assist emotionally troubled students who 
may be at risk of harming others in the school? And what steps 
are being taken to address the concerns of students, teachers, 
and parents who may feel that our schools are not safe? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
take the answer . . . or take the question on behalf of the 
Minister of Education. First of all our government, as we said 
earlier, wants to express sincere sympathy to the family and the 
parents and certainly to the students and staff in Taber. 
 
I think it’s a tragic fact, Mr. Speaker, that no community can 
guarantee absolute immunity to a tragedy like this. But we have 
been in discussion as recently even as this morning with the 
teacher’s federation and with the SSTA (Saskatchewan School 
Trustees Association) on this very issue. And they feel that we 
do have adequate measures in place right now, but there is 
always more that we can do. And we’re, on an ongoing basis, 
working with the teachers and with parents and students with 
respect to counselling, so forth. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Minister, as a former school principal and teacher, I understand 
the challenges that teachers face every day. Teachers are asked 
to do much more than just teach our children. In many cases, 
teachers also assume the role of coach, social worker, mentor, 
and even a counsellor. The reality is that teachers are on the 
front lines when it comes to dealing with the emotional and 
social challenges of their students. And while nothing can 
replace the love and support of parents, our schools do play a 
critical role in the development of our children. 
 
One way we can support this process is through the 
co-operative efforts of teachers, trustees, directors of education, 
and the parents to recognize troubled kids and then to assist and 
support them. No child should be falling through the cracks. 
 
Mr. Minister, would you support this kind of co-operative 
structure as a first step in helping at-risk kids and reassuring 
everyone that our schools are safe places to learn and work? 
 

Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First of all, I 
would say to the member that there is a lot of work that 
currently does take place. It certainly is our view that issues like 
this are not solely the responsibility of the schools, but in fact 
the entire community needs to deal with difficult issues like 
this. 
 
I would highlight for the member just a few of the programs 
that currently exist in schools. As an example, the health 
education, life transitions, and guidance courses are core 
curriculum teaches skills that help our students deal with 
conflict resolution, getting along with others, self-esteem, 
respect, peer pressure, anger management, gang behaviour, 
breaking cycles of violence, and problem solving. 
 
There’s much more that is taught in the schools. And certainly 
we need to compliment our teachers and our staff and the 
community for the work that they do in trying to prevent 
tragedies like this. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Neutrality of Judiciary 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Justice. Mr. Minister, one of the 
fundamental principles of our judicial system is the neutrality of 
judges. Could you explain how this principle is upheld, and 
specifically, do you think that it is appropriate for judges to 
attend conferences and criticize government policy? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I have stated 
before on a number of occasions in this session, we’re part of a 
democracy that includes the legislature, executive branch, and 
the judiciary. And when we work within that democracy, we all 
have roles that we are to play. Part of the democracy includes 
discussion between these various branches, and that continues 
in many different ways. 
 
But I think the key thing to remember is that we all have roles 
that we are to follow. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, recently 
Provincial Court Judge Mary Ellen Turpel-Lafond spoke at an 
FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations) conference. 
She said at that conference that Indian leaders are being unfairly 
blamed for accountability and management problems on 
reserves. 
 
Instead, she says, the fault lies with the federal government due 
to inadequate budgets and poor legislation. 
 
Mr. Minister, these are very political statements. Justice 
Turpel-Lafond is clearly taking a side in a very contentious 
issue. Mr. Minister, do you think these are appropriate 
comments to be made by a provincial judge. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — As I stated before, there are particular 
roles that we all have within a democracy, and part of that 
includes discussion. When the judiciary speak at conferences 
and other places, they end up commenting on various things 



905 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1999 

that they do. But we also know that they understand and respect 
their roles as judges and that they work together in dealing with 
these things, to deal with them on a national basis, on a 
provincial basis. I think that it’s important to recognize that in 
all of our roles that we have within a democracy, that we should 
follow and do those things which enhance the discussion within 
democracy, but do it within appropriate roles. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Minister, if a case involving the alleged 
mismanagement or misappropriation of Indian band funds came 
before Justice Turpel-Lafond, would she be able to deal with it 
in an impartial manner? She has clearly staked out a position on 
this issue by saying the fault lies with the federal government 
and not the band leaders. At the very least, the perception of 
neutrality has been compromised. And as you know, our justice 
system must not only be fair, it must seem . . . be seen to be fair. 
 
Mr. Minister, hasn’t Justice Turpel-Lafond compromised her 
neutrality? And what steps are you taking to deal with this 
matter? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, within our democracy we 
have ways of dealing with complaints about judges. Those 
complaints can be made by any citizen if those are concerns. In 
Saskatchewan, we have the Saskatchewan Judicial Council; we 
also have the Canadian Judicial Council. All of those places are 
appropriate places if people have concerns. 
 
Our role within the legislature, or within the executive branch, 
is to recognize the independence of the judiciary and recognize 
their very clear role in our society. 
 
So, if there are concerns of a nature, well then there are 
appropriate places where those concerns can be addressed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Agriculture Income Disaster Assistance 
 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question’s 
again, Mr. Speaker, for the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Mr. Minister, AIDA (Agricultural Income Disaster Assistance) 
is a useless program — hardly anyone qualifies. And because of 
you, those who do qualify will only be getting up to 42 per cent 
of their cheques. Normally they would be getting 70 per cent 
upfront. But you haven’t got around to signing the agreement. 
 
One farmer says it’s like standing in front of a wall waiting to 
be shot and the governor says, I’ll pardon you but I’m just too 
busy right now. 
 
Mr. Minister, clear the colouring books off your desk, pull out 
your big red crayon, make an X on the dotted line. Why on 
earth haven’t you done this and what on earth are you waiting 
for? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — You know, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, 
I’ve been around this legislature for about 13 years now and I 
take pride, take pride in the honest answers that I give to 
questions. But what I get really sick and tired of are accusations 

that are unfounded. 
 
You and your leader yesterday were saying that the reason 
farmers are getting 40 per cent is Saskatchewan hasn’t signed 
the form. The first time I heard the accusation or saw it was 
through the media because we don’t have the form. The form 
wasn’t through the federal cabinet until the day before 
yesterday. Every other province is in the same position. Our 
money is on the table. 
 
The question that you should be asking, is why only 42 per 
cent? Why isn’t the federal government giving more money 
upfront? That’s what you should be asking. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Minister, yesterday you didn’t even know you hadn’t signed the 
agreement, let alone that you didn’t have the agreement. You 
were caught off guard, Mr. Minister, because you were not 
paying attention, just as you weren’t paying attention when you 
should have been fighting for Saskatchewan farmers, and you 
reneged on that too. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday a reporter asked the Ag minister if an 
acreage payment would have been better than AIDA. The 
minister said, anything would be better than this — anything. 
Mr. Speaker, that’s the way the farmers feel about the Ag 
minister — anything would be better than you. 
 
Mr. Minister, why weren’t you at the table making that point 
when the program was being negotiated? Will you admit that 
you failed by not getting an acreage payment for Saskatchewan 
farmers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Why don’t you apologize . . . Mr. 
Speaker, why doesn’t the member apologize for misleading the 
people of this province — misleading the people of this 
province. 
 
The forms got through cabinet the day before yesterday. None 
of the provinces have the forms. And it’s got nothing to do with 
stopping the flow of money — it’s got nothing to do with 
stopping the flow of money. The federal government could put 
as much money as they wanted out. Our money’s on the table, 
in the bank. All they have to do is bill us. 
 
For you to mislead, for you to mislead . . . Mr. Speaker, for this 
member to mislead the public in this manner is disgusting in my 
books — disgusting. And instead of trying to play his cheap 
politics on the back of farmers in this province, the question he 
should be asking of the federal government is why are you only 
putting 42 per cent up? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — I’m sorry, Mr. Minister, Mr. Speaker, but 
there’s only one thing disgusting to farmers in this province and 
it’s sitting on that side. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



906 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1999 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, the minister . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. Order. Order, 
order. Order. I guess the Assembly may not be aware but the 
long-standing traditions of parliamentary democracy do prohibit 
guests of the Assembly from participating in the proceedings, 
and the Chair humbly requests the co-operation of our guests 
who are here today. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, why 
in this province do we always have to be last? You say no one 
signed the program in Canada. Why can’t we initiate it? Call 
Mr. Vanclief, get the program out here, sign it, and maybe our 
farmers that finally do qualify will get some money. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister said this program was going to be 
bankable, and now we find out many farmers — most farmers 
— don’t qualify. And those that do are only going to get 42 per 
cent, and the minister didn’t even know that until a reporter told 
him. 
 
Mr. Minister, where have you been? Maybe after you’ve 
finished clearing the colouring books off your desk, you could 
find your phone, call Mr. Vanclief, get the program out here, 
and sign it. Let’s get some money for the farmers of 
Saskatchewan who desperately need it. Will you do that, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, the member says, the 
minister said the bankable program — alluding to me. He 
knows that’s not true. What he means is the federal minister. 
But there again, the shady side. 
 
And you can attack me personally. You can attack me 
personally if you like — that doesn’t bother me. I understand 
your lack of ability — I understand your lack of abilities in 
being an effective opposition, but look it: taking it out 
personally on me won’t help the matter . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . He still alludes, Mr. Speaker, to the . . . he still 
tries to allude to the point that something . . . there’s a 
relationship between signing the program and farmers getting 
their money. This is not true — not true. The federal 
government could put up as much as they want. Our money’s 
on the table. 
 
So for him to continue to try to mislead the public, Mr. Speaker, 
is not right. It’s not right. I know the member has had a pretty 
fair reputation in this House. I’d ask him to try to continue that 
reputation and try to ask questions that you know are a little 
more truthful. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I think . . . order. Order, order. Order. Now I 
think the hon. minister will recognize that in his final statement 
he’s gone beyond the breach of parliamentary debate. I remind 
all hon. members that character attacks are not ever acceptable, 
and I’ll . . . Order. And I will ask the minister to withdraw his 
final remark. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — With due respect to this Assembly, I 
withdraw my remarks. 
 

Closure of Grain Elevators 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, the community of Dollard has a 
simple request — it doesn’t want to become a ghost town. It 
doesn’t want to become a memory. It wants to be part of the 
province’s future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool has their way, 
Dollard, along with 170 other communities, is going to have its 
heart ripped out. The Wheat Pool wants to close or bulldoze the 
grain elevator. But Dollard and its area farmers want to fight 
back. They want to buy the elevator rather than see it bulldozed. 
They’ve written to Sask Wheat Pool and they’ve written to CP 
(Canadian Pacific) Rail. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today the Liberals will introduce a Bill to stop the 
senseless bulldozing of elevators and give communities like 
Dollard a chance. 
 
Mr. Premier, will you support this Bill and help rural 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It seems 
interesting that a provincial Liberal would bring this question to 
us. I hope that they are talking to their federal Liberal 
government. 
 
First of all, our government is doing what it possibly can out 
there. And certainly the government urges the federal 
government to implement a process which we have done on 
options for elevator closures, one of those being the viability of 
local proposals to assume ownership. The current and future 
need for specialty crop storage — the ultimate community use. 
 
But I want to tell the member opposite that just yesterday, 
because our province has been proactive, that there was a 
meeting with Saskatchewan Wheat Pool; with an interlocutor, 
Mr. MacKay; with SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities) and SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association), which are meeting . . . or have met 
just yesterday to look at these issues. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Wheat Pool has a plan 
to close 235 elevators in 170 communities. People across 
Saskatchewan are deeply opposed to seeing good elevators 
bulldozed, and the Premier knows that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in our platform Liberals put forward a plan that 
would preserve rural Saskatchewan and rural elevators. In a 
recent letter to the Liberal caucus, Leroy Larsen, the president 
of Sask Wheat Pool, said he opposes our plan to save these 
elevators from the bulldozer. He opposes the Liberal plan which 
would require companies like the Pool to offer these elevators 
for sale to local groups without conditions. 
 
Our plan also includes a financial help for these communities to 
conduct feasibility studies and to provide for arbitration over 
issues like price. 
 



907 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1999 

We know the Wheat Pool’s opposed to the government 
stopping the demolition of grain elevators. The question is, 
what about the Premier? Does the Premier support the Liberal 
position to allow communities to keep their elevators, or is he 
content to see the destruction of Saskatchewan rural life? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure if the member 
opposite heard what I had said . . . But I should just remind him 
that the province is playing a very active role in this. And as I 
said just yesterday, there was a discussion of the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order! Order. Order. Now it 
does not serve the purposes of question period well to have 
members shouting across the floor, and I refer to members on 
both sides . . . Order! 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — As I was saying, just yesterday we had 
SARM, SUMA, the Wheat Pool were sitting down with an 
interlocutor to have meaningful discussions around this type of 
issue. But I’d like to ask the opposite Liberals, provincial 
Liberals, this is federal jurisdiction . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. The Chair has just 
asked hon. members to not be shouting across the floor to 
enable the minister’s response to be heard. And the Chair asks 
for the co-operation of all hon. members. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — We’ve got a circumstance that we’re 
facing which is a direct result of federal Liberal policy, a policy 
that took out the Crow benefit in which you have branch line 
abandonment and of course therefore we also have had elevator 
consolidation. 
 
And I’d like to ask the member opposite what proposals he’s 
put forward to the federal government? Has he talked to Ralph 
Goodale today? The responsibility of where the grain 
companies will be has got a lot to do with all of the grain 
transportation issue. 
 
And when we look at what we’re doing in this province with 
our short-line advisory unit, with helping with short lines, 
helping communities — we are working with the communities 
in this province and we have one successful branch line that’s 
moving from Pangman to Assiniboia. It’s a short line that has 
two Wheat Pool elevators that have been reopened. 
 
We are working with communities as we can. What we need is 
changes at the federal . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Next question. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, on December 15, the 
municipality of Limerick saw its Wheat Pool elevator close. 
Although the Pool has made an application to demolish the 
elevator, it’s still filled with grain. 
 
Limerick has another elevator operated by N. M. Paterson, a 
company based out of Winnipeg. Paterson wants to build a 
grain terminal in Limerick on the site of the former Pool 
elevator, however CP (Canadian Pacific) rail will not guarantee 
it will continue to operate a line into Limerick, but it will 

guarantee operating a line to within three miles east of 
Limerick. 
 
You knew since December this was happening to Limerick, but 
so far you’ve offered no help whatsoever. Mr. Premier, your 
Minister of Highways promised in November to get grain 
companies in local groups to discuss options about this very 
elevator, but that was almost six months ago and you’ve done 
nothing. 
 
Will you finally step in and help communities like Limerick — 
help them — or are you committed to see rural elevators go the 
way of rural highways with nothing but holes where the roads 
and the elevators used to be? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Speaker, this is so interesting. On 
the whole it’s jurisdiction . . . the federal jurisdiction, but this 
province is doing everything it possibly can. 
 
Yesterday, I was just in Swift Current in the southwest area. I 
met with a group there and they certainly are appreciative of 
what our province is doing. And do you know what they’re 
saying? How can we get changes at the federal level? They 
agree with our position. We are doing what we can to get the 
attention at the federal level. 
 
What I’d like to know is if the provincial Liberals are calling 
. . . Are you calling Ralph Goodale? Report to us in this House 
on what you’re doing. 
 
I’d also like to just add, when I was first made minister and I 
met with federal officials about these very issues I said, and 
what did you see in place after you’re going to deregulate, after 
you take the Crow benefit out? Do you know what they said? 
Well we thought we’d see what happens. That’s 
unconscionable. Either they knew what was going to happen or 
if they didn’t know what was going to happen that’s 
irresponsible also. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, while the situation in Limerick 
is bad, the situation in Stenen shows that this government’s lost 
their ability to care. The good people of Stenen have secured 
rail access from CN (Canadian National). They have that in 
their hip pocket. What they don’t have, Mr. Speaker, is a way to 
buy their soon to be demolished elevator. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier knows we’ve lobbied the feds to do 
something. Don’t tell us this matter is their responsibility. Don’t 
blame somebody else. Mr. Premier, take responsibility for 
yourself and help these people out. Mr. Speaker, the Liberals 
have a plan to help rural communities save elevators. Mr. 
Premier, where’s yours? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Speaker, as I was saying, in every 
one of these areas that we’ve been out in they’ve been very 
appreciative of the short line advisory unit that also advised on 
their branch lines, on elevators. And every single place that we 
go that we discuss this with, they said how do we get the 
attention of the federal government? This is a jurisdiction of the 



908 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1999 

federal government. This province is doing everything it 
possibly can to get that attention. 
 
In the review on Estey we asked for a moratorium on branch 
line abandonment. That didn’t proceed. The Liberals, it’s their 
jurisdiction at the federal level. If these provincial Liberals 
would certainly try to help get their attention, we would 
certainly work with them because we know the impact that this 
is having on communities. We’re doing everything possible that 
we can to support our rural communities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Education for Special Needs Children 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Premier. 
Mr. Premier, we’ve all heard your government say that children 
are the most valuable resource in this province. In fact the UN 
(United Nations) The Convention on the Rights of the Child 
stated disabled children have the right to special care and 
training designed to help achieve self-reliance and a full and 
decent life in society. Our province signed that document. 
 
Mr. Premier, the system set up by your government is failing 
our special needs children. Your government had a two-year 
task force on special education policy and now it’s just seen as 
a make-work project because the government is not obligated to 
put any of those recommendations into effect. 
 
Mr. Premier, will you commit to living up to article 23 on the 
rights of a child and will you start to address the requirements 
of the 2,800 school-aged children in this province with special 
needs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of 
the Minister of Education, I would want to say that we . . . she 
is correct. The review has been released and is out. And we 
certainly will be working with the communities and with the 
schools on the very critical issue that she raises. And shortly, I 
believe that report will be available. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 205  The Public Inquiries Amendment Act, 1999 
(Justice System Review) 

 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I move first 
reading of Bill No. 205, The Public Inquiries Amendment Act, 
1999. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
Bill No. 208 — The Referendum and Plebiscite Amendment 

Act, 1999 (Constitutional Amendment Referendum) 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move first reading 
of the Bill No. 208, The Referendum and Plebiscite 
Amendment Act (Constitutional Amendment Referendum). 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 227 — The Grain Elevators Sales Act 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move first reading 
of Bill No. 227, The Grain Elevators Sales Act. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 242 — The Crown Corporation Managers’ 
and Permanent Heads’ Salaries Act  

 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I move 
first reading of a Bill, Bill No. 242, The Crown Corporation 
Managers’ and Permanent Heads’ Salaries Act be now read a 
first time. 
 
The Chair: — Order. The Chair seeks the co-operation of all 
hon. members to allow the House to hear and the Chair to hear 
the introduction of Bills — on both sides of the House. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 243 — The Crown Corporations Disclosure Act  
 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I move 
first reading of a Bill, Bill No. 243, The Crown Corporations 
Disclosure Act be now read a first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 41 — The Municipal Revenue Sharing 
Amendment Act, 1999  

 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 41, 
The Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment Act, 1999 be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 42 — The New Generation Co-operatives Act  
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 42, The 
New Generation Co-operatives Act be now introduced and read 
the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 43 — The New Generation Co-operatives 
Consequential Amendment Act, 1999/Loi de 1999 apportant 

des modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée 
The New Generation Co-operatives Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 43, The 
New Generation Co-operatives Consequential Amendment Act, 
1999 be now introduced and read for the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 



909 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1999 

read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — If I could, ask for leave to introduce 
guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to 
introduce to you and to members of the Assembly, seated in 
your gallery, a couple of important people, Chris and Jeannie 
Brewer, who are with us here today. Of course Chris has been 
. . . is the past president and executive director of the 
Saskatchewan Snowmobile Association.  
 
Chris has been involved for about 14 years, and Jeannie as well, 
giving a hand in making sure that the snowmobile association is 
working properly. And today of course we’re dealing with some 
legislation that Chris and his association have been very 
involved with. 
 
And I welcome them here to the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 25 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Serby that Bill No. 25 — The 
Education Amendment Act, 1999/Loi de 1999 modifiant la 
Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, over the last few days I’ve had the opportunity to 
receive a number of phone calls; I’ve had the opportunity to talk 
with a wide range of people about some very important issues 
regarding the education Act that is before us. 
 
While about two-thirds of the Act is very straightforward, as I 
indicated before, there seems to be tremendous amount of 
confusion as to what is actually being stated in the first portion 
of the suggested amendments. 
 
I have indicated to the Minister of Education that I would like 
to meet with him prior to moving the Bill on. And I have been 
unable to meet with the minister at this time. I have contacted 
the minister’s office, and we have a suggested meeting that will 
take place very, very soon, but it hasn’t taken place yet. 
 
I’ve had the opportunity this morning, Mr. Speaker, to raise 
concerns on behalf of a number of individuals with different 
people in the legal system as to what their interpretations might 
be of various sections of all of the Acts of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. 

You have to remember that The Education Act was created at 
the time that the province of Saskatchewan was incorporated. 
So we have ordinances when this province was not in existence; 
there was a territory. There was the constitution of 
Saskatchewan that came into being in 1905. And now we have 
The Education Act. 
 
And we’re trying to look at all of the concerns that have been 
expressed. At the same time, Mr. Speaker, a number of 
individuals have raised previous court cases that have set 
precedent, and we’re still trying to figure out exactly what those 
court cases have indicated. 
 
So at this time, Mr. Speaker, there is a lot of questions that have 
to be asked and I’m looking for the opportunity to be able to ask 
those questions. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to rise on this Bill today. As my colleague was 
pointing out, there are a number of areas of question and 
difficulty that need to be dealt with before this Bill proceeds. 
There needs to be some consultation with the Minister of 
Education as well as with people who understand and read the 
law. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, at this time I would move adjournment 
of debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 30 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 30 —The 
Cemeteries Act, 1999 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
Bill, from what we can see so far, is very positive. We will have 
some questions in committee but at this time are willing to let it 
pass on to committee. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 31 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 31 —The Funeral 
and Cremation Services Act be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The same with 
this Bill; I think we find it positive at this point. But we will 
have a number of questions that we want clarified when it’s in 
committee and be willing to let it pass to committee at this time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 11  The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital 
Corporations Amendment Act, 1999 

 



910 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1999 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’m pleased to present to the House for second reading 
The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital Corporations 
Amendment Act, 1999. 
 
The labour-sponsored venture capital program has been very 
successful since it was introduced. Labour-sponsored funds 
have made substantial equity investments in small- and 
medium-sized businesses, some $44 million since 1989. And 
they’ve helped employees of those businesses create and 
preserve jobs, nearly 1,000 since 1989. 
 
Members of the Assembly will be aware that there are three 
types of labour-sponsored venture capital funds under the 
program. The most popular by far have been employee funds, 
where individuals invest in the companies where they work. 
Those investors have protected and created jobs, realized 
greater job security, and enjoyed more job satisfaction as a 
result. 
 
Pool funds represent the second type of labour-sponsored 
venture capital funds. These raise funds from people across the 
province and invest in businesses across the province. Late last 
year I had the privilege of helping announce the golden 
opportunities fund, the first of these funds. This partnership 
between Saskatoon’s Westcap Management Ltd. and the 
construction and general workers’ union, local 890, provides 
yet another financing mechanism for Saskatchewan businesses. 
 
The third type of fund is one that is federally registered under 
the federal income tax regulations, and there are two of these 
funds currently operating in Saskatchewan: working ventures 
Canadian fund and Canadian medical discoveries fund.  
 
The amendments that we are proposing to the Act are mostly 
technical and of a housekeeping nature. They, along with other 
minor policy amendments, are intended to provide some 
consistency between federal and provincial programs. And they 
are also intended to maintain a level playing field between 
provincially registered and federally registered funds. 
 
The main beneficiaries of these changes are investors who will 
have greater options for investment and have fewer restrictions 
on their investments into eligible Saskatchewan businesses. 
 
The main policy amendment is removal of one section in the 
Act regarding redemption of shares in labour-sponsored venture 
capital corporations. Under this section, individuals who 
redeem shares in any given year were restricted from claiming 
tax credits for the purchase of new LSVCC (labour-sponsored 
venture capital corporations) shares during that year of 
redemption and in the following two years. 
 
Our removal of this section brings us in line with a similar 
policy change made by the federal government last summer on 
federally registered funds. This amendment should encourage 
individuals to continue investing and reinvesting in LSVCCs; 
continue investing in businesses that create jobs for 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
The other amendments to this Act are technical, as I noted 
earlier. Of those amendments, one allows for registered 
retirement income funds to hold and redeem eligible equity 

shares of LSVCCs. 
 
This amendment is primarily designed for investors who are 
retired or over 69 who have held equity shares through their 
RRSPs (registered retirement savings plan). Previously those 
investors would have been required to liquidate those equity 
share investments at age 69. Now they have an option of 
placing those shares into registered retirement income funds. 
 
This amendment once again demonstrates our commitment to 
flexibility for investors, a commitment to more choices on how 
they can manage their money. 
 
The other technical amendment of note is one that moves the 
reference in the Act to the maximum annual limit of investment 
in a type A fund — moves it from the body of the legislation 
into the regulations. 
 
(1430) 
 
The existing type A fund is the pool fund I spoke of earlier, the 
broad-based fund that invests in a variety of businesses, not just 
a single company. The current annual maximum on equity 
shares is $10 million per corporation. Moving reference to the 
maximum limit into the regulations helps improve the future 
efficiency of these funds. 
 
Federal funds have no limits on the amount they can raise. We 
may therefore need to make changes to our provincial funds if a 
cap of their monies raised places them at a disadvantage relative 
to federal funds. We can make those changes to maximum 
investment limits more easily when those limits are in the 
regulations rather than in the body of the Act itself. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the technical and policy amendments I’ve outlined 
today address a number of small issues in the LSVCC program, 
issues that by and large were identified when we were 
developing the first Type A or pool fund. 
 
As I’ve noted, the amendments ensure consistency between 
federally registered and provincially registered funds, and a 
level playing field between the two. They provide more scope, 
more flexibility for investors. They ensure LSVCC funds work 
even better in the future to help Saskatchewan businesses, to 
help those businesses create jobs and opportunities for 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
And it is in that spirit that I move that The Labour-sponsored 
Venture Capital Corporations Amendment Act, 1999 be now 
read a second time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 37 — The Snowmobile Amendment Act, 1999  
 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it’s with a great deal 
of pleasure that I rise to give a second reading speech as it 
would relate to The Snowmobile Amendment Act, 1999.  
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that after much consultation with 
the Saskatchewan Snowmobile Association, Tourism 
Saskatchewan, and other interested organizations, we are 



911 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1999 

amending The Snowmobile Act to establish a fund that will pay 
for the construction and the maintenance of an enhanced system 
of quality snowmobile trails throughout the province of 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, a percentage of the fund will also 
be used to support what’s important — a safety program in the 
province for snowmobile and snowmobile operators. 
 
I want to stress that this change to the legislation is being made 
at the request of the Saskatchewan Snowmobile Association. 
 
The amendments will also allow the snowmobile association to 
collect permit fees from snowmobilers who use these 
established trails throughout the province. Mr. Speaker, the 
snowmobile association will then use the money to help 
snowmobile clubs around the province to build, maintain, and 
look after the trail system for the benefit of the snowmobilers in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one might ask why the snowmobile fund is being 
established, but I would like to say that it’s important to know 
that not only will it be established but it will be self-sustaining 
as well. Mr. Speaker, we estimate that snowmobilers will 
provide funding of at least $275,000 annually to the association 
through the purchase of trail permits. 
 
The establishment of an enhanced system of trails in this 
province has two main benefits. First, the trails will increase 
tourism and economic development in the province, in 
Saskatchewan, in our communities. Secondly, these trails will 
help improve the safety of snowmobiling in our province. The 
fund will take effect at the start of the season, 1999-2000. And I 
want to say that SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) has 
provided interim trail funding for the previous two snowmobile 
seasons. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, during this past year’s snowmobile season, 
about 6,200 voluntary $25 permits were sold by the association 
to people using the trails. Permits will now be mandatory at a 
cost of $45 each for snowmobilers who use the trail system. It is 
expected that even more permits will be sold in next season, 
thus providing adequate funding for the association for trail 
construction, maintenance, as well as a safety initiative 
program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, administration and enforcement of the permit 
system will be the responsibility of the Saskatchewan 
Snowmobile Association. Mr. Speaker, the association 
volunteers will not have peace officer powers, but will serve as 
public relation officers convincing trail users to purchase these 
trail permits. 
 
Offences identified by the association volunteers will be 
documented and reported to local law enforcement agencies. 
Under these amendments, the enhanced system of trails as well 
as the snowmobile fund will also be administered by the 
snowmobile association of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan is committed to 
maximizing the economic benefit of the sport of snowmobiling 
for all the people in this province. The sport is already one of 
the leading generators of tourism dollars during our winter 
months. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I am confident that an enhanced system of trails 
will provide an even bigger economic boost to the tourism 
related businesses in Saskatchewan during the snowy winter 
season. And I might add from personal experience in using 
some of these trails, that many of the small businesses in the 
towns along the trails — hotels and restaurants used extensively 
by the snowmobilers — will be the main beneficiary of the new 
increased trail design and building. 
 
In addition to the economic benefits we believe an enhanced 
system of snowmobile trails in Saskatchewan will help improve 
snowmobile safety and reduce negative environmental impacts. 
 
I want to say as well the Government of Saskatchewan is 
committed to making the sport of snowmobiling as safe as 
possible in this province, both for the snowmobiler and the 
general public in the areas where these machines are operated. 
We’re confident that an enhanced system of trails will reduce 
snowmobile-related accidents and fatalities. The trails will be 
constructed and regularly maintained with the safety of 
snowmobilers in mind and I want to say that a groomed and 
signed trail is in fact a safe trail. The establishment of an 
enhanced system of trails will also help reduce snowmobile 
traffic on other land reducing any negative environmental 
impact in those areas. I want to reiterate that this initiative is 
totally self-supporting and will have no financial impacts on the 
provincial government. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that in closing my comments, 
this is a win-win situation for snowmobile users, property 
owners, and taxpayers in general. And I want to move second 
reading of this amendment Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just want to respond 
on behalf of the official opposition in regards to Bill No. 37, the 
Act to amend the Saskatchewan Snowmobile Act.  
 
Mr. Speaker, certainly my colleagues and I have had the 
privilege of meeting with many different snowmobile clubs 
across the province and certainly with the provincial 
organization. And we’ve been . . . we’re pleased for the input. 
And we’re also pleased, Mr. Speaker, that we’ve been . . . in 
talking to government about this and about a number of the 
concerns and issues that have been raised, that the government 
has been listening. And I think this is a clear example of where 
MLAs can bring forward ideas that can be constructive to the 
citizens of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re all aware of the fact that we’ve moved from 
snowmobiles that used to just crawl along to very powerful 
machines out there right now. And it’s certainly imperative that 
we have in place some guidelines that the different clubs across 
this province can put into place as they try to build a safer 
environment for all the snowmobile enthusiasts who enjoy the 
trails that they create. 
 
And I can say that certainly in the Moosomin area this past 
winter, the Moosomin snowmobile club working together with 
communities like Rocanville and Spy Hill opened up a series of 
trails. And I understand if you get on the trail at Moosomin you 
can basically skidoo right up to Hudson Bay and be on trails all 



912 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1999 

the way. And that’s just one; there’s trails all across this 
province. 
 
And certainly I appreciate the input that I’ve received from 
clubs in my area that have been asking for some of these things; 
and pleased to see, as noted by the minister, some of the 
changes that are being brought in . . . into this Act and the fact 
that the Act will carry it itself. And it gives the snowmobile 
association a real opportunity to provide an enhanced set of 
trails that are safe and that snowmobile enthusiasts can certainly 
appreciate and enjoy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’ll be our pleasure to just direct a few direct 
questions, just to get a little more clarification on some of the 
clauses as we get into Committee of the Whole. So at this time 
we’re just more than prepared to move this through to 
committee. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 38 — The Litter Control Amendment Act, 1999 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And after my 
remarks I will be moving the second reading of The Litter 
Control Amendment Act, 1999. 
 
In 1988 the province, through a partnership with the 
Saskatchewan Association of Rehabilitation Centres, SARC, 
established the provincial beverage container program, 
SARCAN. SARCAN has been extremely successful in creating 
an effective, province-wide deposit fund beverage container . . . 
refund beverage container collection and recycling system for 
non-refillable containers. This deposit fund refund program has 
a greater than 90 per cent return rate and helps protect the 
environment by significantly reducing the amount of solid 
waste entering our provincial landfills. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1997, after less than 10 years of operation 
SARCAN celebrated the recycling of 1 billion beverage 
containers in Saskatchewan. This means hundreds of thousands 
of tons of waste has been diverted from our landfills. 
Furthermore, what was formerly considered waste is now 
routinely being recycled all across the province. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, SARCAN employs more than 300 
people and 80 per cent of those are disabled or were formerly 
on social assistance. SARCAN provides these people with 
meaningful work opportunities and financial independence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan is amending 
The Litter Control Act to address a major problem the beverage 
container collection and recycling program is having with 
out-of-province containers being imported to claim a deposit 
from SARCAN. 
 
The cross-border trafficking of beverage containers has become 
a major concern for SARCAN, for its customers, and for this 
government. SARCAN has attempted to stop the problem and 
has established and maintained adherence to internal policies 
such as limiting customer returns and setting operating 
guidelines for bulk return customers. In spite of these measures, 
cross-border trafficking continues to be a problem. 

SARCAN depots throughout Saskatchewan face blatant abusers 
of the Saskatchewan deposit system, which they are unable to 
prevent. In a growing number of communities with SARCAN 
depots, organized rings have formed a network to circumvent 
SARCAN return restrictions. 
 
These importers are straining the SARCAN program, causing 
significant lineups and delays, particularly at depots along our 
east and west borders. They are costing the province an amount 
estimated at over $1.5 million a year in payments of refunds on 
containers which no deposit has been paid in Saskatchewan. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, we are introducing legislation under The 
Litter Control Act which will make it illegal for a person to 
claim a refund from SARCAN if the refundable deposit and 
environmental handling charge have not been paid to the 
province. The amendment authorizes SARCAN depot operators 
to set up return rates, rate limits, to request identification of 
customers, to refuse payment if they have reason to believe the 
environmental handling charges and deposit have not been paid. 
 
In addition this amendment provides finance revenue officers, 
RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police), and municipal police 
officers, as well as SERM’s (Saskatchewan Environment and 
Resource Management) conservation and wildlife officers with 
the authority to stop and inspect vehicles and to seize containers 
believed to have been imported in violation of the Act. 
 
This amendment provides for penalties including fines of not 
more than $25,000 or imprisonment for a term of not more than 
three months, or both the fine and imprisonment. Those 
convicted of violating this Act may also be required to pay to 
the Crown an amount equal to two times the amount of the 
refundable deposit, an environmental handling charge the 
person would have paid had the designators’ containers been 
purchased in Saskatchewan. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, this amendment also ensures enforcement 
efforts target the blatant abusers of the SARCAN system. 
Small, incidental returns from out-of-province travellers which 
have a minimal overall impact on the SARCAN program will 
not be affected. Only bulk importers, those who import to 
Saskatchewan more than 100 empty, designated containers at 
one time will be affected. 
 
We will be working closely with SARCAN to ensure that the 
cross-border trafficking of containers is eliminated before it 
causes serious damage to the collection program. 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. Speaker, this amendment is about the ongoing stewardship 
of the environment and respecting the four R’s of waste 
management — reduce, reuse, recycle, and recover. 
 
The SARCAN program truly embodies these principles and 
also recognizes and respects the dignity of individuals with 
disabilities who wish to enjoy an independent lifestyle. 
SARCAN has improved the quality of life for many people with 
disabilities. This amendment reconfirms the province’s 
commitment to this program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I now move second reading of The Litter Control 



913 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1999 

Amendment Act, 1999.  
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, just a few 
comments before we allow this Bill as well to move to 
committee, because I think we’d be able to ask our questions 
more directly there. 
 
Number one, Mr. Speaker, we’re well aware of the fact that 
SARCAN certainly has provided a real opportunity for disabled 
individuals across this province to gain full employment. And 
when you take cans into a SARCAN depot and just to see the 
individuals and the pride they take in receiving those cans is 
something else. And it’s certainly a well worthwhile project. 
 
I’m pleased to hear that the minister as well is addressing some 
of the concerns. Concerns regarding a number of containers that 
are available that consumers purchase that are just getting 
thrown into landfills because SARCAN has no way of 
refunding. They haven’t been recognized, especially milk 
containers and some of these other containers. And because of 
the fact that there hasn’t been a refund, people haven’t made 
that extra effort to recycle those products. And I believe, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s appropriate that we address that concern. 
 
As well I believe the minister made a comment about 
cross-border movement of product. When we get to the debate 
in committee, we certainly are pleased to see that. We also want 
to raise the fact that as we have along the eastern side of the 
province, there are many people who live right on the border 
actually, but live in Manitoba, but do the majority of their 
shopping, because of the proximity of the communities and the 
shopping areas, in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And so I think . . . and something we want to clarify there is to 
make sure these people aren’t discriminated against. Because 
they may spend most of their grocery dollar in our province, 
that they at least have the opportunity of taking advantage and 
recycling product or cans within the facilities that are closest to 
them. 
 
But those are questions, I think, Mr. Speaker, we can raise with 
the minister directly in committee. And make sure that we have 
a program, that once it’s implemented, once this piece of 
legislation comes into play that really addresses the need out 
there, addresses the abuse, and something that SARCAN can 
work with that facilitates their needs as well as meets the needs 
of the environment and the population of Saskatchewan. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 39 — The Wildlife Habitat Protection 
Amendment Act, 1999 

 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. After my 
remarks, I will be moving the second reading of The Wildlife 
Habitat Protection Amendment Act, 1999. 
 
In Saskatchewan, where so much of our economy is based on 
our natural resources, maintaining healthy ecosystems is 
necessary if we wish to stop the loss of species and their 

habitats. Today, Mr. Speaker, I will summarize The Wildlife 
Habitat Protection Amendment Act’s new features. 
 
The amendment recommends the removal of 5,227 acres of 
land as a result of extensive consultation with lessees following 
the 1992 amendment to The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act 
which added lands to the Act. An appeal process was initiated 
after that amendment to deal with lessees’ concerns which arose 
out of these additions. Some of the lands being removed from 
the Act by this amendment are to become available for purchase 
by farmers and ranchers who require these lands as an integral 
part of their operations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Act conserves some of Saskatchewan’s best 
remaining natural areas while protecting and managing Crown 
lands for agriculture use and wildlife protection. The 
government remains committed to conserving and managing 
habitat lands while recognizing and respecting the role ranchers, 
farmers, and property owners have in conserving wildlife 
habitat. In total, 5,227 acres of the 3.4 million acres under the 
Act will be removed to accommodate the interests of farmers 
and ranchers. 
 
Secondly, this amendment also adds 2,680 acres to the Act. One 
area covering approximately 1,440 acres is adjacent to the 
provincial forests and is identified as important habitat for 
wildlife. The other area covering 1,240 acres is referred to as 
the Fur Lakes area and was part of a land use planning process 
which recommended these lands be included under the Act. 
 
And lastly, Mr. Speaker, the proposed amendment deals with 
administrative housekeeping. In some cases, incorrect land 
descriptions were listed in the schedule. These amendments will 
provide the correct legal descriptions. 
 
In protecting a total of 3.4 million acres of government-owned 
land, The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act is the most 
cost-effective habitat program this province has ever 
implemented. It is less expensive to conserve our natural areas 
than it is to try to restore them later. 
 
By accommodating and balancing the needs of agriculture 
along with the responsibility to manage and conserve valuable 
natural habitat on public lands for our native plants and animals, 
we create a win-win situation. 
 
These natural areas are valuable to wildlife and to those who 
enjoy them, and they can be protected at very little cost to the 
taxpayer. 
 
This government recognizes the importance of wildlife to 
Saskatchewan people and in turn is committed to working with 
landowners and lessees to conserve wildlife habitat on private 
and Crown land. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I now move second reading of The Wildlife 
Habitat Protection Amendment Act, 1999.  
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 



914 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1999 

Bill No. 32 — The Corporation Capital Tax 
Amendment Act, 1999  

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
move second reading of The Corporation Capital Tax 
Amendment Act, 1999. 
 
This Bill reduces the corporation capital tax rate for small 
financial institutions from 3.25 per cent to .7 per cent. 
Saskatchewan now has one of the lowest capital tax rates in 
Canada on small financial institutions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, every province in Canada has a capital tax on 
financial institutions. A small financial institution is defined as 
a small . . . is defined as a financial institution with taxable, 
paid-up capital, including all of its associated corporations 
equal to or less than $400 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, resource corporations are subject to a resource 
surcharge in addition to the normal corporation capital tax 
liability. There are often significant corporate income tax 
benefits if resource corporations do not claim certain deductions 
in determining their corporation capital tax liability. 
 
This Bill permits Canadian exploration and development 
expenditures to be elective deductions by the corporation rather 
than mandatory deductions from paid-up capital. Mr. Speaker, 
we are continuing to work with the resource industry to 
improve the fairness and integrity of the income and capital tax 
system in this province. 
 
This Bill also implements a new corporation capital tax 
deduction for research and development corporations. Scientific 
research and experimental development expenditures will be 
allowed as deductions from paid-up capital to the extent that the 
expenses have not been deducted for income tax purposes. Mr. 
Speaker, this initiative is in keeping with this government’s 
targeted support for research and development in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 
Corporation Capital Tax Act.  
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 33 — The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 1999 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure for 
me to rise to move second reading — which I will do at the end 
of my remarks — with respect to The Tobacco Tax Amendment 
Act, 1999.  
 
As everyone knows, Mr. Speaker, in the recent budget we 
reduced the provincial sales tax from 7 per cent to 6 per cent. 
This Bill essentially ensures that the overall cost of tobacco 
products does not drop as a result. The reason being that 
smoking and tobacco products continue to pose a real threat to 
thousands of Saskatchewan families and young people. 
 
We do not want to decrease the cost of a package of cigarettes 
or loose tobacco, Mr. Speaker. We want the price to remain the 

same. 
 
It is estimated that 1,600 adults in Saskatchewan die every year 
as a result of smoking. And in addition, between one-third and 
one-half of Canadians who now smoke will die prematurely as 
a result of their tobacco use. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, lowering 
the cost of tobacco products would send the wrong message 
about the health risks associated with tobacco use. 
 
And tobacco use also has major implications for the health and 
well-being of non-smokers. Environmental tobacco smoke is a 
significant risk for all Canadians, regardless of age, gender, 
income, education, or race. 
 
So to offset the sales tax decrease, which if we did nothing 
would make tobacco products cheaper, this Bill increases the 
tax on a package of 25 cigarettes from $2.10 to $2.15 effective 
March 27, 1999. The tax on one gram of fine-cut or pipe 
tobacco goes from 5.5 cents to 5.7 cents. 
 
The changes contained within this Bill are effectively revenue 
neutral. We don’t get more money out of the sale of tobacco 
products. The tobacco tax is collected at the wholesale level 
while the education and health tax is collected at the retail level. 
The decrease in the education and health tax is offset by the 
increase to the tobacco tax. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these changes will not affect the margin of return 
for either retailers or wholesalers of tobacco products and the 
cost to the consumer basically remains the same. 
 
The tobacco tax increase is expected to yield an additional $3 
million in this fiscal year while we will lose an equivalent 
amount or a very similar amount from education and health tax 
revenue collected from tobacco products. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of an Act to amend The 
Tobacco Tax Act, 1999.  
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
(1500) 
 

Bill No. 34 — The Education and Health Tax 
Amendment Act, 1999 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 
gives me great pleasure to rise today to move second reading of 
The Education and Health Tax Amendment Act, 1999. This Bill 
continues our promise to bring sustainable tax reductions to 
Saskatchewan people. Mr. Speaker, our record on tax reduction 
is clear and there is a pattern for all to see. Since the budget was 
balanced in 1994-95 by this government provincial taxes have 
gone only in one direction in Saskatchewan and that is down. 
 
For example in 1995 and 1996 we reduced personal income 
taxes which resulted in the tax being eliminated for 6,000 
Saskatchewan people — 6,000 people, Mr. Speaker, taken off 
the income tax roles of that time. In 1997 we cut the sales tax 
rate to 7 per cent and in 1998 we reduced the personal income 



915 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1999 

tax rate from 50 per cent to 48 per cent. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this Bill reduces the Education and Health 
tax rate a further percentage point from 7 per cent to 6 per cent 
effective March 27, 1999. This is the lowest rate of any 
province that has a sales tax. And, Mr. Speaker, we charge the 
sales tax on far fewer things than other provinces that have a 
sales tax. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many provinces apply the sales tax to family 
essentials like children’s clothing, home heating fuel, and 
electricity. This includes three of the Atlantic provinces which 
have chosen to become part of the federal government’s 
harmonized tax scheme. 
 
I might add in this regard, Mr. Speaker, many people may not 
be aware that under the previous Conservative government in 
Saskatchewan, Saskatchewan had passed a law prior to the 
election of our government to harmonize the PST (provincial 
sales tax) with the GST (goods and services tax). 
 
And in fact, Mr. Speaker, when we took office the PST had 
been put on children’s clothing, used cars, lottery tickets, 
reading materials, restaurant meals, and it was the plan of the 
Conservatives to extend the sales tax to all goods and services 
that the GST is on, effective January 1, 1992. And fortunately, 
Mr. Speaker, in October of 1991 Premier Romanow and our 
government came to office . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, now the minister will recognize of 
course that it’s improper to use proper names in the House and 
that the only recognition of members should be in the context of 
the authorities and the responsibilities they have in the House. 
And I’m sure that he’ll want to conduct himself in his debate 
accordingly. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Speaker. I should have 
said the Premier and our government were elected in 1991 and 
one of the very first things that we did, because we did want to 
have tax relief for families, was to undo what the members 
opposite had done in government in the sense that first we did 
away with the expanded sales tax. They had put the sales tax on 
the children’s clothing, the restaurant meals, the used cars, the 
lottery tickets, and so on. And their plan was, on January 1992, 
to extend the provincial sales tax to all goods and services, Mr. 
Speaker. But what we did, unlike the Atlantic provinces under 
the Liberals and Conservatives, we did away with that notion, 
and we reduced the sales tax. 
 
I’m happy to say now, Mr. Speaker, we’re taking the provincial 
sales tax, effective midnight on budget day, to 6 per cent — the 
lowest it’s been I think since 1986. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — So that’s what we’re trying to do in 
contrast to the policies of the members opposite. So, Mr. 
Speaker, we’ve taken 3 percentage points off the sales tax in 
three years. It’s gone from 9 per cent to 7 per cent down to 6 
per cent. 
 
This means, Mr. Speaker, $300 million a year — $300 million a 
year, Mr. Speaker, put back into the hands of families, 

businesses, municipalities, educational institutions, school 
boards, and health boards right across the province. And I’m 
proud of that, Mr. Speaker, because it stands in such contrast to 
the policies, the taxation policies, the higher tax policies of the 
members opposite. 
 
Now during pre-budget consultation, Mr. Speaker, 
Saskatchewan people clearly stated they wanted to see 
continued tax reduction, and that their priorities for tax relief 
were income tax and sales tax. They were equally adamant that 
tax reduction should not proceed unless and until it is 
affordable. And here again we contrast ourselves to the 
members opposite, Mr. Speaker, because we will reduce taxes, 
but not at the expense of running deficits and debt — which is 
of course the Tory policy — because we’ve seen, Mr. Speaker, 
that when we follow the policies of the Conservative Party and 
the members opposite, the next generation ends up paying the 
bill. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think the people in the province have 
arrived at a consensus — that we don’t want Tory debt and we 
don’t want Tory deficit and we don’t want increased Tory sales 
taxes. No, Mr. Speaker, we want to continue a balanced 
approach of balanced budgets, paying off the debt, and lower 
taxes. That’s what we need to do, Mr. Speaker, and that’s what 
this Bill helps us do in a very sincere, honest way. Unlike the 
doublespeak we see from the members opposite who are of 
course telling people that they’re going to reduce taxes on the 
one hand and increase spending on the other which of course 
they have no intention of doing, Mr. Speaker. And I’m 
constantly reminding people never listen to what the 
Conservatives say, only examine what they do and compare the 
records, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What we saw under the Conservatives in the 1980s — and 
they’re proposing it again — was deficit, debt, and ultimately 
higher taxes because it’s the only way that you can pay for that. 
 
What we’re proposing, Mr. Speaker, is continued gradual tax 
reduction in a way that will let us keep the balanced budget, not 
have a deficit, and not increase the Tory debt, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s what we want to try to continue to do. I think that’s what 
Saskatchewan people want us to continue to do. And I hope that 
the opposition, Mr. Speaker, will support the reduction of the 
sales tax. We’ll be looking to see whether they support this, Mr. 
Speaker. And it’s a step in the right direction. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’m very happy to move that an Act to 
amend The Education and Health Tax Act be read a second 
time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, before we 
move this Bill into committee, I think it’s imperative that a few 
comments be made about the Bill. While the minister talks 
about reducing the sales tax, the minister neglects to tell the 
people of Saskatchewan . . . to become open and truthful with 
the public. But the fact that it was his government and it was 
this Premier and this NDP that increased the sales tax — they 
increased the sales tax to 9 per cent since they formed 
government. They brought in a flat tax, Mr. Speaker. 
 



916 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1999 

He also neglects to tell the people of Saskatchewan that they 
increased the income tax. And another thing he forgets, Mr. 
Speaker, is the fact that everyone in Saskatchewan is 
complaining today about the other indirect taxes like the 
property taxes that have gone up and certainly with regards to 
education. And we saw yesterday a number of groups finally 
standing up and saying enough is enough. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the Saskatchewan Party has in its platform a 
sales tax reduction, a fair and affordable sales tax reduction. 
And for that, Mr. Speaker, we agree with the minister and we 
thank the minister for taking our advice and reducing the sales 
tax because the people of Saskatchewan are just taxed too 
much. And the people of Saskatchewan are also asking for 
reduction in tax so that they can put more money into providing 
for their needs. And as they spend more money in the province 
of Saskatchewan it eventually ends up in the hands of the 
Minister of Finance to provide the goods and services. So, Mr. 
Speaker, we agree with the minister. 
 
We believe at the end of the day we’re going to have to go 
further. That’s why our party has set out a policy that calls for 
meaningful tax reduction and in that regard we can agree with 
the minister here; but we just find it disreputable that the 
minister continues to blame somebody else for his actions and 
the minister is always pointing to somebody else rather than 
pointing to himself and realizing that he’s just trying to undo 
what he did in the first place. 
 
So having said those few words, Mr. Speaker, we will address 
some of the concerns directly in Committee of the Whole. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 40 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 1999  
 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
rise and move second reading of a Bill to amend The Income 
Tax Act. This Bill continues our government’s commitment to 
improve the efficiency of our tax administration in order to 
reduce the compliance burden of Saskatchewan businesses. 
 
As announced in the budget, the Saskatchewan manufacturing 
and processing profits tax reduction program will be 
incorporated into the overall corporate income tax system 
which is administered on the province’s behalf by the federal 
government. 
 
In other words, Mr. Speaker, we have for several years been 
administering this ourselves because we have not been able to 
obtain the agreement of the federal government to collect it. To 
the extent we can, we want the federal government to handle the 
income tax system, the administration, so we don’t duplicate 
efforts. That’s what this does in terms of the manufacturing and 
processing profits tax reduction program which itself is 
designed to encourage more manufacturing and food processing 
in our province. 
 
This Bill also introduces amendments as a consequence of the 
reduction in the education and health tax rate from 7 per cent to 
6 per cent. The Bill also contains a technical amendment to The 
Income Tax Act which is necessary to ensure effective 

administration of our income taxes by the federal government. 
 
I might say in this regard, by way of explanation, Mr. Speaker, 
that what this Bill does with respect to the manufacturing and 
processing tax advantage that we offer, that had been a 7 per 
cent advantage when manufacturers and food processors were 
paying a higher sales tax; like others, it will now be 6 per cent 
that they will pay and the program is adjusted accordingly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, fiscal responsibility by governments involves 
finding a balance between the provision of government 
programs and the level of taxation that will provide the 
necessary funding for the programs that people want, including 
areas such as health, education, justice, and highways. Our 
government is committed to a comprehensive strategy to lower 
taxes, improve key provincial services, and pay down the rather 
large provincial debt which we have. 
 
However, a key consideration is that these objectives must be 
accomplished while continuing to maintain a sound fiscal 
position for Saskatchewan. In other words, we shouldn’t be 
making rash promises that we can’t keep, Mr. Speaker. We 
should be proceeding in a reasonable, responsible, balanced 
way. 
 
This strategy that we’ve been following has resulted in five 
consecutive budgets of lowering personal and business taxes. In 
1995 and 1996 we implemented a reduction in personal income 
taxes that saved Saskatchewan taxpayers $55 million a year. In 
1997 we reduced the rate of the provincial sales tax from 9 per 
cent to 7 per cent, saving Saskatchewan residents about $200 
million a year. 
 
It is important to note that the sales tax reduction benefited both 
families and businesses, not to mention, Mr. Speaker, 
organizations like school boards and health boards, because 
they pay a great deal of sales tax and when we cut the sales tax 
it helps them, too. 
 
The 1998 budget reduced the basic personal income tax rate 
from 50 per cent to 48 per cent of basic federal tax, 
implemented in 1998 and 1999 and providing annual savings 
for provincial taxpayers of $45 million. 
 
The 1999 budget lowered the education and health tax rate from 
7 per cent to 6 per cent, providing annual tax savings of over 
$100 million for all Saskatchewan families and businesses, 
school boards, health boards, municipalities, and so on. 
 
With this latest tax cut we have succeeded in reducing the 
provincial sales tax by one-third since 1997, putting $300 
million a year back into the hands of families, businesses, 
municipalities, educational institutions, school boards and 
health boards all across our province. 
 
These tax cuts, Mr. Speaker, are responsible and sustainable. 
The budget remains balanced. We’re avoiding deficits and 
debts. And our government is committed to ensuring that these 
tax cuts are here to stay and that they will be followed by 
further tax reductions as we can afford them. 
 
(1515) 
 



917 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1999 

Mr. Speaker, provinces have been working with the federal 
government for several years towards finding ways to provide 
greater flexibility in the determination of provincial personal 
income taxes in order to achieve the social and economic 
objectives of individual governments. 
 
The federal government recently agreed to allow provinces to 
convert their existing personal income tax structures which 
calculate provincial tax as a percentage of federal tax to a 
system which will calculate provincial tax as a percentage of 
taxable income. This new approach to determining provincial 
income tax is commonly referred to as “tax on income”. 
 
As I announced in the budget, our government is committed to 
a review of tax on income over the course of the upcoming 
year. This review will consider whether Saskatchewan should 
move to a tax-on-income system, and will examine a whole 
range of alternatives available under the tax-on-income concept. 
The review process will include public consultations to ensure 
that the people of Saskatchewan have an opportunity to share 
their ideas on the design of the new income tax system for the 
province. 
 
So to recap, Mr. Speaker, this Bill will bring about changes to 
The Income Tax Act, but there are many other changes that we 
think we should be looking at. We’re going to review them. 
 
To recap our record: 1995 and 1996, income tax cuts; 1997, 
sales tax cut; 1998, income tax cut; 1999, sales tax cut. And 
we’re going to keep going forward, Mr. Speaker, in a 
responsible, balanced way. 
 
And I know that the members opposite are going to get up and 
probably complain about our taxation record. But our record is 
clear and can be contrasted, Mr. Speaker, to the higher debt, 
higher deficit, higher tax regime, we had under the 
Conservatives which they’re proposing to impose upon the 
people of the province again. 
 
I know that the members opposite will get up and say 
something in response to that, Mr. Speaker, but I will stack up 
our record of balancing the budget, getting rid of the deficit, 
paying off the debt, and gradual sustainable tax reduction 
against their record any day of the week, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I predict that when the people of the province in the next 
election compare our record to the record of the members 
opposite, they will endorse our record, Mr. Speaker. And with 
that, I’m very pleased to move second reading of an Act to 
amend The Income Tax Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 36 — The Animal Protection Act, 1999 
 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
this government has substantially rewritten The Animal 
Protection Act. Revisions to the Act will: better define the 
definition of animal distress or neglect; will rename peace 
officers to animal protection officers to better reflect their role 

to broaden the Act’s investigation, enforcement, and penalty 
provisions; to allow animal protection officers to take 
mistreated farm animals to caretakers who have the proper 
facilities to care for them; and recognize the role of the 
livestock industry in defining the conditions or codes of practice 
for raising and marketing farm animals. 
 
Before I move second reading, I would like to provide you with 
some background. The Act was established in 1972 to protect 
animals in Saskatchewan. At the time, Mr. Speaker, the Act 
empowered peace officers to deal with and remove distressed 
animals from premises where animals were being mistreated. 
 
Over the years deficiencies in the Act became apparent as the 
Saskatchewan Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals 
investigative services peace officers became highly trained and 
involved in more difficult cases. The peace officers were 
limited in their course of action to relieve farm animals in 
distress and to prevent further suffering. 
 
Mr. Speaker, times have changed. Farmers now raise more than 
horses, cows, and pigs. We now have bison, elk, and wild boar 
on farms. The SSPCA (Saskatchewan Society for the 
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals) investigative services do not 
have the facilities to handle these types of game animals. 
 
A major defect in the previous Act that has over the years 
created problems is that peace officer was left with the broad 
definition of distress as being “undue or unnecessary hardship, 
privation, or neglect.” The interpretation left to the individual 
officer was too subjective. 
 
Over the years problems were created due to the lack of 
uniform standards for charges under the Act. Those suspected 
of inhumane treatment of animals could be dealt with 
differently depending on the interpretation of the individual 
peace officer. Distress is now clearly defined as depravation of 
adequate food, water, care or shelter; injured, sick, in pain; 
suffering, neglected, or abused. 
 
We are renaming peace officers to animal protection officers. 
The new title, animal protection officers, more appropriately 
defines their activities. The revised Act broadens investigation, 
enforcement, and penalty provisions. In our consultations with 
humane societies and the SSPCA it became apparent there was 
a need to strengthen the investigation and enforcement 
provisions of The Animal Protection Act. 
 
Section 7 in the revised Act, Mr. Speaker, updates standard 
search and seizure. The section which complies with 
constitutional law ensures the animal protection officer, with a 
warrant, can seize carcasses for investigative and pathology 
evidence. In cases where the animal protection officers suspect 
suppression or removal of evidence, the Act permits them to 
take a specialist or a veterinarian with them for assistance to 
carry out a search or seizure, or diagnosis of an animal in 
distress. 
 
To ensure this government’s position on the humane treatment 
of animals is followed, the Act identifies and increases the 
penalties. Previously the Act stated a person guilty of an 
offence was fined not less than $100, nor more than $1,000, and 
in default of payment could be imprisoned for up to seven days. 



918 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1999 

Under the revised Act, for a first offence a person found guilty 
could be fined not more than $5,000, imprisoned for not more 
than three months, or both. For second and subsequent offences 
the penalties double. 
 
The revised Act makes provisions for animal protection officers 
to move mistreated animals to safety to individuals identified as 
caretakers who do have the appropriate facilities in which to 
keep and care for animals in distress. The animal protection 
officer will make appropriate arrangements to transport animals 
to the appropriate caretaker when necessary. Caretakers will 
look after these animals until they are back to health. 
 
An animal is not considered to be in distress if it is handled in a 
manner consistent with a standard or code of practice in 
accordance with accepted animal management. Over the past 
number of years we have consulted with the Saskatchewan 
Livestock Association, cattle feeders association, Heartland 
Livestock Services, and others in the livestock industry 
regarding this matter. 
 
The livestock industry has been writing codes of practice for the 
raising and marketing of farm animals. Their codes of practice 
define how animals are to be managed, what practices are 
acceptable, and what is not acceptable. 
 
The revised Act, Mr. Speaker, recognizes the role of the 
livestock industry to define the conditions or codes of practice. 
This is important because the codes of practice written by the 
industry define in specific terms what is and is not humane 
treatment of animals. It means in essence the industry policing 
itself. 
 
Animal welfare is a priority with our government and the 
livestock industry. This is an important issue that impacts on 
our future trading prospects in the global community. Our trade 
partners want assurances that as a government and livestock 
industry we’re serious in Saskatchewan about the humane 
treatment of animals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the livestock industry and the public fully support 
our government’s revision of The Animal Protection Act. 
Comments on our revisions to the Act from the livestock 
industry and humane societies in the province were positive. 
 
So I ask the members of the Assembly to support this Act, and I 
therefore move second reading of Bill No. 36, The Animal 
Protection Act, 1999. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Social Services 

Vote 36 
 
The Chair: — I would ask the minister to introduce his 
officials, please. 
 

Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Yes, Mr. Chair, the officials with 
me today I believe are — yes — the same officials as last time. 
Sitting beside me is Glenda Yeates, the deputy minister. Seated 
behind Ms. Yeates is Bonnie Durnford, the assistant deputy 
minister. Seated behind me is Bob Wihlidal, the executive 
director of financial management. Seated beside him is Phil 
Walsh, the executive director of income support. And seated 
behind Mr. Wihlidal is Richard Hazel, the executive director of 
family and youth services. 
 
Subvote (SS01) 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And welcome to the minister and 
to your officials. As you’re probably aware, Mr. Minister, over 
the past number of years there have been quite a number of 
concerns raised by families about Social Services intruding 
themselves into the homes of various families. And I have on 
my desk in my constituency office probably a half dozen of 
those that are moderately serious, I would believe. 
 
And so what I have here is a compilation of questions that don’t 
deal with any one of those specifically, but are questions that 
are general enough that I believe they cover probably all of 
those situations, and as a result, you should be able to answer 
those without getting involved in any specific family 
difficulties. 
 
The first question I have is: what legislation guides 
Saskatchewan social workers with regards to the visitation of 
families in child protection? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — The Child and Family Services 
Act, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Does the department follow any other 
legislation than what you’ve just outlined? 
 
(1530) 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, that Act deals with all 
child protection matters. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And so I’ll draw from that 
answer that there is nothing else that relates to that kind of a 
question. 
 
With regards to child protection investigation, could you 
describe for us please the full routine from start to finish from a 
report, investigation, conclusion that would probably take 
place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, generally speaking 
once a report is received by the department that a child is in 
need of protection, we investigate the report. If in our opinion, 
in the opinion of the worker at the time, there is in fact a child 
that is in need of protection, then we offer our services to the 
family to help them deal with the issue, with the presenting 
problem. 
 
We try to get agreement on services that should be offered to 
the child or to the family that will enable the child to stay with 
the family. If the risk is too great in the opinion of the worker, 
the child may be removed from the family. When that happens, 



919 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1999 

one of the first things that we try to do is to contact the 
extended family and to see if the extended family can play a 
role in terms of caring for the child, and also in resolving the 
issues that caused this matter to be brought to our attention in 
the first place. 
 
After a period following the apprehension, should there be an 
apprehension, the worker has to apply for a court hearing within 
seven days. If the court finds the child to be in need of ongoing 
protection services, the judge can order a number of things. 
 
Supervision: the child is returned home and a caseworker 
provides supervision for a specified period for up to a year. 
 
Temporary committal: the child remains in the care of the 
minister for a specified period up to six months. 
 
Persons of sufficient interest order: a child is placed in the 
custody of a person having a close connection to the child such 
as an extended family member. 
 
A long-term care order: the child becomes a ward of the 
minister until age 18 but the parents retain guardianship. 
 
And permanent committal: the child becomes a ward of the 
minister until age 18 and the parents lose all rights and the child 
may be placed for adoption. 
 
That in general terms, is the process we follow and the specific 
terms, those are the options that are available to the courts when 
these matters are brought to the courts. 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — To ask leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you very much. In the west gallery 
I have 38 students, 38 grade 4 students from Hugh Cairns V.C. 
School in Saskatoon. The teachers with them are Dena Miller 
Racicot — hopefully that’s right — Lesia Bondarenko and 
chaperons Dan Favreau David Udchic, and Todd Jarvis. 
Welcome to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Chair: — Why is the member on his feet. 
 
Mr. Whitmore: — With leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Whitmore: — Thank you, Deputy Speaker. I too would 
like to welcome the kids from Hugh Cairns today. I’ve had on 
two occasions the opportunity to be at Hugh Cairns when 
citizenship court has been held. And I’ve certainly enjoyed the 
program that the children have put together and certainly hope 
at another time that I’d be able to attend. But I simply want to 
congratulate them and their teachers for the programs they put 
on during those citizenship courts. Again thank you very much. 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Social Services 

Vote 36 
 
Subvote (SS01) 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Minister, as you stated the answer you 
gave was sort of a general overview of that and my question 
relates somewhat to that. Can a citizen of this province have 
access to all the specific protocol and steps that social workers 
are to follow in their investigations? And if they can have 
access to those steps and that protocol, who would they contact 
to get that information? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, any citizen who is 
interested in this information in terms of the process, first of all 
with respect to the child abuse investigation protocol, which is a 
joint protocol which has been developed with the police, we can 
provide people if they’re interested in that information, in that 
process, we can provide that information. Similarly, if there’s 
aspects of our policy manuals that are germane to a certain 
process that a person’s concerned about, we would also provide 
those. I would certainly encourage people to call my office. 
 
What we cannot provide, of course, is any specific client 
information that may be on file. But as to the process, as to how 
our people do their work, either as departmental officials and/or 
in conjunction with police departments, we can certainly give 
that information to people if they want to contact my office. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. The next one . . . question gets 
close to what you intimated but I think it’s a slightly different 
direction. How would a Saskatchewan family gain access to 
files a social worker keeps on them — so the family’s asking 
for files about their own specific situation, not anyone else — 
or an investigation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, The Child and Family 
Services Act does provide . . . or sets out a procedure in which 
information may be provided to a family on which we maintain 
a file. The form of that information is subject to my discretion. 
It may be because in part we are concerned that those who bring 
information to us which instigated a certain process or 
investigation, that those people also be protected. 
 
So the answer is yes, information can be made available upon 
application to the director. But the form in which it’s released 
may be circumscribed. So I don’t know if that answers the 
member’s question fully. But yes, information can be released. 
But we also need to ensure that, in releasing that information to 
a family, that we do not implicate others. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. I believe you answered that 
question very fully when you used the word may, which meant 
that essentially there isn’t a hope in anything of most families 
getting any of the information they want to find out. Because by 
the time that information gets sifted through your bureaucrats 
and through your desk — and I’ve experienced that myself 
contacting your office — there isn’t a hope of them finding out 



920 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1999 

anything about what your department is doing with the families 
and the kids in this particular province. 
 
It’s an arrogant attitude that your department has, that you know 
the best what should happen in every particular family. You 
know the best what should happen to the kids. And you’ll take 
any excuse to go ahead and have your department work and 
intrude themselves into the families of this particular province. 
And that’s a concern that I said at the very start that I had with 
your department. 
 
(1545) 
 
Another question. Is it department protocol to forward concerns 
on to local police or RCMP if no charge is made, if after the 
investigation the children of the family are not classified as in 
need of protection? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, when we receive an 
allegation of child abuse whether it’s physical or sexual, we 
notify the police immediately and we do our investigations 
together. That may be the RCMP detachments throughout the 
province. In the case of the city of Regina and the city of 
Saskatoon where we have municipal police forces, we have also 
set up special units so that we have the same police officers that 
tend to be involved in those investigations, and develop some 
familiarity if you like, with these issues. So as I say, we do the 
investigation together. 
 
If there’s insufficient evidence with respect to criminal charges, 
there may still be an ongoing need for involvement on the part 
of my department. Because even if the specific circumstances 
don’t suggest or do not suggest they’re criminal charges, there 
may be conditions which lead us to believe that there may be 
future problems for the children. 
 
There may be issues of neglect if not abuse, and so my 
department may continue to be involved even if the police do 
not continue their involvement because there are no specific . . . 
or there is not the kind of evidence that lends itself to criminal 
charges at that time. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. Very interesting answer. What 
you’ve essentially said, that when you find no evidence you can 
lay no charges, you will continue to harass that family looking 
to see if you can find something. Very much as if someone gets 
a ticket going down the highway and the policeman just goes 
right after him and keeps on following for the next two days to 
see if he can catch him at something else. That’s harassment, 
and that’s what your department is doing in a number of 
families. 
 
One more question and I’ll turn it over to my colleague. What is 
the department’s view with regards to corporal correction? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, I just want to say at the 
outset that my department has zero tolerance when it comes to 
child abuse, and I trust that this is also the member’s attitude. 
We tend to err on the side of the safety of children, so that when 
allegations are brought to our attention we want to make very 
sure that we do not in fact have conditions, even if the specific 
conditions at that time do not suggest criminal charges, that we 
satisfy ourselves that there are no conditions that may lead to 

abuse. So that there are no, if you like, other circumstances that 
may suggest neglect or other reasons that we should be 
involved. 
 
So again I just want to emphasize that we have a zero tolerance 
when it comes to child abuse and we tend to err on the side of 
that. Even if there are no specific criminal charges at that time, 
we tend to err in that way. 
 
And as to the member’s question with respect to corporal 
punishment, I’m not quite clear and I wonder if he might restate 
his questions. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Well I think I’d rather make a comment than 
try to restate the question because the question was very simple, 
and that was asking your position. And you waffled on that 
answer, sir, which tells me exactly what you intend to do. You 
will use that opening that you’ve allowed yourself to go ahead 
and continue harassing families in this particular province with 
their views on disciplining and raising kids in this province. 
And you think you know better than they do. And that’s the 
problem that’s come through in a number of high-profiles cases 
in this province recently that have hit the media, and a lot of 
other ones that haven’t hit the media and should have. 
 
Over to my colleague. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — If I might, Mr. Chair, I appreciate 
the member’s comments, but again I just . . . With respect to 
corporal punishment — if that was the question that the 
member asked previously — when it comes to our foster homes 
or our adoptive homes, we do not tolerate corporal punishment. 
 
But again, Mr. Chair, I just want to make it perfectly clear — 
perfectly clear — when it comes to the question of abuse of 
children — abuse of children — whether it’s physical abuse or 
sexual abuse, we will always err on the side of the child; we 
will always err on the side of safety, Mr. Chair. Thank you. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Mr. Minister and officials, I have a number of questions in 
different areas today, but I’d like to start with the caseload 
numbers and the concerns that we’re hearing through the media 
and directly from social workers who are talking about the 
number of people that they are responsible for, the number of 
people that . . . increasing number of caseloads that they have 
and the fact that they feel that at the end of the day they can’t do 
their job. They aren’t able to fill the morals that they feel they 
should have, and even the Social Services ethics, the 
commitment they made when they became workers. 
 
The number of people on welfare that are able-bodied is 
increasing. And at the end of the day we have workers who are 
not feeling good about what they are doing, even though they 
study very hard to be caregivers and help people. 
 
So I’m going to start by asking about caseworkers, and if you 
can give me the idea . . . an idea of how many caseworkers 
there are, not including managers and supervisors — actual 
caseworkers — for the departments of income security, child 
protection, and young offenders. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chairman, I want to provide 



921 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1999 

the answer for the member. In family and youth services, that 
includes all child protection, adoptions, foster care, also 
includes . . . well a number of different programs all under 
family and youth, the number of workers is 392 . . . or not 
workers but full-time equivalents. It’s actually 392.1. And in 
addition thereto there are 61.6 full-time equivalents who are 
classified as supervisors. 
 
In the income security area, total income security workers or 
full-time equivalents is 242.3, and 34.2 FTEs (full-time 
equivalent) as supervisory. 
 
Now in addition to those figures some of our caseloads are also 
administered by some northern bands, and I don’t have the 
numbers for that. Some of our caseload might be administered, 
for example in the case of Regina, by the Regina Mental Health 
Clinic. 
 
And some of our caseloads have been centralized in our 
administrative component where . . . For example, caseloads 
where there is very little change from month to month — it 
might be, for example, someone who is in a nursing home or 
personal care home; it might be some of our clientele who live 
in group homes or, for example, live in Valley View — where 
the circumstances don’t change from month to month and really 
no social work component is required but it’s a matter of 
administering support each month, that might be in the 
administrative component. 
 
(1600) 
 
And so if, in terms of looking at total caseloads and then 
looking at the number of workers, one may not be able to form 
a very accurate picture sometimes of the number of cases per 
worker. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. Chairman. To the 
minister: you have of course gone into the . . . My next question 
is the number of caseloads. And I understand with 392 family 
and youth workers, my next question is how many cases are 
they looking after? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — I just want to point out to the 
member that to talk about average caseloads may in some ways 
be quite misleading. Because you may have one worker whose 
responsibility it is to deal with foster care and a certain caseload 
might be appropriate or manageable. Someone else might be 
doing adoptions, and a different kind of caseload because of the 
intensity of work that might be required there. Yet another 
worker might be working in the area of therapeutic foster 
homes where the caseload is very, very small, given the 
intensive nature of the work that is required. 
 
Having said that, we try to use the advice of the Child Welfare 
League of America in terms of arriving at, if you like, 
standardized numbers and to allow for comparisons. And prior 
to November 1998, the average caseload in the child welfare 
area was 36, and the average caseload now is thirty-two and a 
half. So there’s been a reduction of three and a half cases, 
roughly 10 per cent if you like. But again it depends on the kind 
of caseload, depends on the worker. 
 
But there has been a reduction as a result of the addition of staff 

during the course of the last fiscal year — I believe it was 50 
staff in total — even though some of the caseloads I think did 
increase. Nevertheless the additional staff has meant an overall 
reduction in the number of child welfare staff . . . or in child 
welfare caseload. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. So you gave me a 
breakdown of 32 cases, and that is with everyone so it’s a little 
more difficult to look at it in the kind of context that I wanted 
to. Maybe you can give me an idea, do you have it broken down 
in an area like Saskatoon? Can you tell me how many caseload 
workers there are in Saskatoon versus the number of cases, and 
in one specific area, let’s say the youth workers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, we do not keep 
statistics such as this on a regional basis. However, we were 
sensitive to the needs of regions when we added the 50 new 
staff. We asked the regional managers at that point for a 
breakdown of their caseloads and the staff that they had 
available to handle that, and at that point we added staff to the 
regions where we felt there was the greatest need. 
 
We normally, or not normally, we ask our regional directors to 
manage the caseloads and to — whether that’s child protection 
caseloads or whether that’s social assistance caseloads — and to 
manage the regions that they have if they feel that their ability 
to manage that, given perhaps increases in their areas as 
opposed to other areas of the province. And we’re sensitive to 
that and we try to respond to that as we did in terms of adding 
the additional child protection staff. 
 
And I hope that answers the member’s question. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. Minister, no it doesn’t. 
There is a lot of gobbledegook and nothing really said. 
 
And I think this is one area where the people of this province 
are looking to see some leadership and looking to see some real 
results. And if we . . . Every once in a while we get some 
statistics out from your department and they are always . . . the 
numbers are never the same as the ones we are hearing from 
other places. 
 
And I think it’s really disappointing and it’s hard on your 
department and the morale of the people working in there if 
they can’t hold their head up high and say that they feel like 
they are actually doing what their job tells them or what they’re 
supposed to be doing. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you tell me what . . . Income security 
probably can’t be as complicated as some of the other areas. 
Can you give me an idea of how many caseloads each income 
security worker has? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chairman, first might I say to 
the member that if she has statistics from other places, don’t 
hesitate to share those statistics with us and to give us the 
source of those statistics so that we might be in a position to 
respond. 
 
I know that for example there are some statistics and some 
interpretations of those statistics that are being floated around 
Saskatchewan, particularly by the member’s own party, where 



922 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1999 

they have said that there’s been a large increase for example in 
social assistance caseloads in Saskatchewan, and that that 
increase is solely due to the policies of the present government 
when the facts are something different than that. The fact of the 
matter is that although there tend to be fluctuations which are 
related usually to the economy and also to depressions and 
recoveries from depressions, these do not tend to be great 
variations. 
 
What we have seen in Saskatchewan as we’ve seen in other 
provinces in Canada was that as a result of changes, unilateral 
changes I might add by the federal government and changes 
which are your party supported at the time, where the federal 
government decided to reduce the kinds of entitlements that 
were previously available to people in receipt of Employment 
Insurance, where they added to the requirements to receive 
Employment Insurance. All of that tended to have a great 
impact on Employment Insurance figures in Canada. 
 
And I think that all of those who are listening will know that the 
federal government at this time has a very great surplus in their 
Employment Insurance fund, in part because they’ve tightened 
up their eligibility requirements to make it tougher for people to 
receive Employment Insurance. And they’ve reduced the 
benefits that people receive on Employment Insurance if they 
do qualify. 
 
All of that has tended to put pressure on the provincial 
governments and has seen a large increase in social assistance 
caseloads in the provinces. And that increase is attributable to 
the change in federal policy with respect to Employment 
Insurance. 
 
There was also another change in federal policy which 
happened in I believe 1993 and has also had a major impact on 
Saskatchewan but less of an impact on some other provinces, 
and that was the change with respect income security for First 
Nations people off reserve. That also tended to add to the 
caseload numbers in Saskatchewan. 
 
So what we saw in a period between 1991 and 1994 was a very 
rapid increase in income security caseloads, but since that time 
income security caseloads have declined in Saskatchewan 
because of the state of the Saskatchewan economy. Caseload 
numbers per worker, the cases per worker in December of 1997, 
the average number of cases per worker was 178, and the 
average cases per worker as of the end of December 1998 was 
168.9. 
 
So there was a decline from the end of ’97 to the end of ’98. 
And that’s part of a decline, as I say, that has been occurring 
since 1994. I believe there’s been a 14 per cent decrease in 
caseloads since that time. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you again, Mr. Minister. The decline 
that you’re talking about, I was hoping and I would think that 
your department and most of your workers were hoping would 
be larger than that with the government’s announcement last 
year of the national child action plan and the fact that there was 
an opportunity for families to actually be working and still 
receive some of the benefits of Social Services. 
 
There was a tremendous amount of money spent on it. There 

was a tremendous amount of hype around the whole idea of 
being able to get families off Social Services and get them into 
the workforce. And if I’m seeing this type of decrease, I believe 
it’s far below the expectations that your government must have 
had when the plan came into effect. 
 
(1615) 
 
So it’s not always right to just look at numbers; I know that. I 
understand that in cases of Social Services, numbers are people 
and we’ve got to look at them on individual basis. But as 
individuals, what we have to see is an increase in their living 
and their ability to actually have a life as opposed to just living. 
And if we’re only seeing this kind of a decrease at the 
beginning when people are . . . should be very interested in 
maybe making their life changes, I’m more than a little bit 
disappointed. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you tell me . . . I am aware, because of some 
calls I’ve been getting to my office, that your department 
actually does some contract work. If there’s areas where you 
don’t have a hired worker and you need some specialized help 
for a young person, an older person, whatever, you actually do 
some contract work to individuals. 
 
Can you tell me how many contracts were let last year and the 
amount of money that was spent on these contracts? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, first of all I just want to 
deal with the member’s initial comment with respect to the 
impact that the Saskatchewan Child Benefit and the 
Saskatchewan employment supplement is having on 
Saskatchewan families. 
 
This year over last year there are 1,800 fewer families in receipt 
of social assistance. We attribute the redesign in social 
assistance, that is the building independence program, as having 
an impact on about 1,100 families. 
 
I might say, though, that the Saskatchewan Child Benefit, in 
addition to those that are not on social assistance, and the intent 
of the program was not necessarily to reach people on social 
assistance per se, but to put more money in the hands of poor 
families. And there are many low-income families who were 
not on social assistance, are not on social assistance, but who 
are being supported through the National Child Benefit and the 
Saskatchewan Child Benefit. 
 
At this point there’s approximately 49,406 low-income families 
who are being supported through the Saskatchewan Child 
Benefit. That reaches approximately 103,000 children. The 
impact of the National Child Benefit and the Saskatchewan 
Child Benefit and the Saskatchewan employment supplement 
will be significant for some low-income families who may 
never have been on social assistance, and therefore won’t have 
any impact on caseloads for people in my department. But the 
intent of the program was to get money into low-income 
families to support those families in the job of raising their 
children. And I think we are having an impact there. 
 
With respect to contracting, we do contract with a number of 
community partners both in the area of, for example, group 
homes for mentally challenged people. We also contract with 



923 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1999 

transition houses to provide services. We contract with child 
hunger organizations such as the REACH (Regina Education 
and Action on Child Hunger Inc.) organization in Regina. 
 
I believe . . . yes the figures I have that approximately $19 
million is expended on a contractual basis for family and youth 
organizations. That might for example be such as the group 
home, the Tapwe-ci group home in Regina. And another 39 
million is provided on a contractual basis to agencies that 
provide either residential or other program services through our 
community living division for mentally challenged people in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you again, Mr. Minister. Do you have at 
your fingertips the information on how many contracts were 
given out to smaller firms for doing counselling for young 
people, or any people I guess, if you don’t have a hired social 
worker within the system right now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, there are number of 
areas where we would contract out with individuals or 
individual agencies, for example, in alternative measures in our 
youth work if there are special conditions. It might be that there 
is some community agency that provides a culturally 
appropriate service where we might contract with that agency to 
provide that service. 
 
There are other instances too where in the area of I guess child 
protection where there might be some agency that provides a 
service that we may not be in a position to provide at that point 
where we contract with an agency. I don’t know if that answers 
the member’s question. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, I knew what some of the areas 
were. My question was: how many of these contracts do you 
have and how much money? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, we’ll undertake to try 
to provide an answer for the member’s question. We don’t have 
that information that she’s specifically asking for with us. These 
things change and fluctuate from time to time. 
 
It might be, for example, that our staff take into care a child 
who has been sexually abused and that child will be put into a 
foster home. But if we feel that we don’t have the counselling 
support or skills to be able to help that child at that time that we 
might contract with some agency, some outside agency, to 
provide the appropriate support. But having said that, we’ll 
endeavour to provide the member with the information and get 
it over to her as soon as we can. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, Mr. Minister, thank you 
very much for that commitment to give me the information. 
 
Mr. Minister, I think that the Saskatchewan Party, the official 
opposition, has great concerns with the fact that we are hearing 
about the caseloads of the workers; the fact that they are 
overworked; the fact that the numbers on social services aren’t 
really decreasing as quickly as I know you would like to see 
them decrease, especially not as quickly as the people who are 
on social services would like to see them decrease. 
 
And I understand the contract last year that was settled with a 

number of your workers agreed on the money, and yet at the 
same time, there was a letter of understanding or some sort of 
commitment that you were going to deal with the real issues of 
social workers much like the real issues of nurses, and that is 
overwork, overload, the fact they can’t even do their jobs 
properly, because to do an assessment to allow someone to get 
out in the workforce is going to mean extra time that the 
workers don’t have. 
 
We’re talking about the same kind of scenario that nurses have 
when they can’t do their real job because they don’t have time 
for patient care. They just run around like crazy doing the real 
technical stuff and filling out papers. And we can’t get either 
the social workers or our health system back in line if people 
aren’t able to treat other people like human beings. 
 
Now I have a number of other questions, but I’m going to ask 
you to respond to the commitment to social workers that you 
are going to be looking at the issues that were outside of their 
wages, so that they could actually go to bed at night feeling like 
they had done their job; and that the people of this province 
would understand that they do count, that they do have an 
opportunity to get off welfare, and they can some day in the 
very near future become a viable part of our society and not 
have to wait for a weekly cheque from the government just to 
keep food on the table. 
 
That’s not what we need in this province if we’re actually going 
to give people a sense of well-being and respect and honour. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, can you tell me what is your commitment to 
the employees of Social Services to make sure that they can 
start doing their job so that the people of this province can 
benefit. 
 
(1630) 
 
The Chair: — Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — With leave, Mr. Chairman, to 
introduce guests. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, I’m pleased to have 
the opportunity — I see they almost missed it; they’re leaving 
now — to welcome students here from St. Mark School on 
Pendygrasse Rd. in Saskatoon. Fifty grade 6 students have 
made the trip to be with us this afternoon and I’d like to ask my 
colleagues in the House to give them a warm welcome here 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Social Services 

Vote 36 
 
Subvote (SS01) 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Good afternoon, Mr. Minister. I understand 



924 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1999 

that there is going to be a review of our youth centres, the youth 
detention centres, and I want to ask you if that is just in relation 
to the recent incident at Kilburn or if it is in relation to youth 
detention centres generally, including the North Battleford 
Youth Centre? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chairman, let me first deal 
with the answer to the question from the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena who asked me some questions concerning 
workload. 
 
Yes, the department and the SGEU (Saskatchewan Government 
Employees’ Union) and CUPE (Canadian Union of Public 
Employees) did sign an agreement to try to find solutions to 
workload issues. In December of 1998, SGEU withdrew from 
that process. We remain committed to dealing with workload 
issues. For example, we did add the 50 new staff. 
 
We would appreciate their involvement as to evaluating the 
impact of that, and how that has worked out; also how 
improved training will assist staff; changes in policy, how that 
will implicate staff; and we like to work with them to get their 
feedback to assist us in dealing with these issues. 
 
The SGEU, of course, has mounted a public campaign. They 
have, what I might say, a very radical approach to these issues. 
They believe, for example, that joint management and union 
committees should be able to make binding decisions as to staff 
allocations. That of course, takes away the power of the 
members of the Legislative Assembly; that would take away 
your power to make decisions about what are the appropriate 
resources in the area of social services as opposed to other areas 
or even within social services, Mr. Chair. And we, of course, 
cannot agree to that. 
 
At the end of the day, it’s the government that puts forward 
spending estimates in the Legislative Assembly and it’s the 
members of the Legislative Assembly that are in a position to 
give approval of that. And we do not normally give powers to 
third parties to set things, such as worker numbers, and have 
those binding on the government and on members of the 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
I might say that I very much appreciate the concern of the 
Saskatchewan Party in these issues. I just wish that their 
predecessors, the Saskatchewan Tory Party, had had the same 
concern in these matters because federal governments might not 
have acted the way that they had if the members on that side 
had not, Mr. Chair, laid down and let the federal government 
make these changes in the areas of employment insurance — 
would have had a very, very great impact on Social Services 
and the people who work in that setting. 
 
And I’m just going to sit down, and then I’m going to answer 
the question from the other member, if that’s in order here. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Yes, I’d understood the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena was finished. I apologize. But if the 
minister is familiar and doesn’t need the question restated, I 
would appreciate his addressing that now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, the member speaks of 
the, I believe, the court ruling with respect to Kilburn Hall. 

Even while that court ruling was being provided, there were 
policy reviews in progress and in place on three matters related 
to the court’s judgment. 
 
There was, and still continues to be, a provincial committee 
with representation that includes the Children’s Advocate that is 
reviewing restraint policy including the types of restraint used 
and when and why we use them. We are anxious to find better 
alternatives to the use of restraints and improved restraint 
mechanisms. 
 
Secondly, the use of segregation and confinement is also being 
examined. We’re also looking at alternatives to isolation for the 
control of behaviour within facilities. 
 
Thirdly, a multidisciplinary team is reviewing all aspects of 
policy, practices, programs, and resources used to manage 
serious violent behaviours within custody facility. The team is 
asked for solutions for the prevention of incidents, the reduction 
in the likelihood of injury and psychological impacts, and 
effective monitoring of incidents. 
 
In addition there too, we also want to make service delivery 
culturally relevant and sensitive. And we are working with 
Aboriginal governments and communities to develop 
Aboriginal design and control of services. And we’re doing 
that, not only with Aboriginal governments, but also with the 
Saskatchewan Government Employees’ Union. 
 
And this is a system-wide review. It just doesn’t pertain to 
Kilburn Hall itself but is intended to cover all of our facilities in 
the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Minister, can you then tell me how long 
you anticipate this review will take, when you expect a report 
can be placed on your desk, and whether that report will in due 
course be available to the general public? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, these reviews are 
ongoing. They are internal but we do try to involve others such 
as the Children’s Advocate in these reviews. When we do make 
changes we would not normally communicate policy changes to 
the general public. We would just simply implement those. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — In the early years of the youth detention 
centres under the Young Offenders Act, we of course had a 
rather distressing record of escapes. And I want to know are we 
now within what would be considered an acceptable range in 
terms of escapes from the youth centres? 
 
I know that’s maybe a subjective question in the sense that there 
will always be some, but say, comparing it to the adult system 
are we now within the expected range and what we . . . in what 
happens in the adult system? Or do we still have a significantly 
higher rate of escapes from the youth system than we have in 
the adult system? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, human ingenuity 
knows no boundaries and . . . but there is no acceptable range 
for those things that you talk about. We’re always working to 
try to reduce breakouts and to ensure the safety of the 
community. And every time that there is an escape we try to 
learn from that and to minimize that in the future. 



925 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1999 

Mr. Hillson: — I’ll rephrase that. Is the level of escapes from 
the youth system still significantly higher than the level of 
escapes from the adult system? Or is it now closer to being on 
par? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, we don’t have those 
kind of comparisons. We’re dealing with two very different 
systems. For example, in our young offender system we have 
both open and secure custody, and I don’t know if we have 
anything comparable to that in the adult system. So we’re not in 
a position to make comparisons. 
 
But again, any escapes trouble us and we try to learn from that 
to minimize that in the future. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Well I would suggest that the minimum 
security of a place like the Battlefords correctional centre is 
analogous to open custody. But a few years ago there was some 
discussion as to the future of the North Battleford Youth Centre 
and the various open custody facilities for North Battleford. 
 
Can the minister assure me that the North Battleford Youth 
Centre is an ongoing and permanent facility? And where do we 
stand in terms of the open custody facilities in the Battlefords 
area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, given the current 
demand for secure custody facilities and for open custody 
facilities we anticipate continued use of the North Battleford 
facility and of the Drumming Hill open custody facility. We see 
no change in this. My own preference, as I’m sure it is the 
member, that we would have no need at all for secure custody 
facilities, but given the increased demand for those facilities we 
see continued use of the North Battleford facility. 
 
(1645) 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Good afternoon, Mr. 
Minister, and your officials. Mr. Minister, in a recent federal 
government press release indicating that there would be 
changes to the Young Offenders Act, it was stated that $17 
million would be given by the federal government to the 
provinces to be put towards community justice committees for 
rehabilitation and reconciliation initiatives. What has your 
government done to see that these committees are being 
established in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chairman, we do have some 
community justice committees that operate on an informal basis 
in some of our communities. We are very anxious to know the 
parameters of the federal funding and how that might affect 
Saskatchewan. And once we have a greater understanding of 
that we will want to develop more of these community justice 
committees to assist us in the young offender process. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, has your 
department not entered into discussion with the federal 
government on community justice committees? And have you 
in fact put forward some of your proposals and thoughts and 
ideas on community justice committees, and how they could be 
established here and assist our young people? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — I’m informed that those 

discussions are ongoing. They’re not yet complete. We have put 
proposals to the federal government to . . . We’ve called on 
them to provide additional funding for Aboriginal youth and we 
would hope they would be sensitive to that. But again these 
discussions are ongoing and we do expect though that they will 
come to a conclusion at some time so we can proceed. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, just one 
more question to you. And I put this to you on behalf of a 
citizen in Regina who is a senior citizen and has indicated to me 
that young offenders are being asked to serve some of their 
time, I guess, for retribution or to pay off fines, by assisting 
seniors in their homes or in their yards. This particular senior, 
Mr. Minister, told me that she had about a thousand dollars 
stolen from her home while young offenders were supposed to 
be there assisting her in her work. 
 
She has spoken to the appropriate authorities and she said that 
there is no help coming to her. In fact she suggested that 
possibly the young offenders could take a polygraph test and 
the authorities instructed that no polygraph test be taken. She 
wants to know what protection seniors have in cases like this. 
What can they do, where can they go, and how can they be 
protected against these things happening? And what kind of 
insurance do they have if in fact some of their property, their 
money, or their belongings are stolen from them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — The only advice that I can offer at 
this time is that in the case, as in the case of any theft, that the 
person should contact the police and report it and ask them to 
investigate it and to see what can be done. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Minister, I just have to put this forward. She 
did call the police and from what I understand there is the North 
Centre Community station or something of that nature in 
Regina and she put forward her complaint to a Mrs. Sutton and 
a Mr. Cox there and they were not being very helpful in giving 
her any further assistance. So she just doesn’t know quite what 
she should be doing in this instance. So she has talked to the 
police I think as far as I understand. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — I’m only guessing here, but given 
the explanation that you’ve provided me, it may well be that 
she’s not communicating very clearly with the police that in 
fact a theft has occurred. And she should very clearly 
communicate that. 
 
The last time I checked, if people in Regina have thefts and they 
report those to the police, the police will investigate. At least 
that’s my experience in Regina, and I don’t know why it would 
be any different in this case. So again I would encourage her to 
report that to the police. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Mr. Minister, I just have one question to ask, and then I feel that 
we . . . we probably won’t be able to get many answers because 
the questions that I ask seem to be skated around, and I was 
disappointed. When I became critic for Social Services and I 
met with you, we discussed the fact that whenever there was a 
real question to be asked, if we could keep politics out of it and 
actually start trying to help the people of the province, we’d 
both be better off. But when we hear the political statements, 
like the debt of the ’80s, that’s not helping us move forward. 



926 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1999 

So, Mr. Minister, the one question that I have to ask you is: 
what are you doing about the community home operators that 
would like to see an association started? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, I certainly don’t want 
to talk about the debt of the ’80s — those are the obligations of 
today. But I would just simply say with respect to the 
community home operators that they have expressed an interest 
in forming an association, and we would support them in doing 
that but we don’t feel that it’s our role to organize that for them. 
But we’ll certainly assist them in anyway that we can. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, thank you very much to your 
officials, and I look forward to the next time that we get to 
discuss this. There’ll probably be a different set-up in this room 
and probably a different vision in this room, so thank you very 
much to your officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, might I say that I 
would never underestimate that member’s wishful thinking, but 
having said that I want to thank her and the other members for 
their questions and also thank the officials for their 
participation. They’ve assisted me greatly as the members will 
know. 
 
Subvote (SS01) agreed to. 
 
Subvotes (SS02), (SS03), (SS04), (SS05), (SS06), (SS07), 
(SS09) agreed to. 
 
Vote 36 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1998-99 
General Revenue Fund 

Budgetary Expense 
Social Services 

Vote 36 
 

Subvotes (SS02), (SS03), (SS04), (SS05), (SS06) agreed to. 
 
Vote 36 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Environment and Resource Management 

Vote 26 
 
The Chair: — I would ask the minister to introduce his 
officials please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have with us 
today, deputy minister, Stuart Kramer to my right; behind me, 
Dave Phillips, assistant deputy minister of operation; and next 
to him Dave Tulloch, team leader of corporate development 
unit; and Bob Ruggles, assistant deputy minister of programs. 
 
Subvote (ER01) 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d like to 
welcome the minister and his officials here. You can see my 
paper isn’t very big. I don’t have a lot of questions. That 
doesn’t mean they may not take some time. 
 
Mr. Minister, outfitting is a very important industry in 

Saskatchewan, and generally though, outfitting for big game is 
limited to northern Saskatchewan. I know that there are groups 
that have been approaching you to expand that into southern 
Saskatchewan. What plans do you have in place, what 
discussions are you carrying on to allow the expansion of the 
outfitting industry in big game outfitting into southern 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Mr. Chairman, the outfitting industry is 
very important as the hon. member points out. We are in the 
process of working with the outfitting industry to allow them 
more self-control, self-administration of the industry. And this 
is taking place. The process probably will not be completed for 
a year or two yet, and at that time we will perhaps re-look at 
outfitting in the South. But our advisory committee has clearly 
pointed out they do not want big game outfitting in the southern 
part of the province at this time. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Who would 
the advisory committee be comprised of? I know that there are 
some groups that have been holding discussions with your 
department about allowing big game outfitting into southern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
In fact they informed me that the discussion had included an 
idea called community-based outfitting, which would be, as I 
understood it or as they understood it, would be operated by 
government agencies in southern Saskatchewan rather than by 
independent outfitters, as outfitting is currently carried on in the 
northern parts of Saskatchewan. 
 
Is this what you’re looking at, or what directions are you 
looking at going at in that area? And I really would like to know 
who’s on the advisory committee. 
 
(1700) 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Mr. Chairman, the advisory committee, the 
wildlife diversification task force which we worked on about 
three years ago was made up of around 24 different individuals 
— from agriculture groups, to SARM, to wildlife organizations, 
outfitters themselves. And at that time the decision was that we 
are not prepared to allow big game outfitting in the South. 
 
And in respect to your community-based outfitting proposal, I 
am aware of it, and it certainly has not been totally shelved. But 
we’re waiting until we get through this next phase of outfitting 
reform and we will . . . this obviously will be coming forward 
again. But for the current time we will not be expanding 
outfitting of big game animals in the South. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, certainly not my 
community-based outfitting. This is a suggestion that the 
outfitting people I’ve been talking to suggested it was coming 
out of your department. I don’t want government involved in it 
as the operators of outfitting. Government is there to regulate, 
not to control and operate. 
 
Mr. Minister, though, I wonder if you can give us the names of 
the individuals and the organizations that are on your advisory 
committee. And did I understand you to say that this report 
decision was made three years ago? 
 



927 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1999 

Hon. Mr. Scott: — That’s correct. It was the committee 
established by the previous minister, so it’d be perhaps four 
years ago. And it was called the wildlife diversification task 
force, and we will get you a complete list of the members of 
that committee. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister. From 
my understanding of SERM, the previous minister didn’t do all 
that great a job. In fact, as we had a good antelope herd here 
before he became minister and now we have very few antelope, 
so I think that’s an indication of the performance of that 
particular minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, I think we do need to take a very serious look at 
expanding the opportunities in southern Saskatchewan for 
outfitting. We have a great deal of potential, and I think we’re 
foregoing business opportunities and growth in the southern 
part of the province by not allowing outfitting to take place. 
And I think the department should be very seriously considering 
having a look at that, and I look forward to receiving that list. 
Thank you, Mr. Minister. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and good afternoon to the 
minister and good afternoon to your officials. And I’d like to 
say a special good afternoon to Mr. Callele, who is with you 
today. Mr. Callele happens to be a friend from out Bruno way, 
and it’s nice to see you. 
 
Mr. Minister, I just wanted to know what kind of projects does 
SERM engage in, in Mexico right now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — I believe the hon. member is referring to 
the Saskatchewan Wetland Conservation Corporation, and 
that’s a Crown. It’s closely tied with SERM, and it was 
established to implement the North American waterfowl 
management plan. 
 
The corporation has expanded into partnerships with groups in 
the United States as well as Mexico. And this is basically 
following the migratory birds — many of them nest up here. 
There’s key migration stopovers in the States that we’re 
working with the Americans, or they’re working with us, to 
protect. And of course the wintering areas in Mexico are very 
important. And we’re working with the Mexicans to protect 
these areas — I guess, tell them about the nesting habitat here in 
Canada. 
 
So that is the partnership agreement that we have with Mexico. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. So what would one of 
your people do if they went down to Mexico? What would their 
interest be? I understand it’s nesting habits and so on, and 
looking at marshlands that may be there. 
 
But I’m wondering what the interest is for the people of 
Saskatchewan for us to be expending . . . or spending, rather, 
quite a lot of money on sending people down to Mexico. And 
what in goodness’ name could they effect there that would be so 
very valuable? 
 
The way I see it is that if we pay attention to our nesting habitat 
and our wildlife habitat here in the province, that should be our 
responsibility, and what the Mexicans do should be their 

responsibility. 
 
This sort of a mandate appears to me to be getting right out of 
control. And I don’t know whether again the taxpayers of the 
province would be feeling very good about spending a lot of 
money on this when we have so many severe problems in health 
and education and highways. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Mr. Chairman, the project which the hon. 
member refers to, we simply cannot go blindly about doing our 
work up here. So when our people do go down there perhaps 
once or twice a year — and the Mexicans have been up here — 
to see the habitat, to see the problems that they are facing, and 
in many cases our problems are the same. We can learn from 
each other. 
 
And the funding for the international projects is all outside 
money and largely from the US (United States) Fish and 
Wildlife Service and other foundations in the States. So it’s a 
team effort. We wish to learn of their problems, offer them 
ideas, and we pick up ideas as well. 
 
Ms. Julé: — So, Mr. Minister, are you saying that the funding 
for this project does not come from the provincial coffers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — The funding for the Saskatchewan Wetland 
Corporation has remained at the same level. In fact it was 
reduced a couple of years ago to 500,000. Virtually all of the 
money used in out-of-province international projects is outside 
money, and the 500,000 which is used here is basically spent in 
Saskatchewan on stream bank programs — the Chaplin and the 
Quill Lakes area for an example. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I have to 
just make this comment because it’s a bit amusing to me, but 
also an observation that really does make me wonder how 
money is being spent. And I’m glad that the money is not 
necessarily coming from provincial coffers. Because I happened 
to meet one of your people on an airplane coming from Mexico. 
And he was expounding about how much time he had for 
holidaying, and he did a little bit of work in between. 
 
So I think that we want to make sure that if there are provincial 
taxpayers’ money going to this project, or any project out of our 
country, that we ensure that the time is well spent and that 
people here don’t have to wonder about what kind of activities 
government has engaged in. 
 
Mr. Minister, I notice that your government seems to claim that 
they really do support the conservation of prime habitat for . . . 
prime habitat land for enhancing an environment for wildlife 
and maintaining the beauty of natural surroundings. 
 
Mr. Minister, I brought the specific issue I’m going to mention 
to you to the attention of the Minister of Agriculture and Food, 
and I would like to have your comments on it also. 
 
Now near St. Brieux in Saskatchewan in my constituency, there 
have been a number of people there who have written letters 
and petitions to you as the Minister of the Environment and 
Resource Management, and also to the Minister of Agriculture. 
And they’re requesting that a parcel of Crown land there, which 
is prime habitat land for wildlife, be preserved as such. This 



928 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1999 

land is not in any way or form suitable for agriculture purposes. 
This land is full of rock, marshland, and natural grassland other 
than that. 
 
The people in . . . the person, rather, at St. Brieux that was 
leasing that Crown land recently received a letter indicating that 
he must have this land fenced in and it must be used for cattle 
grazing. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, why in the world would you not ensure that 
prime habitat land like that is in fact left as prime habitat land 
for our wildlife? And why would the Minister of Agriculture go 
to the point where he saw that this gentleman’s lease was 
revoked by the Department of Agriculture and Food? This 
gentleman that was leasing this land has paid local taxes and all 
of the leasing agreement fees, and has been doing this for some 
time. 
 
Now if we were truly trying to preserve these wildlife habitat 
lands, why would we not make sure that people that are 
concerned about wildlife and Crown land that is engaged in 
wildlife habitat, not be preserved as such? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. The hon. member 
raises an issue which I am aware of. It’s a half section of The 
Wildlife Habitat Protection Act land. This is agriculture Crown 
land which is used for grazing, haying in some cases. 
 
The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act, brought in in the 1980s — 
which we certainly support — provides for the land to be 
grazed, but it cannot be cleared; it cannot be broken up; it 
cannot be drained. And we believe that there is certainly room 
for cattle to graze on some of these lands. And we are still in the 
process though. If the local community feels strongly about it, 
we would consider looking at this. 
 
But the land is basically protected. Nobody can break it up, 
drain it, or clear it. It cannot be sold. So we are aware of the 
situation. And we’re working with my colleague, the Minister 
of Agriculture, to see what we can do to accommodate the 
interests of the local people. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Minister, who determines that that land has to 
be grazed? Who determines who is going to put cattle on there 
for grazing? If this has not been done up till now, how is it that 
the government can indicate that it must be used for grazing 
when in fact there may not even be anyone in that area that 
wants to put cattle on there for grazing? 
 
Or was the lessee a person who gave you an indication when he 
leased the land that it would be used for grazing? Is that the 
case? Or . . . like I’m wondering who determines if that land 
should be grazed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — The land has been grazed in the past albeit 
the last couple of years the individual who was leasing the land 
has paid the taxes. And my understanding is somebody else saw 
that this individual had access to this Crown land, was not using 
it, and perhaps that individual wanted to put some cattle in 
there, and that’s why it came to our attention. 
 
So the Department of Agriculture determines if the grazing will 
occur, how many animals, and through the critical wildlife 

habitat Act we ensure that the land will not be sold, broke, 
drained, or cleared. And in that way we are protecting the 
habitat. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Minister, does the provincial government get 
anything, any monetary compensation or any benefit from 
insisting that the land be grazed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — The Department of Agriculture would 
collect grazing fees from the individual with cattle on the land. 
 
Ms. Julé: — So, Mr. Minister, is this going to be a sort of new 
and ongoing practice? You’re going to be looking at lands that 
have been preserved for wildlife habitat, and if there’s a 
possibility that the government can gain some funds from 
having cattle grazed on our lands that are wildlife habitat, that 
you’re going to make sure that that’s happening, and it will be 
turned over to the purview of the Department of Agriculture 
and Food? 
 
Because that seems to me that you’re doing that specifically to 
have money coming into provincial coffers. And I’m not too 
sure whether or not that’s going to be really good for the 
wildlife, the wildlife of our province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Mr. Chairman, the lands in question are 
agriculture grazing lands. They total about 7 to 8 million acres 
in the province. And we’ve identified about 3.4 million as being 
very important to wildlife. And we do not want to kick the 
cattle off of all of these grazing lands. We believe that 
agriculture and wildlife can coexist. And our idea is to allow 
grazing, sustainable grazing, but we will not allow the land to 
be sold and we will not allow someone to go in and bulldoze the 
trees off, drain the wetlands, or break up the native prairie and 
seed alfalfa. 
 
So in this way I think we’ve come up with a good balance. And 
on the other hand the wildlife development fund lands, which 
the hon. member may know, is purchased through hunting 
licence fees. Grazing is not permitted on these lands. 
 
(1715) 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I just 
wanted to have a bit of a discussion with you on the forest . . . 
the recent announcement on forest management. 
 
I know there’s a number of people in this province who are 
quite thrilled with the whole announcement that was made 
because it will in fact produce some economic activity and 
private economic activity which is looked at favourably. And in 
one sense I agree with that; however on the other hand, Mr. 
Minister, there are a number of people that are concerned about 
the boreal forest in northeast Saskatchewan and whether or not 
that is going to be endangered by extra harvesting of the trees 
there. 
 
From what I understand Weyerhaeuser has made a commitment 
to give up some of its cutting rights, or whatever it’s called, and 
that they are going to be moving into more densely populated 
areas — areas more densely populated. 
 
So can you tell me whether or no there is a danger to that boreal 



929 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1999 

forest? And are we going to have to look back in a few years 
and realize that in fact the whole ecosystem has been terribly 
disturbed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — I certainly appreciate the comments on our 
forestry industry, Mr. Chairman. The forest is very important to 
us all, both economically and environmentally, and for 
ecotourism and many things. And for the past number of years 
we’ve been doing an in-depth inventory on our forests and we 
firmly believe that we can sustain an increased harvest. 
 
Currently we harvest about 20,000 acres, or the size of 
Greenwater Provincial Park. This is one-tenth of one per cent of 
our forest base. Now if all of these announcements that were 
made earlier this week come to, or are fulfilled, we would be 
harvesting two-tenths of one per cent of our forest. Now on the 
same token one and a half per cent or 15 times more acres of 
forest burn on average each year than are harvested. 
 
The other important thing that we are doing now which we did 
not do earlier, we are 100 per cent reforestation. Back 20, 30 
years ago this did not occur, and we are still grappling with that. 
We are committed to reforesting areas but we believe that we 
have a sustainable forest industry and there will . . . we will 
have independent reviews and audits by outside experts from 
the scientific community to ensure that we are not going too far 
or we need to back off in some areas in cutting our forests. It is 
our full intention of a sustainable forest industry while 
accommodating ecotourism, northern residents, outfitting, 
snowmobiling, and other activities. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, at this 
time I’d like to bring up a situation that was brought to my 
attention about an incident that happened at Moose Mountain 
Park in southern Saskatchewan. 
 
I understand that there are people from the United States that do 
come up into Saskatchewan to harvest antlers that have fallen 
off of deer. And these people came up as they have in many 
years past and were picking up antlers. Ended up being taken by 
conservation officers from what I understand. And I must say 
this is hearsay on my part because there has been nothing 
proven. But I want to bring it to your attention because it’s a 
really important matter on how we treat our tourists and how we 
treat people coming from other countries into Saskatchewan. 
 
Now as I’ve said, they came to harvest these antlers. I was told 
that there was conservation officers who had side arms, who put 
them in handcuffs, put them into a holding cell in one of the 
towns, and ended up not having the right basically to phone 
anyone or do anything in their defence. There was no RCMP 
officer at the scene. And in fact these people ended up being 
fined, I understand, $20,000 or something. 
 
I’d like to know a couple of things, Mr. Minister. Who would 
that kind of a fine go to and to what extent of authority do 
conservation officers have? As it turns out, these people went 
back to the States, and I understand that one of them is the 
publisher of quite a significant magazine in the States about 
hunting and so on. And I know that we wouldn’t want to have 
bad relations between our US counterparts and ourselves. 
 
So if you could answer those two questions, what extent of 

authority do conservation officers have if they believe that 
someone is breaking the law? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Mr. Chairman, I am not familiar with the 
specific case the hon. member raises, but if she could give me 
more details later on we’d be glad to check into it. We do know 
that poaching and trafficking in wildlife parks is a very major 
problem here in Canada and the United States. Our officers 
have the full peace officer status. They can enforce all laws in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So I don’t know about this particular case but in order to pick 
up shed antlers or purchase them from some kid that’s found the 
antlers on his farm, we require that the individual have a permit 
so that we can track this. And it also is required . . . for the 
American to enter back into his country, they have to determine 
where these antlers came from. 
 
So wildlife trafficking and poaching is a big problem and we 
deal with it very seriously. At the same time, we want to be 
dealing with people fairly. So if the hon. member has any 
further information, please send it to us later on. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, these 
people did have a permit from what I understand and they have 
indicated to me that they are going through a legal process if 
need be and they’re consulting their lawyers about this. If in 
fact anything does come of this and they notify me, I will let 
you know, but I would assume that you would probably be 
notified before I would if they proceed with legal action. 
 
Mr. Minister, just one more comment and question. Last year I 
brought up to you, I believe in estimates, the problem of 
herbicides present in every water supply in Western Canada. 
The national hydrological research centre in Saskatoon has 
determined that dugouts in Saskatchewan contain pesticides, 
sometimes as much as 1,000 times more detectable than 
European water supplies. And there is danger to farmers and 
custom applicators as far as pesticide residues that they 
assimilate while spraying. 
 
We know that the effects of pesticides on rural residents is very 
bad. We don’t know enough about it because funding for 
research in this area is quite tight. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, this is the responsibility of the provincial 
government and I’d like to know what forward-looking steps 
you are taking as a provincial government to concretely and 
effectively develop methods to address the problem? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Mr. Chairman, the hon. member raises 
another very good and important area and that’s the whole use 
of pesticides, herbicides in Saskatchewan. And because of our 
large agriculture base, there is a lot of chemicals used. 
 
First of all these chemicals have to be licensed federally and 
they do go through stringent tests before they are licensed. And 
locally in Saskatchewan here, the Department of Health and 
Sask Water will do tests for any drinking water samples 
required. And I am told that by and large the amount of 
chemicals, if any, in drinking water is certainly minimal. 
However, none would be preferable. But there are so-called safe 
limits or acceptable levels in our drinking water but we 



930 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1999 

certainly want to stay well below that level if at all possible. 
 
But it is an issue, and if contaminated water is found obviously 
the people that may use that water would be notified. So we are 
working with communities, farmers, to test water on a regular 
basis. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, and welcome to the minister and 
his people. I have a comment and then a question that I’d like to 
pose to you. 
 
First of all, recently, as you’re aware, Saskatchewan got a mark 
from the WWF (World Wildlife Fund) that was substantially 
lower. I would hope you don’t take much consideration of that, 
and make decisions based on what the people of Saskatchewan 
want, not some multinational group that wants to tell us what to 
do. 
 
The specific question that I have is relating to an item called the 
old Simpson timber mill site, and I’m sure your officials will 
probably know what that is. There’s apparently a cleanup taking 
place of this old Simpson timber mill site. 
 
And I guess the question that I have has two parts to it: is the 
government paying for that cleanup; and if they are, why was 
the cleanup not tendered? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Mr. Chairman, with a contaminated site, if 
there is any ability to identify the source of the polluter, it’s a 
polluter pay. 
 
So we do not have the specifics on this case but we would 
definitely get back to you on this particular Simpson timber site 
to let you know what, if anything, is being done on that site and 
who’s paying for it. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, just 
a few short questions on surveillance in your department. I’m 
wondering, in your budget, is there a set amount of money that 
you have allotted for surveillance operations such as monitoring 
illegal activities and the likes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Certainly the surveillance and enforcement 
of laws — game laws, pollution laws — is very important. And 
we do have a fixed amount that goes into this budget or that 
portion of the department every year. And in fact last year, we 
added an $11,000 pot for aerial night lighting surveillance. 
 
So yes, there is a regular amount of money for conservation 
officers’ work. And if need be, we try to find a few more 
thousand dollars to prop it up a bit if we see a problem in an 
area. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Do you try and have a set amount for a 
particular surveillance operation if it involves a small group, an 
individual, or something like that as opposed to a major 
operation where you’re continually monitoring surveillance for 
night hunting? I guess what I’m asking, do you have a set 
amount that you would try and adhere to for a single 
surveillance operation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — I believe the hon. member is leading 
towards the special investigation undercover work. We do do 

some of the that — averages around 12 cases a year. And it’s a 
matter of perhaps 10 to $20,000 that we would spend on that. 
Again it would depend on the size of the undercover operation. 
But we are definitely involved in some of that activity. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you. Minister, at whose discretion is 
the amount of time and money allotted to any individual case 
come under? Is it of the man in the field or does it have to be 
sent down from the top? Or how is that determined? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — The assistant deputy minister of operations 
is the official person who determines whether money will be 
spent on an investigation in this province. And often these 
investigations are interprovincial-international 
smuggling-poaching rings, and RCMP are often involved as 
well. So it’s a team effort but we would determine it in our head 
office here in Regina. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you. What kind of leeway would your 
members in the field have, say on a surveillance operation for 
the poaching of an illegal deer? What type of money would he 
be allowed to spend on surveillance in airplanes, helicopters, 
other officers, in following that? 
 
And is there a particular — I’ll ask you the second part of the 
question — is there a particular time frame that officers are 
allowed to pursue a particular surveillance operation, or does 
that . . . is that his discretion or does that have to come from the 
assistant deputy minister as well? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — It’s sort of a case-by-case issue, Mr. 
Chairman. If it’s one individual poaching a deer, simply the 
officer would deal with that. 
 
However, if it’s an organized ring which involves more than 
one or two people and is ongoing and there’s trafficking 
involved and other jurisdictions, then that’s when we take a 
more, I guess, broad look at the issue, how serious it is, and 
then we would direct as many resources as we could towards 
that. If it included aircraft work, we would certainly find that 
money to achieve that. 
 
(1730) 
 
Mr. McLane: — Minister, would the department allow a 
substantial amount of money, say, maybe a couple years time 
frame, a week or two of surveillance by an airplane, several 
officers involved, for a single person or two in the illegal 
hunting of a deer? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Again, it’s the severity of the issue. If it’s 
again one individual that’s gone out and shot a deer or perhaps 
half a dozen deer and is trafficking them around town, the 
officers would simply do their job. However, if it involves other 
jurisdictions, the officers obviously would report to their . . . the 
people higher up the ladder in the department until it got to the 
top and then we would see what we’d need to do. And certainly 
the officers’ ideas, input, and recommendations would be 
clearly used to determine how we best break this poaching ring 
or smuggling ring and the resources that would be required. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Minister, is it legal under the legislation for 
your department or your members to monitor an FM radio 



931 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1999 

band? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t have the specific 
answer on that — the radio. But our officers are full peace 
officers. Any resources available to, example, RCMP officers to 
enforce the law are available to our officers, and bearing in 
mind that both groups would have to abide by the Charter of 
Rights and Freedoms. 
 
So we can certainly check on the use of monitoring FM radio 
stations. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Minister. If you could give that to 
me in writing, I’d appreciate that. 
 
I guess as you guessed, I’m alluding to a specific case where 
I’m coming to. And it seems to me that all of us want to 
preserve the wildlife in the province as best we can. And it 
seems to me one of the best ways to do that is to have our 
members out there and to be visible. I’m sure the RCMP who 
you’ve just mentioned take that attitude and prefer to be visible 
and prevent an actual crime before it takes place. 
 
And I think that’s important for our members in your 
department to understand that once the crime has been 
committed, and the officers knew it was going to be committed 
and were watching and waiting and monitoring and letting the 
wildlife be depleted and then moving in to get the charge, I 
think is causing your members some problems in the field in 
doing that. 
 
As I said, once the crime is committed, the wildlife has had it, 
whatever it may be, whether it’s fishing or whether it’s birds or 
large, big game animals. 
 
So I’m wonder, Mr. Minister, if you could address that issue 
just a wee bit for me and let me know what the plans in your 
department are to look into this, and if that is the policy of the 
department to be visible as opposed to trying to entrap someone 
into committing a crime. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Obviously the hon. member knows exactly 
what we want to do as well. Let’s solve the problem, or try to 
nip the problem in the bud. 
 
And we have a number of ways of doing that. For an example, 
one out of five people in Saskatchewan have now taken a hunter 
safety, education, and conservation course. We have our TIP 
(Turn in Poachers) line which works very well. People will 
phone in suspicious vehicles or anyone that they think may be 
doing stuff and they shouldn’t be. 
 
And we obviously do try to get to the crime as quick as we can. 
But at the same time, somebody has to break the law before we 
can act. We can monitor and keep tabs on things. 
 
We agree with what you’re saying. Rather than let something 
get away on us, we try to get at it as quickly as we can. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you. Mr. Minister, I’ll take that a step 
farther I guess. Is there a way that we can ensure that this is 
happening to your members out there in way of education 
through your department, or in way of — and this is maybe 

being a little simplistic — in the way of a memo saying that 
we’d much prefer the members to be visible driving down the 
road or driving around where the hunters and fishermen are as 
opposed to hiding behind a bin or hiding in a row of trees 
waiting for someone to exceed their limit or to do an illegal act. 
 
Is there some reassurance that people of Saskatchewan might 
have from your department that that indeed is the role that the 
minister is handing down to his people in the field? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Yes, 
getting our officers out, getting them visible, whether it’s 
visiting in schools or walking through one of our park sites, and 
certainly out during the hunting season as well, we are happy to 
report that we have got more money for our conservation 
officers to drive more miles for an example this year. 
 
So the member makes a good statement, observation. We need 
our officers out and about where people will see them, where 
they’re accessible to the public, where would-be lawbreakers 
may think twice about committing a crime. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you. Is there something that the public 
will see that will give them that sense of security that that 
indeed is happening? That they’re going to be trying to be the 
visible law enforcement officers as opposed to the people 
hiding behind something, a building, or you know, binocularing 
from three or four miles away. We have great technology these 
days. 
 
And I have no sympathy for the people that are breaking the 
law. But I do think in many instances, as with our police force 
in the province, that being visible prevents many more crimes 
than are committed if the officers are there. If people know 
they’re there, they may be wanting to be doing something that’s 
wrong, but if they see that member out there and they know 
he’s in the area, they’re going to say, uh-uh, it’s not worth it 
because I know they’re around. 
 
But if they’re hiding behind a bush waiting to pounce on 
someone, it does two things. It leaves ill feelings for the 
members and it leaves ill feelings for the department who the 
members are a part of. And that’s certainly something that I 
think we’ve seen an increase in over the past few years, and I 
think it’s something that I want to see turned around and try and 
create an environment of where the people actually want to help 
the officers in maintaining the law. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Well, Mr. Chairman, certainly we would 
much prefer the upfront, public approach as well. But obviously 
if the officer is waiting to see if somebody commits a crime, he 
has suspicions, or somebody’s reported that this individual is 
breaking a law. And sometimes you have to wait and catch 
them in the act simply to have charges that will hold. So I 
appreciate what you’re saying. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Minister, I think back to the original line of 
questions that I was pursuing with these individual cases. There 
is an individual case where I think upwards of two years of 
surveillance went in. Air surveillance was used; monitoring of 
the FM crystal was used; a lot of money was used as well 
through a number of members pursuing this particular case. 
 



932 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1999 

And it was really quite a minor case and it involved really a 
single animal. And it had nothing to do with trapping, it had 
nothing to do with a ring, it had nothing to do with anything 
other than some people hunting. 
 
I will be coming to you with that case and I hope that you’re 
receptive to hear about it. And I think there was a considerable 
amount of money lost and spent in an area that didn’t need to be 
when indeed we were losing truckloads of animals in the 
northeast to out-of-province hunters. 
 
So I will be bringing that case to you on an individual basis and 
I hope that you and some of your officials, that we can sit down 
and discuss it and see that maybe money is spent in places 
where it probably should be. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Mr. Chairman, I will be glad to meet with 
the hon. member and get the details of this particular case. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, in closing I’d 
like to just comment to the minister that in view of the fact that 
the member from Arm River has brought up the situations that 
he has, and I have also been notified of people that are in our 
province and outside of our province, really concerned with 
citizens being entrapped. I think that it’s up to you as minister 
to look into this very serious allegation and make sure that that 
does not happen. Thank you. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Sorry, Mr. Chairman. I forgot one or two 
questions that I wanted to ask. I hear the members saying short 
questions. If, you know, if you’d rather adjourn and come back 
we could do that, but I’m prepared to stay here and ask these 
questions. 
 
Mr. Minister, it’s on the big game hunting for this coming fall. I 
wonder if you could tell us a little bit about what you expect to 
see in terms of seasons for the big game in the province, the 
antelope — whether we’re seeing the numbers increase or are 
we going to have a season of white-tailed deer? 
 
I believe that there’s some changes in the particular area that I 
live in and across the province, and certainly to do with the 
moose and elk population in the north, west, and east. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Mr. Chairman, there’s very little change in 
big game quotas for this coming year. Antelope season is still 
closed. Mule deer is about the same as last year. White-tailed 
deer has been reduced from two to one tag in some of the zones 
in the south-central area. 
 
There are still some two deer zones. And moose and elk are 
about the same. There’s pockets where the moose is down a bit 
and perhaps elk is up a bit, but by and large they’re the same. 
And the new hunting guide is officially out now for anybody 
who would like to obtain one. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Last question, Minister. In particular in zone 
56, the moose populations for that zone. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Zone 56, Mr. Chairman, is much the same 
as last year. We’re offering 100 tags. 
 
Subvote (ER01) agreed to. 

Subvotes (ER02), (ER08), (ER15), (ER04), (ER09), (ER10), 
(ER05), (ER07), (ER03), (ER11), (ER14) agreed to. 
 
Vote 26 agreed to. 
 
(1745) 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1998-99 
General Revenue Fund 

Budgetary Expense 
Environment and Resource Management 

Vote 26 
 
Subvotes (ER01), (ER08), (ER04), (ER09), (ER10), (ERO7), 
(ER11), (ER14) agreed to. 
 
Vote 26 agreed to. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:49 p.m. 
 
 



 

 


