





























































Hansard: March 26, 1999


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 273 
 March 26, 1999 
 
The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I have a petition to present on behalf of farm families 
across Saskatchewan. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
demand that the federal government work with 
Saskatchewan to put in place a farm aid package that 
provides real relief to those who need it and that the 
provincial government develop a long-term farm safety net 
program as it promised to do when it cancelled GRIP 
against the wishes of farmers. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition come from the 
communities of MacNutt, Langenburg, and Churchbridge.  
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have 
petitions to present today on behalf of the Saskatchewan 
disenfranchised widows. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to have the Workers’ 
Compensation Board Act amended whereby benefits and 
pensions are reinstated to disenfranchised widows and 
whereby all revoked pensions are reimbursed to them 
retroactively with interest to April 17, 1985. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from the Regina, Moose 
Jaw, and Qu’Appelle areas of the province. 
 
I so submit. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present this morning. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
demand that the federal government work with 
Saskatchewan to put in place a farm aid package that 
provides real relief to those who need it and that the 
provincial government develop a long-term farm safety net 
program as it promised to do when it cancelled GRIP 
against the wishes of farmers. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The community signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
community of Langenberg. 

I so present. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As well to present 
petitions. Reading the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to end 
its unfair tendering policies and immediately cancel the 
Crown Construction Tendering Agreement. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by individuals from the 
communities of Humboldt, Carmel, Tompkins and other 
communities in the province. 

 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise on 
behalf of people in the province concerned about the unfairness 
in the Crown Construction Tendering Agreement. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to end 
its unfair tendering policies and immediately cancel the 
Crown Construction Tendering Agreement. 

 
The signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Saskatoon, Martensville and Vanscoy. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
to present today. 

 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
abandon any plans to reduce acute care or close any more 
hospitals in the North-East Health District. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

The people that have signed this petition are from Carrot River 
and Arborfield. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too rise 
today to present petitions on behalf of people in Saskatchewan 
who would like to see the Crown Construction Tendering 
Agreement scrapped. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitions humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to end 
its unfair tendering policies and immediately cancel the 
Crown Construction Tendering Agreement. 
 

The signators on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from Saskatoon 
and area. 
 
I so present. 
 



274 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 1999 

Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud today to 
rise in this House to present a petition on behalf of the people of 
this province. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call on federal and provincial 
governments to dedicate a significantly greater portion of 
fuel tax revenues toward road maintenance and 
construction so that Saskatchewan residents may have a 
safe highway system that meets their needs. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition has been signed by the good folks 
from Govan and Duval and Strasbourg areas. 
 
And I so present. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
petitions on behalf of citizens who are concerned about the state 
of our highway system and lack of concern for maintenance and 
construction to them. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call on federal and provincial 
governments to dedicate a significantly greater portion of 
fuel tax revenues toward road maintenance and 
construction so Saskatchewan residents may have a safe 
highway system that meets their needs. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will every pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, those who’ve signed these petitions this morning 
are from communities of Moose Jaw and also from the Moose 
Jaw district. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have petitions 
from good people of Saskatchewan, and the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call on federal and provincial 
governments to dedicate a significantly greater portion of 
fuel tax revenues toward road maintenance and 
construction so Saskatchewan residents may have a safe 
highway system that meets their needs. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

The signatures on these petitions are from Bienfait, from 
Estevan, Lampman, Kindersley, Francis, and Regina. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present petitions 
this morning praying that the entrance to the city of North 
Battleford and specifically the Highway 40 intersection with the 
Yellowhead be removed and relocated in order to relieve 
congestion and the dangerous condition at the city of North 
Battleford entrance. 
 
Your petitioners this morning come from Battleford, North 
Battleford, Wilkie, and Denholm. 
 
I so present. 

Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I join with my 
colleagues here today in bringing forward petitions regarding 
the poor state of Saskatchewan highways. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call on federal and provincial 
governments to dedicate a significantly greater portion of 
fuel tax revenues toward road maintenance and 
construction so Saskatchewan residents may have a safe 
highway system that meets their needs. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed these petitions are 
from the Glentworth, Mankota, McCord, Shaunavon, and 
Eastend areas of the province. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
very pleased to rise once again on behalf of Saskatchewan 
citizens who are most concerned about the education of children 
with learning disabilities and I’ll read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide essential funding and ensure the delivery of 
scientifically proven diagnostic assessment and 
programming of children with learning disabilities in order 
that they have access to an education that meets their needs 
and allows them to reach their full potential. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The signators today, Mr. Speaker, are all from Pelican Narrows. 
Thank you very much. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy today, 
Mr. Speaker, to rise to present petitions on behalf of the people 
from the Leader community and I will read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reach necessary agreements with other levels of 
government to fund the twinning of the Trans-Canada 
Highway in Saskatchewan so work can begin with the 
project, and set out a time frame for the ultimate 
completion of the project with or without federal 
assistance. 

 
I’m happy to present this, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the people 
of Leader, as I’ve said, and also from Fox Valley. And I so 
present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the petitions presented at the last 
sitting have been reviewed and found to be in order. Pursuant to 
rule 12(7) these petitions are hereby received. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 



March 26, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 275 

shall on day no. 15 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Finance: regarding the education and 
health sales tax, what is the department’s estimate of the 
total annual value of cross-border shopping done by 
Saskatchewan residents in PST-free Alberta; what is the 
department’s estimate of the annual revenue lost on 
provincial sales tax for cross-border shopping purchases 
made by Saskatchewan residents in Alberta. 
 

And if I may, Mr. Speaker, I also give notice that I shall on day 
no. 15 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Finance: regarding the fuel tax, what is 
the department’s estimate of the total annual value of 
cross-border shopping refuelling done by Saskatchewan 
residents in Alberta; what is the department’s estimate of 
the annual revenue loss on fuel tax for cross-border fuel 
purchases made by Saskatchewan residents in Alberta. 
 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall present the government with the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Agriculture: how many grain elevators 
do your officials believe will be remaining in 
Saskatchewan by the year 2000 and by the year 2010; what 
assistance are you offering to those willing to purchase 
branch lines; how many branch lines are being negotiated 
for by those willing to purchase them; how many of those 
do you estimate will be remaining in operation and 
operational; and what impact do you predict there will be 
on communities where branch lines are not converted into 
private operations. 
 

And I so present. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It would appear 
that we are joined by a few guests this morning in the Assembly 
and I would, rather than introduce starting at the back corner of 
the room, I would like to introduce a group of grade 12 students 
who are joining us here today. 
 
It’s a tradition that this group of grade 12 students from 
Campbell Collegiate join us every year to watch the budget 
come down. It’s an important part of their studies as they watch 
the practical application of our democracy. 
 
Today there are 46 students in the west gallery. They’re joined 
by their teachers, Dan Fletcher and Debbie Soroka. And I 
would ask all members to join with me in welcoming them here 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is 
indeed a pleasure of mine to introduce an individual today to 
you and through you to all members of the Assembly, an 
individual noted for his witticism and intellectual gymnastics on 
the floor of this very Assembly, and not only here but in the 
Senate as well. He is the incomparable Senator Dave Steuart 
who was first elected in a by-election in 1962, then re-elected in 

1964, 1967, 1971, and 1975 — who nicknamed himself 
landslide Dave because of his habit of winning elections by a 
whisker. 
 
I ask that Dave Steuart stand and be recognized and please have 
all members of the Assembly join me in giving him a very 
warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to 
join with the words of the former leader of the Liberal Party in 
Saskatchewan and the member from Saskatoon Greystone in 
welcoming Davey Steuart, although I noticed that even today 
when the hon. member from Greystone asked Mr. Steuart to 
stand up and be noticed, like when he served in the legislature, 
he refused to do that. 
 
The truth of the matter is I have a great deal of fond memories, 
and some not so fond, in serving in this House with Mr. Steuart. 
Ross Thatcher was sitting as the premier, and big physique, and 
Davey, you could just barely see him across the deputy leader’s 
chair. But boy when he got up, you could sure hear him. And 
you could sure feel him. And what the member from Greystone 
said is bang on. A person with wit, intellect, principle, a 
commitment to this province, a commitment to this country. I 
know I am probably approaching that period in political life 
when things never quite are as good as they used to be, but I 
want to say in those days they were titanic debates with Dave 
Steuart, Al Blakeney and a number of the members of the 
House. Their policy and ideology were at the centre of what we 
were doing in trying to build a great Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of all of the members on this side of the 
House and all of the former members who would be here, it’s so 
great to see Dave Steuart looking so well and I’m told last night 
in such fine fettle that you stole the show again. It’s great to 
have you back and many, many more years of good health. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to add my 
words of welcome on behalf of the Liberal caucus to Senator 
Davey Steuart but also I would like to welcome all the people 
who have taken the time to be with us here on this very 
important day. We have members of parliament, we have 
community leaders, we have mayors, we have . . . we have 
people from the civil service who have joined us here today and 
I would like to, on behalf of our caucus, welcome each and 
every one to the Assembly today, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Very 
quickly, I too would like to welcome all of the people from 
Saskatchewan who have taken the time to be here for this very 
important occasion. On behalf on the official opposition caucus 
I too would like to welcome the Senator. It is nice to have you 
here in the House and I look forward to the kind of atmosphere 
that we will have today. I’m sure it’s charged and I’m sure that 
everyone here will be rewarded. Thank you very much. 



276 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 1999 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Average Weekly Income 
 

Mr. Whitmore: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On budget day, 
Mr. Speaker, I have some good news which will help explain 
the good news that we expect to hear in a moment from the 
Minister of Finance. Call me the warm-up act. 
 
StatsCan just released some information about average weekly 
earnings across Canada. Very interesting information, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
For instance, across Canada . . . average weekly earnings across 
Canada decreased by nearly $4 from December 1998 to January 
of this year, which placed it about the same as January a year 
ago. 
 
Except in Saskatchewan. Average weekly income was down in 
every province but ours where it increased by $15 over January 
1998, by $3 over December 1998. That is up, not down. A 2.8 
per cent increase this year, half a per cent a month, the highest 
rate in Canada. 
 
This means, Mr. Speaker, that in Saskatchewan there are more 
jobs, there are more well-paying jobs, and there are more 
full-time jobs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Good news to start the day of good news. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

War in Yugoslavia 
 

Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As we sit here today 
to listen to the budget, squabbling over which government 
department should get a few more dollars, there is a war taking 
place in Yugoslavia. The skies in Kosovo lit up as American 
B-52 bombers and Canadian CF-18s launched attacks on 
Yugoslav army barracks, missile sites, and other key 
Yugoslavian military positions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, thousands of people have fled their homes only to 
return to find them destroyed. We are all too familiar with the 
atrocities that war brings. Families are torn apart and lives are 
lost. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is our duty as elected officials to recognize that 
there’s so much going on in the world outside of the 
Saskatchewan borders. Mr. Boris Yeltsin said himself that with 
these air strikes from NATO (North Atlantic Treaty 
Organization), could follow a potential world war. 
 
That is the magnitude of this problem, Mr. Speaker. And on 
behalf of the official opposition I would like to extend our 
deepest sympathy for those families in Canada and Yugoslavia, 
and to our brave soldiers who are fighting to keep Canada safe. 
Most of us in this room have a family member with memories 
that include the last world war. Now again we have to worry 
that our children will also know the pain of war. 

Mr. Speaker, for a few moments this morning on this budget 
day let’s put the world in perspective. The economy is not the 
only global concern. Peace, security, and freedom are the 
foundations of humanity. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Saskatoon’s Workforce and Tourism Receive High Rating 

 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Two good news 
items from Saskatoon this morning. First, a recent poll 
conducted by the Saskatoon REDA (regional economic 
development authority) unearthed a valuable resource in our 
city, namely the quality of the Saskatoon workforce, and more 
importantly the work ethic that is found in the city of Saskatoon 
— rated superior by each and every sector of the economy 
there. Whether it was ag-tech, food processing, information 
technology, manufacturing, or transportation, each sector of the 
economy pointed to the workforce and the work ethic as the 
reason for business locating in Saskatoon. 
 
And secondly, last year Saskatoon had a record year for 
conventions and attendance. Although conventions only 
increased by 5 per cent, attendance increased by 62 per cent 
resulting in a $29 million going into the city’s economy, an 
increase of $9 million over 1992 which was the previous record 
year. 
 
Because of this success and the increased interest in Saskatoon 
as a host city, Tourism Saskatchewan is now going to market 
Saskatoon in other provinces and in the US (United States). Mr. 
Speaker, both Saskatoon and Regina are establishing 
themselves as valuable and viable resources for our province. I 
say well done to both cities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Air Travel for Government Ministers 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When the 
Post-Secondary Education minister was flying with the 
president of the University of Regina Students’ Union to go 
hear the DesRosiers report, the minister explained that the first 
priority for the executive plane was for cabinet ministers, and 
the second priority was for private citizens travelling with the 
minister. The other day the Deputy Premier said that the policy 
on the plane was not to let space go to waste. 
 
So, in the interests of helping the government in that matter and 
affording the cabinet an opportunity to meet some of their 
constituents, Marlin Belt, a Safeway employee who lives in the 
Deputy Premier’s riding is generally available on short notice to 
trips to Vancouver to visit relatives. 
 
Tom, a University of Regina student, is looking for someone to 
share gas with to Edmonton on the week of March 29th. Chris, 
a University of Saskatchewan student, is looking to split gas 
expenses with a non-smoker to Calgary once a month. Tamara, 
a U of R (University of Regina) is looking to share costs on a 
trip to Winnipeg any time in April for at least two days. 
 
While this is by no means a comprehensive list, I’m sure each 
and every one of them would travel executive air if they felt 



March 26, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 277 

they were doing their little part for Saskatchewan government 
policy. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Job Losses 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
know that the government would far prefer that this simply be a 
good news day, but unfortunately I was passed a note just 
shortly after 10 o’clock this morning that indicates that some 40 
highly qualified professionals in Saskatoon as of today will no 
longer be employed by their employer. Their employer is 
Kilbourn Lavalin, as most people would know, that is an 
architectural engineering firm. And those two different kinds of 
professions, Mr. Speaker, are directly correlated with growth — 
economic growth in a province. 
 
It is with great sadness that this news has come forward, and 
I’m sorry that it had to be on a good news day. 
 

Entrepreneurs 2000 — Small Fruits Processing Facility 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Farmers are 
again showing us the way to build Saskatchewan. We have all 
heard Paul Martin, the journalist, speaking about how we 
hooked the world on Saskatoon pie in 1986 and then left them 
hanging. 
 
In response to this farmers have begun planting small fruits, 
now about 1,000 acres here in Saskatchewan and in response to 
that we’re going to see a new processing industry about to 
emerge. 
 
And once again Entrepreneurs 2000, the REDA in the 
Rosetown region has recognized this opportunity. Entrepreneurs 
2000, which has since its inception helped create 100 new 
businesses and 300 new jobs, is doing it again. With a 
development grant from Economic Development they will work 
with growers to create a facility to clean, chill, freeze, and store 
small fruits. Entrepreneurs 2000 and growers will also be 
exploring new product and marketing opportunities. 
 
This is just another example of how innovation and hard work 
is changing the face of Saskatchewan. So put another mark on 
the wall for farmers, for the rural communities that are their 
home, and for the rural diversification that is continuing to build 
our province. 
 
And chalk up one more business success for Entrepreneurs 
2000. Congratulations. 
 

Moosomin Chamber of Commerce Banquet 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, all across 
this province we have many communities that are working so 
hard for their existence. But last night I had the privilege of 
attending a banquet in the community of Moosomin, put on by 
the Moosomin Chamber of Commerce — just a good and prime 
example of what chambers of commerce are doing across this 
province, and how they promote their communities, how they 
sell their communities to the province and to the world beyond. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, for the crowd that was in attendance, the 
Moosomin chamber had a special treat. They brought in our 

own, Saskatchewan’s own Sandra Schmirler. The crowd was 
certainly thrilled by her exploits. As we all know Sandra is not 
only a provincial, she’s a national, international, and an 
Olympic medallist and winner, fine winner, and representative 
and spokesperson for the world of curling. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what the Moosomin Chamber of Commerce did 
last night is well . . . And all communities maybe in 
Saskatchewan need to take heed that if you work together and if 
you promote your community you can certainly build it as we 
build our province. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Business and Industry 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know the member 
from Saskatoon Sutherland was correct. Saskatoon is a great 
place to do business. The member from Rosetown-Biggar is 
rightly proud that his constituency is becoming a centre of food 
processing industry. How about my town, Mr. Speaker? Well 
we’re right in the hunt. In fact in one way we’re leading the 
pack. 
 
A recent study by KPMG which studies the costs of doing 
business in the G7 countries reveals a couple of simple but 
revealing facts. 
 
Fact one, Canada is the least expensive of all the G7 countries 
in which to do business. 
 
Fact two, in all of the cities in western Canada and the western 
US, Regina is listed as having the lowest average business cost. 
Not Calgary, the promised land for members opposite, not 
Edmonton, not Winnipeg — Regina. 
 
Facts, as they say, speak louder than hollow rhetoric. Third 
place by the way goes to Saskatoon. 
 
Some of us are proud of Saskatchewan, and we’re proud that 
Saskatchewan is the best province in the best country in the 
world. 
 
Some of us, Mr. Speaker, are proud of our towns and our 
province and especially the individuals who combine their 
knowledge, ability, ideas, and efforts to make our towns such 
great places to live and work. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Taxation Policy 
 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Finance. Mr. Minister, every 
family in Saskatchewan is hoping to hear a long-term plan for 
significant tax reduction in this year’s budget. That’s what the 
Saskatchewan Party has laid out in our election platform — a 2 
percentage point cut in the PST (provincial sales tax) over two 
years and a 20 per cent cut in personal income tax over four 
years. 
 



278 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 1999 

Mr. Minister, your NDP government (New Democratic Party) 
has given Saskatchewan the second highest taxes in Canada. 
We need to see Saskatchewan’s tax rates more competitive with 
other provinces, especially Alberta. We need to give 
Saskatchewan families some hope. 
 
Mr. Minister, will we see a long-term plan for real tax reduction 
in today’s budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, answering on behalf of 
the government, what I want to tell the member opposite is that 
what we’ve seen since 1991-92 when we assumed office . . . 
and I might remind the House that when we assumed office on 
November 1, 1991, the government of the day fled the Chamber 
without even having passed the budget, so we had to pass one in 
December of 1991 and then introduce a new one in May of 
1992. And we had a consistent plan to do the first thing — 
reduce and eliminate the deficit. And we were the first 
government anywhere, provincial or federal, in recent history in 
Canada, to do so because we had that determined plan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Then we said, then we said we have a 
balanced approach to dealing with the surplus dollars. Roughly 
speaking, one-third for debt; roughly speaking, one-third for tax 
reduction, your point; roughly speaking, one-third to maintain 
the infrastructure — heath care, roads, education, and the like 
for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
That is our game plan. That is sustainable. Your game plan is a 
return back to the 1980s. Your so-called tax cuts would put this 
province back into the hole $2 billion. No wonder you slipped 
into third spot in the provincial interests in the political polls. 
Nobody is buying that old back-to-the-eighties line of yours. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Premier’s government didn’t balance the government; the 
people of Saskatchewan balanced the budget because you took 
an extra billion dollars in taxes out of their pockets every year. 
Mr. Speaker, that policy has made your job creation record dead 
last in Canada. Over the last 12 months thousands of jobs were 
created in every province in Canada except Saskatchewan. 
 
You know, Mr. Premier, you once said that high taxes are the 
silent killer of jobs. Well, you’re killing business, you’re killing 
jobs, you’re killing hope. Mr. Premier, when will you stop all 
this killing? When will you come up with a meaningful, 
long-term tax reduction plan for the people of Saskatchewan so 
that jobs can be held in this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, if the hon. member 
missed the point of my first answer, let me repeat to him in 
more simple terms. I have said that there is a game plan that this 
government is now implementing ever since we balanced the 
budget, and that is what to do with the surplus dollars. 
 
And what we’re doing with the surplus dollars is we’re 
devoting a large chunk of them to a specific — in your words 
— game plan for tax reduction. We removed two points off the 
sales tax; removed two points off the income tax. We removed 

various other tax benefits to promote industry and economic 
development. And we did so because we had inherited from you 
and your administration a situation where today, Mr. Speaker, 
and members of this House, where today we pay $2 million a 
day — $2 million a day — in interest payments on the public 
debt, thanks to your reckless, wild spending in the 1980s. 
 
No, we’re not going back to the future. We’re building a 
21st-century-ready Saskatchewan where there’s economic 
growth, tax reduction, and optimism and hope. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Funding for Health Care 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
for the Premier. 
 
Mr. Premier, today’s budget is expected to contain a lot more 
money for health care and almost all of it is coming from 
Ottawa. The Saskatchewan Party would ensure that all dollars 
flowing through Ottawa would go to front line services and 
patient care. 
 
But more money is not the only answer. The NDP spends more 
every year on health, but health care in Saskatchewan keeps 
getting worse and worse. Less hospital beds, less hospitals, and 
less nurses, and less confidence that the system is really going 
to work when your family needs it. 
 
Mr. Premier, does today’s budget contain a long-term plan for 
improving health care? Or is it just a short-term fix to get you 
through the next election? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, it is good news that the 
federal Liberal government has now decided to reinvest in 
health care — $2.5 billion doesn’t match the withdrawals but 
it’s a good step and I commend the Prime Minister and I 
commend the federal Liberal government for doing it. 
 
And I want to tell the House, the minister will be making his 
speech in a moment, but every penny of that share from Ottawa 
to the provinces is going to be put back into health care. Plus 
wait till the budget — to exactly what we’re going to add on top 
of that in terms of investment and reinvestment in health care. 
 
But I just want you to say . . . you asked, do we have a game 
plan. We do have a game plan as I just outlined. The question is 
do you have a game plan? And the answer is you do have a 
game plan. Under the statement of your leader, Elwin 
Hermanson, quote: 
 

Saskatchewan Party Leader Elwin Hermanson couldn’t 
guarantee his party would keep the doors open at all 36 
hospitals with low average daily bed usage rates. 

 
Yet this, he said this — now, Mr. Speaker, you see how they 
react when they get a dose of truth in them — he says, an 
evaluation would be done first, a Saskatchewan Party 
evaluation would be done first to decide how to best serve 
communities. 
 
I say we’ve got a plan. You’re plan is to Americanize two-tier 



March 26, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 279 

medicare and destroy medicare. That’s not our plan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, is 
there anyone in Saskatchewan that really believes that health 
care has gotten better under the NDP? No. 
 
What have we got for a record? Hospital closures, bed closures, 
record waiting lists, nursing shortages — that’s the NDP record. 
And then the Associate Minister of Health says there’s going to 
be fewer hospitals in Saskatchewan. 
 
You have mismanaged health care and money alone is not 
going to solve the problem. We have to ensure that money is 
going to be used to improve the system, to keep hospitals open 
in places like Carrot River, Hafford, or in the Moose Mountain 
District. And it’s not just to pay for more communications 
officers to spread your propaganda. 
 
Mr. Premier, what are you doing today with the budget to 
ensure that Health dollars are being spent properly on front line 
services and patient care instead of administration? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, again the Minister of 
Finance will be announcing this to the House and the people of 
Saskatchewan very shortly. But I want to repeat again what I 
just said in response to the last question. Every penny of 
Saskatchewan’s share of the 2.5 billion from Ottawa goes into 
health care — from Ottawa, from Ottawa . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Now hold it. 
 
But what is your leader and what does the Sask-a-Tory party 
believe in? Your leader came back from the united alternative 
conference in Ottawa. He said he liked the united alternative 
conference and then he said this, quote: 
 

Hermanson also likes one of the new party’s first proposals 
to have the federal government (note these words, Mr. 
Speaker, to have the federal government) surrender its 
responsibility for health care to the provinces. 
 

You know what that means? If Ottawa surrenders . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Right on, the member from Canora says. If 
Ottawa pulls out of health care, no Canada Health Act, no $2.5 
billion from Ottawa for health care, and yet you stand up 
saying, we need more money. 
 
You don’t support more money. You support zap — a five year 
freeze on health care. Zap — there’s not going to be any 
increase in health care at all. You are going to try to finance this 
so-called pie in the sky by zapping the nurses and the doctors 
and freezing and two-tiering Americanize . . . (inaudible) . . . 
Zap, that’s your approach — that’s not our approach. 
 
We have a game plan. You do not have a game plan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Financial Support for Farmers 
 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister . . . 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Now hon. members will 
recognize that the hon. member for Saltcoats is not located far 
from the Chair and I’m having much difficulty being able to 
hear him put his question. I’ll ask for the co-operation of all 
members. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the 
Minister of Finance. Mr. Minister, it is now clear that the NDP 
and Liberal government’s farm aid program is a dismal failure. 
And most people expect this year to be even worse for our 
Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
Mr. Minister, last year you were scrambling at the last minute to 
come up with money to help farm families, even though the 
Saskatchewan Party started warning you as far back as last 
May. 
 
Mr. Minister, are you putting a little more thought and planning 
into this year’s budget? Is there anything built into this year’s 
budget in case the farm crisis gets even worse, or is the NDP 
going to abandon our farm families once again? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I find this very 
interesting with respect to the Sask-a-Tory party. They are 
advocating $2 billion roughly speaking in tax cuts; they say that 
they want more money for agriculture, as the hon. member says 
. . . member from Cannington says he wants more money from 
health care. 
 
I suspect somewhere along . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . You 
didn’t say that? No more money. So the answer is you don’t 
want any more money for health care. You’ve said I wasn’t 
listening, so thank you for clarifying — no more money for 
health care. Zap, you’re frozen for health care. 
 
In the meantime their leader, Mr. Hermanson, goes down to 
Ottawa and he says to anybody who would listen to them, he 
says, don’t believe the Romanow . . . don’t believe the 
administration in Saskatchewan, don’t believe the Minister of 
Agriculture; they got money coming out of their ears; they can 
pay. What kind of an assist is that to the farmers in the province 
of Saskatchewan? 
 
They go down to Ottawa to tell Ottawa, stick it to the farmers. I 
tell you if this game plan in farm aid is ruined, it is because of 
your interference, your paperwork, and the lack of your support 
behind all of the farmers in order to get top dollar from Ottawa, 
which is what we needed. You hurt the farmers of 
Saskatchewan, not us. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Funding for Highway Maintenance 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is to the Minister of Highways or the Premier, if he 
would prefer to answer it. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Now the Chair must ask for the 
co-operation of all members of the House. But also for our 
visitors to the Assembly, visitors may not be aware, but it is 



280 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 1999 

prohibited to participate in the proceedings of the Assembly and 
I’ll ask for the co-operation of all members. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I can 
appreciate the Premier’s exuberance with the crowd he’s 
brought in to wait for the budget speech. And, Mr. Speaker, 
when you look at the record of this government, and Mr. 
Speaker, to the Premier — I would have to suggest if you went 
and if you drove on the highways of Saskatchewan rather than 
flying over them, Mr. Premier, you would find that 
Saskatchewan highways are a mess. So is your NDP’s 
management of Saskatchewan highway system. 
 
Three years ago, Mr. Speaker, this Premier, this government, 
promised the people of Saskatchewan they would put $250 
million into fixing Saskatchewan highways. To date, they are 
$70 million behind that commitment. Mr. Premier, are you 
going to live up to that commitment in today’s budget? Will we 
see $250 million dollars finally committed to upgrading 
Saskatchewan highways? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member 
obviously has . . . is the pattern now of the Sask-a-Tories, not 
quite telling the complete picture if I can describe it that way in 
parliamentary terms. The promise made by the former minister 
of Finance is that this government is going to spend $2.5 billion 
dollars on Saskatchewan highways over 10 years — over 10 
years. 
 
And we’re doing it, and we’re doing it without a penny of 
assistance from the federal government. And we’re doing it in 
the light of getting rid of the deficit where the province of 
Saskatchewan people had the highest per capita deficit of any 
province in this country. And we’re doing in on top of 
something else. You remember how you did away with the gas 
tax? You remember the Tory caucus, you did away with 350 
bucks . . . million dollars — just like that. You remember how 
you sold off the highways equipment? Just like that. You gave 
it away. In the result with no money for highways. In the result 
with no equipment to repair highways. 
 
The member gets up and he has the gall to say, guess what, 
there are a few potholes that are around here. You know what 
the biggest pothole is around here? The $15 billion debt that 
you left and it went right straight through the hole of 
Saskatchewan finances. Shame on you for asking that question 
today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A further question to 
the Premier who has obviously gone to the cupboards and 
pulled out the blame-thrower again. He’s blaming everybody 
else but himself. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in fact Mr. Premier, Mr. Premier, last year a 
young woman came to the legislature with a 10 pound hunk of 
asphalt that had come through her windshield, that had flown up 
out of one of your crumbling highways and almost killed her. In 
every other province, people say it’s time to hit the road. In 
Saskatchewan, the road hits you. 

Mr. Premier, when are you going to become serious and put 
some money in. People aren’t looking for 10 years down the 
road. They want to see a serious commitment beginning today, 
that you’re going to honour that promise rather than making a 
promise that’s hither to and yonder. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a sad thing to watch 
what’s happening to the Sask-a-Tory party. A party in the 
process of drowning politically. Not pleasant, not pleasant 
what’s going on in the consequence. Today’s poll on CKRM 
shows now, the Saskatchewan Sask-a-Tory party running third 
behind the Liberals. Not my poll, that’s a University of Calgary 
poll. Remember how they were telling us two or three months 
ago how things were so strong in rural Saskatchewan and now 
the truth comes out. 
 
The hon. member opposite says he wants more money for 
highways. I’m telling you that this government’s commitment 
at $2.5 billion is an unprecedented commitment for highways in 
the face of the fact that you brought this province on the verge 
of bankruptcy, on the verge of bankruptcy. 
 
And I say to you, hon. member, if anybody says out here that 
somebody is hitting the road, I tell you who’s hitting the road, 
who’s hitting the political road, is this collection of dead of the 
night Liberals and Tories, called Sask-a-Tories. Good bye and 
good luck. You’re hitting the road, not this government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Funding for Health Care 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today should be a 
day about priorities, but this government’s record on health care 
is pathetic. They failed year after year to make health care the 
number one priority that they should have. They’ve laid off 600 
nurses and now they’re begging them back to work. They’ve 
closed 53 rural hospitals and turned them into phone booths, 
Mr. Speaker. And according to the Associate Minister of 
Health, they’re going to close even more. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we continue to see waiting lists grow — 3,000, 
6,000, 10,000. When will it ever end, Mr. Speaker? Mr. 
Premier, how in the world can you defend your government’s 
pathetic record on health care? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, our spending record on 
health care, I stand to be corrected by the Minister of Finance 
when he speaks momentarily, but I believe that you will see the 
largest amount of money dedicated to health care to the 
province of Saskatchewan in the history of the province of 
Saskatchewan since 1905. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — And we’re doing it in the face of 
federal cutbacks — I’ve announced and acknowledged and 
complimented the Prime Minister on reinserting the 2.5 billion 
— but from 1995 until this year, cutbacks at $6 billion. We’re 
doing it in the face of that. 
 



March 26, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 281 

And we’re doing it in accordance with the principles of the 
Canada Health Act. We’re doing it in accordance with what 
Tommy Douglas and Woodrow Lloyd and all the men and 
women who fought for medicare believe in. We’re doing it in 
accordance with those principles. 
 
But not you folks. Your leader Jim Melenchuk here, the good 
doctor says on November 27, 1997, private surgical clinics 
should be permitted to open in the province to reduce hospital 
waiting lists. Do you know what that amounts to? Canada 
Health Act out the window, two-tiers. 
 
What do you say? What do you say? You say in a report to BBS 
(Baton Broadcasting System) on the 1997, quote: “Harvey 
McLane,” the news reporter says, “if there are people that are 
prepared to pay in a private clinic, then I think we have to let 
them pay.” 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order, order. Order. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Mr. Speaker, the government can throw all 
sort of dollars at an ill-conceived health reform model, and it 
doesn’t work. And here’s a quote from a health care worker in 
the Rockglen area, Mr. Speaker, that will bear out what we’re 
trying to say, and I quote: 
 

I have been working in the health care field since 1965 
with 25 years as a combined lab plus X-ray technician, 
presently working back as an aide as there is no longer 
full-time lab and X-ray services in Rockglen due to health 
care reforms and our doctor leaving. Due to losing all acute 
care beds, there is a threat of closing the facility altogether 
(Mr. Speaker). I see a lot of staff taking sick leave due to a 
heavy workload that is being forced upon the nursing staff. 
I feel we had better health care before health care reform 
was dreamed up. I strongly feel that we are going 
backwards. 

 
Mr. Premier, that’s what the people out in the country are 
saying about you. And how can you justify what you’ve done? 
You admitted in the Throne Speech that you made mistakes. Is 
doing what you did to towns like Rockglen one of the mistakes 
that you made in health reform? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, there is no enterprise of 
men and women, especially in the area of government, that is 
free of mistake or error. We all make that. But we have not 
made the mistake in supporting the reform of our health care 
services, which provide the best possible health care this 
province can afford, which leads the nation right now of all of 
the provinces. And I can attest to that, having met with all the 
premiers. 
 
And I want to say this. When I’m out there fighting for health 
care, here’s what I get. I chaired the premiers’ conference — it 
was my pleasure — this August, 1998, right here in this 
province. We come out with a headline that says, “Premiers 
make health care top issue.” Top issue — all of us united on it. 
 

What does your leader say? Quote: 
 

Liberal leader Jim Melenchuk acknowledged that his party 
. . . made health care its number one priority. “But (he 
says) you simply can’t ignore all the other things. You 
have to look at highways, infrastructure and rail line 
abandonment.” 
 

In fact, the headline says, “Saskatchewan opposition parties go 
ahead and start province-bashing.” You don’t defend us; you’re 
province-bashing us. 
 
I say the alternative is not the fact that we made mistakes. Judge 
us against what the alternatives politically are. And they are 
two-tier, they are Americanization, they’re doing away with the 
Canada Health Act, the destruction of medicare in 
Saskatchewan, and we won’t allow it. No, not as long as we’re 
here — never. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Health Care Workers 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, we have more questions for the 
Premier from health care workers. This one comes from a 
health care worker in Herbert and I quote: 
 

I know of health board members going back and forth to 
Regina for meetings given good pay. It’s hard not to be 
resentful when making 9.50 an hour working alone at 
nights and having lost my pension plan. I love my work. 
The elderly I care for have enriched my life. It saddens me 
to see how governments can so easily step on us working 
folk who are asking for a fair chance to make ends meet 
and give quality care to those we serve. 
 

So, Mr. Speaker, my question to the Premier is, how can the 
Premier say his health reforms have been worth it when he’s 
had to step all over working folk like this health care worker 
from Herbert in order to accomplish his aims? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, we value very much, 
and I don’t think all of us or perhaps many of us say enough 
times, the importance of the health care workers. Whether it’s 
nurses or doctors, any part of the persons who works in that 
system is absolutely valuable. And they should be compensated 
fairly. They should be compensated in accordance with our 
capacity to compensate. 
 
We’re in negotiations right now with nurses and with other 
health care workers with the objective of getting a fair, freely 
collective-bargained agreement. That is our approach. I think 
we can succeed. They’re difficult negotiations. We’ll see how 
the next few days unfold. But we’re committed to providing 
that kind of respect and that kind of remuneration. 
 
And that is consistent with what we’re trying to do, and that is 
to build a 21st century health care system which will hold 
Saskatchewan at the very top of the Canadian pantheon of 
health care where we were in ’61 and ’62 and where we are 
right now. 



282 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 1999 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, this question is from a health 
care worker in Neville and I quote: 
 

When I hear Regina has a shortage of nurses I can only feel 
for the patients. We nurses tried to tell the government 
back in 1994 and 1995 when all of the so-called changes 
started they were wrong. But did they listen? Now we 
know we were right; do they? 

 
Mr. Speaker, she adds that she was laid off in 1995. Mr. 
Speaker, what does the Premier have to say to this nurse? Will 
you admit you were wrong? Will you finally admit that you are 
responsible for the nursing shortage? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I say to the hon. member 
opposite that the policy of the government with respect to 
health care renewal has been articulated over and over again by 
myself today, and over the years. And I can say with authority 
it’s been my privilege for 18 months, almost two years now, to 
meet with my colleagues in every other province and I know 
how far ahead we are. 
 
And I know that when people like Michael Decter come in from 
Ontario, and others, here Alan Backman, University of 
Saskatchewan, and say that Saskatchewan’s health care reforms 
are the model — the model — of this country, I’m going to 
accept those judgment calls before I accept a judgment call 
from the member from Thunder Creek. I’m going to accept that 
judgment all the time. 
 
Have there been mistakes? Yes there have been. Can we do 
better? Yes, and we shall. But I tell you the difference — the 
difference — I repeat again, is your member, your seatmate; 
two-tiering; your leader of the Liberal Party, private clinics; 
two-tiering. 
 
The alternatives? The Sask-a-Tory, valuation, do away with the 
Canada Health Act. Just, I ask all the nurses and all the doctors 
and everybody here to consider that alternative to ours, and 
they’ll pick our alternative all the time, because we invented 
and defend medicare. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 201  The Government Accountability Act 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that Bill 
201, The Government Accountability Act be now introduced 
and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 202 — The Balanced Budget Act, 1999 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that Bill 
202, The Balanced Budget Act, 1999 be now introduced and 

read a first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — I am pleased to submit the answer to 
question 17, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The answer to question 17 is provided. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Also pleased to submit the answer to 
question 18, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The answer to item no. 2 is provided. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, I request that question 19 be 
converted to orders for return (debatable). 
 
The Speaker: — The item no. 3, question no. 19, is converted 
for motions for returns (debatable). 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

TABLING OF ESTIMATES 
AND SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I thank my colleagues for 
their warm applause but at this point I want to announce that I 
have a message from His Honour the Lieutenant Governor. 
 
The Speaker: — I’ll ask members to stand. The message is as 
follows from the office of the Lieutenant Governor: 
 

The Lieutenant Governor transmits estimates of certain 
sums required for the service of the province for the 12 
months ending March 31, 2000, and supplementary 
estimates of certain sums required for the service of the 
province for the 12 months ending March 31, 1999, and 
recommends the same to the Legislative Assembly. 
(Signed) Honourable E.N. Wiebe, Lieutenant Governor, 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, at 
this time I’d like to move, seconded by the Premier: 
 

That His Honour’s message, the estimates, and 
supplementary estimates be referred to the Committee of 
Finance. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, today I am going to present a 
budget which will chart our course into a new century. 
 



March 26, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 283 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And we have with us, Mr. Speaker, as has 
been mentioned, many special people today. But if I may be 
indulged just for a moment, I’d like to introduce a few very 
special people who I’ve asked to be my special guests today. 
 
Starting with my wife Pauline, and I would ask her to rise. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — With us also is Erin Wier who’s a student 
at Campbell Collegiate in Regina, and Erin is a national public 
speaking champion. And Erin don’t judge me too harshly today. 
Welcome. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And with Erin we have our good 
neighbours and friends from Saskatoon, Mary and Ruben 
Peters. And I welcome them here today as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And finally our good friend, Ann 
Schulman, who’s a registered nurse in Saskatoon and is the 
executive director of the Saskatchewan Institute on Prevention 
of Handicaps. Welcome. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1100) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And before I get into the body of my 
address, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank my constituents in 
Saskatoon Mount Royal for sending me here, my personal staff 
who do such a good job for me and the excellent public service 
we have in Saskatchewan, my colleagues here in the legislature 
on both sides of the House, and the thousands of Saskatchewan 
women, men, and young people who contributed their thoughts 
and ideas during the pre-budget consultation. 
 
And what struck me, Mr. Speaker, during that pre-budget 
consultation was something we all know, but certainly I was 
struck by it again, and that is that people in Saskatchewan have 
a shared passion for doing things together. That is one of our 
defining strengths in this province. And, Mr. Speaker, I think 
it’s fair to say that throughout the history of our province, 
pulling together has been the way that we have got things done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And it will be the way, Mr. Speaker, that in 
the new century we’ll be pursuing our dreams. And our dreams 
are for Saskatchewan, a Saskatchewan where we will all enjoy 
the benefits of community and the rewards of individual effort. 
 
And our role as government, Mr. Speaker, is to unite people in 
that pursuit. We can do more working together than we can do 
apart. And where we start, Mr. Speaker, is with sound financial 
management. Saskatchewan people pay their bills and they 
expect government to do the same. And in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, balanced budgets are now the rule, not the exception. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — In the 1980s the government got it wrong. 
They mortgaged our future in favour of political self-interest. 
They drove Saskatchewan to the brink of financial and 
economic disaster and put in jeopardy the public programs that 
people in this province rely on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that is why Saskatchewan people chose our Premier and 
his team to take over the government in 1991. Working 
together, Saskatchewan people took this province from the 
worst financial position in Canada to among the best. And 
today, Saskatchewan’s record of balanced budgets is second to 
none. And I’m proud, Mr. Speaker, to rise today to present 
Saskatchewan’s sixth consecutive balanced budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And, Mr. Speaker, this budget contains a 
plan for three more balanced budgets, and that is nine straight 
years of balanced budgets. And that is nearly a decade of paying 
down the debt from the 1980s. 
 
When former minister Ed Tchorzewski tabled our first budget, 
he said this: 
 

Let us look forward to the day when we can tell our 
children that though we entered the 1990s plight by 
financial crisis, we made the difficult decisions. We turned 
a new page in our history and put this province firmly on 
the path to prosperity. 

 
Mr. Speaker, and ladies and gentlemen, Saskatchewan people 
have made the difficult decisions and we are on the path to 
prosperity. 
 
In the 1980s we saw how deficits, debt, and mismanagement 
led to higher taxes, less investment, fewer jobs, and economic 
stagnation. In the 1990s we’ve seen how balanced budgets, 
responsible management translate into growing confidence, 
more jobs, lower taxes, more investment, and more 
opportunities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And for most of this decade, Mr. Speaker, 
Saskatchewan led Canada in economic growth. Last year 
employment reached the highest level in the province’s history. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — As we move forward, Mr. Speaker, we’re 
facing some tough challenges like low commodity prices and 
unstable international markets. But we’re weathering this storm 
because our foundation is stronger than ever. And building on 
the strong foundation, our economy will continue to grow and 
diversify, creating more jobs and opportunities for 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
We set a goal for our government and our province of creating 
30,000 new jobs by the year 2000. Some said it couldn’t be 
done but we’re almost there already, and this budget sets out a 
plan to create even more jobs by continuing to develop our key 



284 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 1999 

economic sectors, building our transportation network, and 
investing in training and education for Saskatchewan people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, in agriculture our farmers are 
the best in the world. They’ve helped build our province, 
diversify our economy, expand markets, and develop new 
industries like food processing, agricultural bio-technology, and 
implement manufacturing. 
 
Today we’re facing unfair subsidy wars from foreign 
governments. We must stand with them and we will. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — To help them get through the recent slump 
in prices, we’re providing $20 million in loan assistance to 
Saskatchewan hog farmers and $140 million to grain farmers 
under the Agricultural Income Disaster Assistance program. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — To better protect farmers, we expanded and 
enhanced our crop insurance program. We’ve reduced the cost 
of crop insurance by 40 per cent since 1996. 
 
Recently we announced an $85 million top-up for producers on 
their NISA (Net Income Stabilization Account) accounts. And 
we’re improving NISA now to make the program even better 
for new and expanding producers. 
 
In addition, this budget invests in research and development for 
new crops, new methods of farming, agricultural biotechnology, 
and value-added manufacturing and food processing industries. 
Last year we targeted nearly $14 million to agricultural R&D 
(research and development) through the strategic research 
program and the technology adoption and demonstration 
initiative. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And this year, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to 
do more. We’re going to invest 26 per cent more in agricultural 
R&D this year for a total investment of over $17 million. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, the northern reaches of our 
province offer significant potential for development and 
growth. And here too there are challenges we must meet and 
there are challenges we will meet. 
 
This year’s budget invests more in economic development in 
the North. It supports northern industries like tourism, forestry, 
and Aboriginal business, and it introduces a new royalty 
structure for gold and base metals, for more exploration and 
development. 
 
Mr. Speaker, agriculture and resource industries will always be 
a crucial part of our economy but as we enter the 21st century, 
Saskatchewan people are making remarkable inroads in 
diversifying the economy and creating new opportunities. 

Our targeted tax strategy is key to this kind of diversification. 
That’s why we’re working with business people to provide the 
competitive tax structure they need to grow. The success of this 
strategy is confirmed by manufacturing and processing 
companies all across the province, which last year employed 
over 31,000 Saskatchewan women and men — 31 per cent 
more than in 1992. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And I’m proud of that progress, Mr. 
Speaker. And there’s more proof in the film and video industry 
which last year doubled production since we introduced the 
Saskatchewan film employment tax credit. 
 
We’re also attracting new investment in broad-ranging research 
and development in biotechnology, information technology, and 
other highly competitive industries. 
 
As part of our renewed emphasis on research and development, 
we’re working with the University of Saskatchewan to bring the 
Canadian Light Source Synchrotron to the U of S campus. With 
this facility Saskatoon will be one of only 10 Synchrotron 
centres in North America and the only one in Canada bringing 
millions of dollars of new research to our province each and 
every year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — We’re also investing in other types of 
research to keep our economy strong and growing. This year’s 
budget includes funding for the new petroleum technology 
research centre in Regina. This centre will design new ways to 
produce and refine Saskatchewan’s vast reserves of oil for more 
jobs and growth. 
 
And we’ll continue to work with Saskatchewan’s entrepreneurs 
and small business to make it easier for them to build on their 
ideas and hard work. Cutting red tape, reducing regulations, and 
partnering with regional associations around the province — 
these are all part of our plan to encourage small business. And 
I’m pleased to announce that in order to better provide access 
capital to start up small business, this budget doubles the 
funding available through the small business loans association 
program. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Agriculture, northern development, 
value-added industries, research and development, local 
economic development, and more support for small business — 
these are the keys to a prosperous, growing Saskatchewan. 
 
The second part of our growth in jobs plan is about 
transportation. Saskatchewan must move goods to market, 
despite the huge challenge posed by changes in road and rail 
transportation. With the help of area transportation planning 
committees, communities, shippers, and producers, we are 
building the transportation system of the future. We’re offering 
interest-free loans for local groups to purchase and operate 
short-line railways, and we’re investing more to modernize our 
road network. 
 



March 26, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 285 

I’m pleased to announce that this budget continues the job of 
modernizing our transportation system by investing $235 
million in roads and highways. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, that is 40 per cent more than 
just four years ago. 
 
But there’s more, Mr. Speaker. There’s more. In addition to the 
$19 million in revenue sharing grants to municipalities to 
support roads, this budget includes an innovative new rural 
roads fund of $5 million to bring rural municipal governments 
together with the Department of Highways to better meet our 
shared transportation challenges. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And there’s more, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
pleased to announce a new $10 million provincial-municipal 
infrastructure program to help . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And that’s going to help northern, rural, 
and urban municipalities address priority needs including 
highways and roads, Mr. Speaker. This new $10 million 
provincial investment to be matched by local funds amounts to 
an 18 per cent increase in municipal revenue sharing, bringing 
total revenue sharing to $66 million this year. 
 
And in addition we will provide Saskatchewan municipalities 
with $3 million through grants in lieu of property taxes, double 
last year’s amount, as we committed to do in 1998. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Minister, the third part of our plan 
invests in the education and training of Saskatchewan’s number 
one resource — its people. Our province has a strong record of 
providing excellent education and training opportunities, and 
we’ll make sure the focus stays where it belongs — on people. 
 
Today we have over 190,000 students enrolled in our 
kindergarten to grade 12 school system, over 30,000 students in 
universities, and over 23,000 people in provincial training and 
employment programs. The 1999 budget makes the largest 
investment ever in their future, which is our shared future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1115) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — To improve elementary education, 
operating grants to schools will increase by $13.5 million this 
year. That’s $13.5 million more for pre-kindergarten programs, 
kindergarten to grade 12 curricula, community schools, 
school-based services, and access to computers and the Internet. 
 
And this budget also provides a total of $3 million this year to 
school boards through grants in lieu of property taxes — double 
last year’s amount. 
 

Last year we invested $24 million in capital funding for over 
100 school improvement projects. I’m pleased to announce that 
this year’s budget invests another $24 million in school capital. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, that is a two-year total of $48 
million to upgrade or build over 200 schools in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — We’re making a significant investment in 
the high quality education and safe, healthy schools we want for 
our children and our future. And as we enter the new 
millennium, annual funding for Saskatchewan’s K to 12 system 
is more than $550 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we took office in the 1990s, the beginning 
of the century, we were spending more money servicing the 
public debt than we were spending on education. And when we 
leave the 1990s, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased and proud to tell you 
and all the members of the House and the people of the 
province, we’ll be spending at least $250 million more on 
education for our kids than interest serving the public debt, and 
that’s what we should be doing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well that’s K to 12 education, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But in the new global economy, education must continue 
throughout a person’s life. And post-secondary education and 
training will ensure Saskatchewan women and men have access 
to the opportunities they need to succeed. This budget increases 
operating grants for SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 
Science and Technology) and regional colleges by 9 per cent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — It increases operating grants for 
Saskatchewan universities and federated colleges to $184 
million, an increase of 7 per cent over the last two years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Like last year the budget provides $3 
million for the universities to revitalize and modernize scientific 
equipment and to make better use of shared resources. And like 
last year it invests in the rebuilding and upgrading of university, 
SIAST, and regional college facilities. 
 
With this budget we are making a commitment to the 
University of Saskatchewan to rebuild the Thorvaldson and 
kinesiology buildings. We’re supporting the SIAST 
redevelopment project to integrate campus facilities in Regina. 
And we’re continuing to upgrade and renovate facilities at the 
University of Regina. 
 
I’m pleased to announce that this year’s budget includes $23 
million for these critical projects, bringing our two-year total 
capital investment in post-secondary facilities to $46 million. 
 



286 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 1999 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And in addition, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased 
to announce we will target new funding of $3 million to the 
College of Medicine at the University of Saskatchewan this 
year to make sure that we increase the number of doctors and 
surgeons in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, our universities and the 
students who attend them continue to benefit as well from the 
province’s efforts in research and development. The new 
Synchrotron, the petroleum research centre investment in 
agricultural R&D, and the 15 per cent R&D tax credit 
introduced last year will mean millions more dollars for funding 
and support of universities now and in the future. 
 
In total, our investment in Saskatchewan’s universities, 
colleges, and technical institutes this year will reach nearly 
$300 million. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — That’s in addition to the improvements we 
made in our student aid program. With these improvements, 
over 3,500 students with children have access to increased 
bursaries and study grants, thereby directly reducing the amount 
they have to borrow. Moreover, this year thousands of 
Saskatchewan women and men with students loans can deduct 
interest payments to reduce their income taxes. 
 
For people in the workforce, education and training continue as 
well. We’re making major changes to the way we deliver the 
work-related training needed for today’s jobs. This budget will 
continue investing in adult basic education: JobStart, Future 
Skills, Quick Skills, apprenticeship, income support, and other 
training and employment programs through the Saskatchewan 
Training Strategy. 
 
I am pleased to announce funding for these important initiatives 
will be $206 million this year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — In total, this budget invests over $1 billion 
— our largest investment — in education and training to 
prepare Saskatchewan people for success in a rapidly changing, 
highly competitive, high-tech economy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, investing in education and 
training, building our transportation system and developing our 
key economic sectors, that is how we will create more jobs and 
opportunities in the 21st century. 
 
The strong foundation we created together in the 1900s also 
allows us to build a progressive inclusive society — one in 
which we care for one another and share responsibility for the 
well-being of all. 
 
That is the Saskatchewan we grew up in. That is the 

Saskatchewan we want our children and grandchildren to grow 
up in. And doing that means providing public services that 
matter to people — to help children and families in need, to 
provide for safety and security in our communities, and to 
ensure our health system is there when we need it. These are at 
the heart and soul of our quality of life. 
 
Saskatchewan has a proud tradition of caring for children in 
need and helping families stand on their own. In the 1990s we 
led the way in encouraging the creation of a National Child 
Benefit to improve the lives of Canadian children. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And we’re working with people in every 
Saskatchewan community to do even more for children and 
families. 
 
The Saskatchewan Action Plan for Children, one of this 
province’s finest achievements, brings people in communities 
and governments together to provide among other things, 
school lunch programs, immunization programs, and expanded 
community education. 
 
And today, Mr. Speaker, I am proud and pleased to announce a 
$14 million increase for the Action Plan for Children bringing 
our total investment in this groundbreaking initiative to $67 
million this year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people believe 
no child should go hungry or go without the guidance and 
support of family and community. They also know the best way 
to prevent child hunger and need is by helping families become 
independent. Common sense says this: the best way to promote 
independence is to ensure parents have the opportunity and the 
dignity of a job. 
 
And our building independence strategy put in place three 
additional measures to ensure that parents can work — a child 
benefit program to provide financial support for children 
outside the welfare system, an employment supplement for 
low-income families to help cover work-related costs, and 
supplementary health coverage to make sure children in 
low-income families have medical and dental benefits when 
their parents return to the workforce. 
 
This strategy has helped move more than 1,800 Saskatchewan 
families off social assistance in the last year alone. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And we’re going to continue with it, Mr. 
Speaker. Social assistance caseloads have been going down in 
this province since 1994. They’re going in the right direction 
which is down, Mr. Speaker, and we’re going to continue that 
work with Saskatchewan children and their families. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — By building independence we can keep 
reducing those caseloads, widen the circle of opportunity, and 



March 26, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 287 

make Saskatchewan a better place for everybody. 
 
We also make it a better place when we ensure the safety of 
every person and the strength of every community. That means 
doing everything we can to reduce crime and make 
communities safer. 
 
I’m pleased to announce that this budget increases funding to 
the Department of Justice by $17 million, 8 per cent more than 
last year, so they can do the important job Saskatchewan people 
want them to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Last year we will target . . . no this year, 
Mr. Speaker, we will target $218 million to the many vital 
services that keep our community safe, including the serious 
crime units, and our plan to deal with violent and repeat 
offenders. And we’ll hold those few people accountable for 
their actions, who break the law, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve already outlined, Saskatchewan is 
doing even more to target the very roots of crime. We’re 
sharing the responsibility for, and the benefit of, a better society 
by lowering poverty, enhancing education, and creating 
independence and opportunities. All of this is good news for 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
But there is more, because the number one priority of this 
budget is health care. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Our belief in shared responsibility for 
health care and our belief in equal access to health care without 
discrimination on the basis of wealth, are basic values which 
define us as a society. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — In an age of change and uncertainty, it is 
important to reaffirm our commitment to those values. Mr. 
Speaker, I’m pleased to announce that this budget contains the 
largest new investment in health care in Saskatchewan’s 
history. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Saskatchewan’s health budget will increase 
by $195 million — 11 per cent more than last year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And every penny of that new investment 
will go to improved health services for people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — First, we will shorten waiting times for 
surgeries. Acting on the report of the Task Team on Surgical 
Waiting Lists, we will serve more patients through expanded 
day surgery programs, provide 24-hour access to follow-up care 
and home districts, and invest in more operating room hours, 

more surgical equipment, and better systems to prioritize the 
needs of patients. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Second, we will improve access to cancer 
treatment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I am pleased to announce that in addition 
to reducing waiting times for surgeries, this budget invests an 
additional $3 million to cover more cancer drugs and new 
programs for cancer treatment and prevention. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Third, we will put more resources towards 
meeting the needs, the special health needs of women. This 
budget invests in women’s health with increased funding for 
detection, prevention, and treatment of diseases of particular 
concern to women such as breast cancer and osteoporosis. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Fourth, we will do everything we can to 
recruit and retain the health care providers we need and make 
health care a career of choice for more people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — As I mentioned a few minutes ago, this 
budget directs an additional $3 million to the College of 
Medicine. That’s a 15 per cent increase to make sure 
Saskatchewan people have the doctors and surgeons we need. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And we’re working to recruit and keep 
more rural physicians. Last year we provided rural practice 
establishment grants to encourage Saskatchewan-trained 
physicians to practise in rural Saskatchewan, and we’ll do the 
same this year. 
 
And we’ll encourage more medical graduates to stay and work 
in Saskatchewan through the medical research resident bursary 
program. Through initiatives like these, we saw 70 per cent of 
Saskatchewan’s new medical graduates practising in the 
province in 1998. That’s double the number that stayed in the 
1980s, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1130) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — A strong, effective health system also 
means a commitment to the well-being of people who care for 
us — our dedicated professional health care providers. Since 
last year we’ve funded 200 additional nursing positions in 
communities across the province. Our government is 
determined to provide the best possible working conditions in 
compensation for nurses and other health professionals to 
support the vital contributions they make to Saskatchewan 



288 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 1999 

people. This budget will allow us to move forward on this issue 
in a way that is fair to health providers and fair to Saskatchewan 
taxpayers. 
 
And we will be targeting resources to train and recruit more 
health care providers for now and for the future. Shorter waiting 
times, improved access to cancer treatment, more women’s 
health services, and better working conditions for health 
professionals to ensure better care — those are the priorities. 
 
This budget also helps health districts to prepare their health 
equipment for a safe and smooth transition into the new 
century. I’m pleased to announce a $50-million millennium 
fund for medical equipment and technology to make sure vital 
components of medical technology, such as heart monitors, 
keep rolling when the year rolls over from 1999 to the year 
2000. 
 
In addition to these important investments, I’m pleased to 
announce that this budget also provides funding for new 
hospitals in northern Saskatchewan — in Meadow Lake, Stony 
Rapids, and La Loche. Improved nursing homes and hospitals 
in Balcarres, Big River, and Unity. Continued work on the 
regional care centres in Battlefords, Melfort, Swift Current, and 
Weyburn. Expanded diagnostic capacity, including operating 
funding for the MRIs (magnetic resonance imaging) in 
Saskatoon and in Regina. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Expanded CT (computerized tomography) 
capacity including a portable scanner for southern and rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — New bone density equipment to aid in the 
early diagnosis of osteoporosis. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — More services in more communities such 
as cancer outreach treatments and kidney dialysis, expanded 
home care and mental health services, enhanced pediatric 
transport for critically ill infants, and progress on the Northern 
Telehealth Project to link health providers in the north to 
specialists in major urban centres. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Ultimately we must all remain focused on 
the most important part of the health system, the people who 
use its services. Mr. Speaker, our health districts must direct 
every possible health dollar into front line services. That is why 
we will continue to work with our district boards to lower 
administrative costs, freeing up even more dollars for front line 
services. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Saskatchewan people have been clear 
about what they want from our health system. This budget 
delivers shorter waiting times, better cancer treatment, 

improved health services for women, better working conditions 
for health care providers, and improved health services right 
across this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — That is how our $1.9 billion investment, 
the largest investment ever, will move our health system 
forward into the 21st century. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And that is how we will remain true to the 
Saskatchewan values that laid the cornerstone for Canadian 
medicare in this Legislative Chamber 37 years ago. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, sound financial management 
is the foundation on which we are building our economy and 
our society. We promised to pay down the debt, to reduce the 
mortgage on our children’s future. And we have. 
 
In 1994 Saskatchewan’s debt stood at almost $15 billion. Today 
it is about $11.5 billion, 23 per cent lower than it was in ’94. 
And this budget sets out a plan to continue to pay down the 
province’s debt. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — We promised to invest in people to 
improve the quality of life. And we have. There are those who 
say, we should slash taxes and slash or freeze spending. They’re 
never very specific about the services they want to cut. Do they 
want fewer nurses? Fewer teachers? Or fewer miles of 
highway? We’re never told. 
 
Let us be clear. We want lower taxes, but we want to sustain 
public services and pay down the debt as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Others say we should have tax cuts, even if 
it means deficit and debt — sending the bill to the next 
generation. We on this side of the House are not among them. 
We are not in the business of buying people’s votes with their 
children’s money. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And, Mr. Speaker, we promised to cut 
taxes as soon as the budget was balanced. And we have. We cut 
taxes every year since 1995, and we did it in a sustainable, 
affordable, responsible fashion. 
 
Today I’m pleased to announce another sustainable tax cut, one 
that will further benefit Saskatchewan families, stimulate our 
economy, and create jobs for a bright future. Mr. Speaker, I am 
very pleased to announce that, as of midnight tonight, the 
education and health tax will be cut from seven per cent to six 
per cent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



March 26, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 289 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, that is three points off in 
three years. And that is $300 million a year back into the hands 
of families, businesses, municipalities, educational institutions, 
school boards, and health boards right across this province. 
 
In addition, in line with the tax changes announced in the recent 
federal budget, Saskatchewan income taxes will be lowered by 
$30 million a year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I want to restate our commitment. It is to 
continue to cut taxes in a common sense, balanced approach 
that also includes debt reduction and improved services. Our 
record on this is clear, and there is a clear pattern for all to see. 
 
In 1995 and 1996 we reduced income tax and eliminated 
income taxes entirely for 6,000 Saskatchewan people. In 1997 
we cut the sales tax from 9 per cent to 7 per cent. In 1998 we 
reduced the provincial income tax rate from 50 per cent to 48 
per cent. In 1999 we cut the sales tax again to 6 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since 1995 provincial income taxes for the 
average Saskatchewan family have been reduced by more than 
10 per cent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And since 1997 the sales tax has been cut 
by 33 per cent. And these tax cuts are here to stay. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And we’re going to do more. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — During the pre-budget consultation 
Saskatchewan people clearly stated that continued tax reduction 
is a priority. But they were equally adamant that tax reduction 
should not proceed unless and until it is affordable, and not at 
the risk of endangering essential public services, balanced 
budgets, and continued debt reduction. 
 
They want a balanced, responsible approach to reduce taxes as 
finances permit. That is our record. That is our plan. 
 
In addition to cutting taxes, we’ll continue to make 
Saskatchewan’s tax system simpler, fairer, and more responsive 
to the needs of Saskatchewan people and the Saskatchewan 
economy. We’ve recently obtained the agreement of the federal 
government to redesign our provincial income tax system as 
early as the 2001 tax year. We’ll continue our consultations 
with Saskatchewan people on how to keep lowering taxes in 
balance with further debt reduction and enhancements to 
priority services like health and education. And I’m announcing 
today that over the next 12 months we will also consult the 
people of Saskatchewan on the design of a new system of 
income tax for Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, as we cross into a new 

century, it is fitting that we look back with pride on what we 
accomplished in the 1990s and what we accomplished in the 
20th century. Working together, Saskatchewan people have 
built a province of which we can all be very proud. We’ve built 
a progressive, compassionate, prosperous, and fair society. And 
a quality of life that is the envy of the world. 
 
In 1995 our Premier inspired us with these words: 
 

Once again, we have launched our great province on a 
journey for human progress. We’ve made a powerful 
beginning. But there is much more to be done. 
 

He was right. It is the obligation of every generation to leave 
this world better off than they found it. And to do that, we must 
constantly build on our progress and pursue our dreams. In the 
Premier’s words: 
 

The dream of ending poverty and want. The dream of 
keeping our youth at home with the best possible training 
and education and jobs. The dream of better care for our 
parents and grandparents. The dream of a safer world. 
 

That is what Saskatchewan is about. That is what this budget is 
about. Moving further along in co-operation, with compassion, 
on our journey to prosperity; to keep our province the best place 
in all the world to live, to work, and to raise a family. 
 
(1145) 
 
The motto of our province is “from many peoples, strength”. 
We are many peoples, but we are also one people moving 
forward together as families, neighbours, and communities. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to move, seconded by the Premier: 
 

That this Assembly do now resolve itself into the 
Committee of Finance. 

 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy once 
again to respond the government’s budget — the third time that 
I’ve had the very great pleasure of doing so in this Assembly. 
 
Sitting here listening to the minister, I was struck by the quotes 
the Minister of Finance chose to finish his speech because I 
think it tells a lot about this government’s record. And I think it 
says much about what we should expect from this government 
in the future, if, in fact, there is a future for this government. 
 
The minister quotes our Premier speaking about his personal 
dreams for Saskatchewan and his vision from where he wants to 
take the province. The Premier used these words in 1995, and 
since then what have become of these dreams? Sadly, nothing 
much. The Premier’s vision of 1995 has turned out to be a 
mirage. The dream has turned into a nightmare for many of our 
people in our province. 
 
Let’s just go through a few of those dreams that we heard of in 
1995 and, once again, in this Chamber today. And I quote: 



290 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 1999 

The dream to end poverty and want. The dream of keeping 
our youth at home with the best possible education and 
jobs. The dream of better care for our parents and 
grandparents. The dream of a safer world. 

 
These words are the strongest reminder of an NDP government 
that has failed to live up to even its own expectations and a 
government that has failed to live up to the expectations of 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
Why, after almost eight years of NDP government, are all these 
things just only dreams? The dream to end poverty. The reality 
is there are more homeless people in our cities today than when 
the NDP was elected in 1991 — more hungry children, more 
people unemployed, more people on welfare. 
 
The dream of keeping our youth at home. Under the NDP, 
Saskatchewan has the worst job creation record in Canada. 
People are leaving, families are leaving, young people are 
leaving because they just don’t see a future in NDP 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The dream of better health care for our parents and 
grandparents. Is there really anyone in Saskatchewan who 
thinks that the NDP has improved health care? People are 
literally afraid they will get sick because they don’t know 
whether the health system is going to be there for them when 
they need it. 
 
The dream of a safer world. Under the NDP, Saskatchewan has 
one of the highest crime rates in the country — and one of the 
worse crime problems are right in Saskatoon in the Premier’s 
own constituency — the highest break and enter rate, the 
highest murder rate, the highest violent crime rate, the highest 
rate of car theft. 
 
After eight years of the NDP, these are still just dreams. And 
unfortunately today’s budget also falls short. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Finance minister tells us that the government 
is strong. Thanks to the second highest taxes in Canada, a drain 
of the liquor cabinet, and massive welfare repayments from 
Ottawa, the NDP has managed to balance another budget. 
 
Yes the NDP government is strong but Saskatchewan families 
are desperately hurting. And many of them are leaving for 
better opportunities that they seek elsewhere. 
 
Many people will be asking if this is an election budget? I look 
at it more as a goodbye budget because this budget is void of 
hope, is void of vision, and it is void of leadership. There’s no 
long-term plan for job creation, no long-term plan to cut taxes 
for families, no long-term plan to fix our highways. 
 
With this budget, parents will continue to say goodbye to their 
children who will continue to leave this province for 
opportunities elsewhere. Families will continue to say goodbye 
to half of their paycheques every month because Saskatchewan 
will continue to have the second highest taxes in Canada. And 
we’ll all say goodbye to any hope for better highways because 
the NDP has no long-term plan to fix roads. 
 
As soon as the Premier decides to call an election, I think we’ll 

be saying good bye to the NDP. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me take just a few minutes to get into some to 
the specifics of this budget. Of course the thing the government 
will promote the most out of this document will be the one 
point reduction in the provincial sales tax. And of course we 
support this action. However, it’s a very small step in the long 
road Saskatchewan has to travel in order to become competitive 
with our neighbouring province. In this budget the government 
has failed to spell out any long-term tax relief. It’s an 
unforgivable failure on the part of the Minister of Finance. 
Compare this to what the Saskatchewan Party has proposed. 
 
We have laid out a long-term and realistic plan for substantial 
and sustainable tax cuts over the course of our first term 
reducing the provincial sales tax to 5 per cent and reducing 
provincial income tax by 20 per cent over four years —that’s 
our plan. And it’s a plan that has been reviewed and endorsed 
by an international firm that the Deputy Premier describes as 
credible as it can be. Agree or disagree, our plan is there for all 
to see, and we get none of this from the members’ opposite. 
 
From this lack of a long-term plan to bring down not only the 
sales tax but income taxes as well, we can only assume that the 
people of Saskatchewan should not expect one shred of 
meaningful tax relief over the next three or four years, should 
the present government survive into a third term. It’s 
unacceptable, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Without a plan to reduce taxes, job creation in this province will 
continue to lag. Today we have the worst job creation record in 
the country. We heard the government talking about the 30,000 
jobs it has created. It’s absolute fiction, Mr. Speaker. The 
government is nowhere near meeting its target of 30,000 jobs 
— another dream unfulfilled. 
 
The second major thing the people of Saskatchewan were 
looking for in this budget is improved health care. What have 
we got from the budget? Well certainly, thanks to increases in 
federal transfers, the overall budget has been increased. But will 
this automatically mean improved services? Frankly I don’t 
think so. 
 
Let’s look at the facts. The present government has increased 
the health care budget every year, and services have 
deteriorated. While they were increasing the budget, hospitals 
were closing; while they were increasing the budget, front line 
workers were put in increasing distress; lineups grew longer. 
 
There’s obviously a much bigger problem inherent in the health 
care system than simply increasing spending. We have to get at 
the root problems of why it takes more money to offer fewer 
services to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
It is clear that there is not enough money in the health care 
system getting to front-line services. So while the Saskatchewan 
Party is committed to increasing the health budget, we also 
think we have to go beyond that and fix the problems in the 
system that’s been created by this health care renewal. Because 
if we don’t do that, there’s no amount of money in the world 
that will fix the problem. It doesn’t really matter if the health 
care budget increases if you have no access to a hospital or a 
doctor when you need the help the most. 



March 26, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 291 

Mr. Speaker, there are other areas where the government has 
fallen short of its funding targets. The NDP promised to spend 
$250 million a year for 10 years, and they haven’t come close to 
matching that — ever — and the highways continue to fall 
apart. Another promise, another mirage. 
 
Mr. Speaker, using the NDP’s accounting methods for a 
moment, which the Provincial Auditor disagreed with by the 
way, we are left with a razor-thin surplus. And to accomplish 
this, we’ve had to drain the liquor and gaming fund. We’ve had 
to drain the Crowns. The rainy day fund is gone, used up. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, let’s not forget how the government 
balanced last year’s budget by breaking its own balanced 
budget legislation. Under its own rules, money from the sale of 
Crown assets was to go towards reducing the debt — but that 
didn’t happen. Instead the money was channelled into the 
General Revenue Fund to help the government cope with the 
fact that it had overspent last year’s budget by hundreds of 
millions of dollars. Even the Deputy Premier said prior to this 
that such a move would likely be illegal. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, when it’s all about political convenience, 
rules are the last thing on the government’s mind. To them, 
rules are made to be broken when political expediency is the 
order of the day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan still have their own 
dreams. They dream of a day when we can provide more for our 
youth than simply to train them and send them off to other 
provinces to make their lives and their futures. They dream of a 
day when they can retire comfortably in this beautiful province 
without worrying about being crushed by an unreasonable tax 
burden. They do dream of hope; they do dream of prosperity. 
 
This budget offers none of that, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’ll 
have a lot more to say about this document in the coming days 
as will the entire Saskatchewan Party caucus. We will get much 
more into detail about the taxes, about health care, about 
education, about highways, and all the other very serious issues 
facing this province that this government has failed to address. 
That’s for another day, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at this time I move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Resumption of Budget Debate 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I move, seconded by the member from Prince Albert 
Carlton: 
 

That debate on the motion that this Assembly do now 
resolve itself into the Committee of Finance be resumed on 
Monday, March 29, 1999. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Speaker: — And before this House adjourns, I’ll just 
advise our visitors it is protocol to remain seated until the mace 
is removed. And I’ll ask that you observe the protocol as well. 
 

The Assembly adjourned at 11:58 a.m. 
 



 

 


