





























































Hansard: March 30, 1999


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 333 
 March 30, 1999 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I have a petition to present on behalf of residents of 
Saskatchewan. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Whereas your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reduce the royalty taxes on new drilling in Saskatchewan 
to stop job loss and create new employment in this sector. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition come from the 
communities of Oxbow, Estevan, and Alameda. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present today. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reduce the royalty taxes on new drilling in Saskatchewan 
to stop job loss and to create new employment in this 
sector. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

These petitions, Mr. Speaker, from the Carievale, Gainsborough 
areas in the very southeast of this province. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present to do with high taxes in Saskatchewan. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Whereas your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reduce the royalty taxes on new drilling in Saskatchewan 
to stop job loss and create new employment in this sector. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will every pray. 
 

The signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Gainsborough and 
Carievale. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As well to present a 
petition reading, the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide a review process with respect to family 

intervention to ensure the rights of responsible families are 
not being violated. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, the petitions I’m presenting today are signed 
by individuals from the Saskatoon-Osler area of the province. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
citizens demanding a review of parental rights. Their prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide a review process with respect to family 
intervention to ensure the rights of responsible families are 
not being violated. 
 

Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are all from Melfort. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
demanding a review of parental rights: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide a review process with respect to family 
intervention to ensure the rights of responsible families are 
not being violated. 
 

Everyone that has signed this petition is from Melfort, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
today to present a petition from citizens of the province of 
Saskatchewan who would like to see a much better farm aid 
package put in place. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
demand that the federal government work with 
Saskatchewan to put in place a farm aid package that 
provides real relief to those who need it and that the 
provincial government develop a long-term farm safety net 
program as it promised to do when it cancelled GRIP 
against the wishes of farmers. 
 

And the signatures on this petition on this petition, Mr. Speaker, 
are from Cudworth. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present petitions in 
addition to the 22,000 signatures presented last fall. The prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call upon the provincial and 



334 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 1999 

federal governments to meet immediately and conclude a 
cost-sharing agreement on the twinning of the 
Trans-Canada Highway in Saskatchewan so that twinning 
of the remaining portions of the Trans-Canada in 
Saskatchewan can begin at the very earliest possible date. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

These signatures are from petitioners in Moosomin, Rocanville, 
Wapella, as well as Fox Valley, Leader, and Mendham. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 
petitions on behalf of citizens concerned about the state of our 
highway system in the province. The prayer reads as follows, 
Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call on federal and provincial 
governments to dedicate a significantly greater portion of 
fuel tax revenues toward road maintenance and 
construction so Saskatchewan residents may have a safe 
highway system that meets their needs. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, those who have signed these petitions are from all 
across our province. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Mr. Speaker, I’m happy to rise again today on 
behalf of the people of Saskatchewan to present a petition. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call on federal and provincial 
governments to dedicate a significantly greater portion of 
fuel tax revenues toward road maintenance and 
construction so that Saskatchewan residents may have a 
safe highway system that meets their needs. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, these petitions have been signed by 
people right across the province, from as far away as Canora, 
Mr. Speaker. We have some from Nipawin, we have some 
from Wakaw, Mr. Speaker; we have people in Regina; we 
have some from Moose Jaw, from Lafleche, Prince Albert. 
We have some from Moosomin, Rocanville, some from 
Springside. We have them from all across the land, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I join with my 
colleagues here today in bringing forward more petitions to 
add to the thousands we already have brought forward. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call on federal and provincial 
governments to dedicate a significantly greater portion of 
fuel tax revenues toward road maintenance and 
construction so Saskatchewan residents have a safe 
highway system that meets their needs. 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these people that have signed the petition are 
from Saskatoon, Meadow Lake, Shaunavon, Ponteix, Val 
Marie, Mankota, Southey, and several of the constituencies of 
Watrous and P.A. (Prince Albert) and Moose Jaw. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
very pleased once again to rise on behalf of some concerned 
citizens in Saskatchewan and present their petition. And I’ll 
read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide essential funding and ensure the delivery of 
scientifically proven, diagnostic assessment and 
programming for children with learning disabilities in 
order that they have access to an education that meets their 
needs and allows them to reach their full potential. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
All of the people who have signed this petition today, Mr. 
Speaker, are from Prince Albert, and I’m pleased to present this 
on their behalf. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This morning, or 
this afternoon rather, the prayer for relief comes from the RM 
(rural municipality) of Marengo, and I’ll read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately start work on the rebuilding of our secondary 
highway system to provide safe driving on what are 
becoming known as pothole roads, to enter into 
negotiations with SARM and SUMA for a longer term plan 
of rural road restrictions reflecting future needs, and to 
provide safety for all drivers as the new trucking regulation 
changes safety factors on these roads. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, these folks come from the RM of Marengo, the 
communities of Flaxcombe as well as from Kindersley and 
Alsask. I’m happy to present them on their behalf today. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the petitions presented at the last 
sitting have been reviewed and found to be in order. Pursuant to 
rule 12(7) these petitions are hereby received. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on Thursday next move the first reading of the following 
Bill, The Negative Billing and Check-Off Options Regulation 
Act. 
 
I give notice that I shall on Thursday next, move first reading of 
the following Bill, The Agricultural Implements Amendment 



March 30, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 335 

Act, 1999 
 
And I give notice, Mr. Speaker, that I shall on day 17 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

For the Ministers of Agriculture and Transportation: what 
is your response to the Southwest Transportation Planning 
Council’s response to the Estey report, a copy is attached; 
do you support their claim that the rail companies are 
abandoning successive sections of a branch line without 
ever throwing off enough to make an economic short line; 
if so, what are you doing about it; do you support the 
SWTPC(Southwest Transportation Planning Council) 
request for a federal Act that would allow for arbitration of 
all disputes between short lines and the main line railways 
and do you support the SWTPC request of the federal 
government to allow the newly elected board of directors 
of the Canadian Wheat Board to determine the changes to 
the board’s mandate including its role in car allocation. 
 

Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 17 ask the government the following question: 
 

For the Minister of Health: where on the list of this year’s 
capital construction costs in your department is the hospital 
facility in Melville; and given its position, will it still be 
completed by 2001. 
 

Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 17 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Municipal Affairs, Culture and 
Housing: who has been appointed to the task force on 
municipal renewal; what criteria was used to determine 
who would be the best people to sit on this task force; how 
long will the task force be in place; and what monetary 
remuneration will members of the task force receive? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure 
to introduce to you and through you to members of the 
Assembly 27 grade 11 and 12 students sitting in the west 
gallery from Vibank, Saskatchewan. 
 
They are accompanied by their teachers Paul Loewen and 
Melissa Hansford. And I look forward to meeting with these 
fine people after question period, and hopefully they will not 
have too difficult a question to ask me. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce today in your gallery eight people from the cancer 
patient lodge, and we’ll be meeting after question period to visit 
and have a bit of discussion. And I’d like everybody in the 
Assembly to join me in wishing them well in their journey. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased today 
to rise in this House and introduce some very important people 
that are seated in your gallery. They are future replacement 

MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly), particularly for 
benches on the opposite side in the government south . . . side. 
I’d like to ask them to stand, please, as I introduce them. 
 
Jim Stiglitz from Prince Albert, who is seeking the nomination 
for Prince Albert Northcote. He represents ward 4 as a 
councillor in Prince Albert City Council and works with young 
offenders at the Nisbet Youth Centre in P.A. 
 
Mr. John Knight, Liberal nomination for Regina Victoria 
constituency, and that will happen on April 13. He operates his 
own business as a consultant trainer and is editor for Gray 
Matters, a publication for seniors. Being the year of the senior 
people, I appreciate that. 
 
Tom Crosby — Tom is the Liberal candidate for Regina 
Sherwood and was an active member of the Save the Plains 
committee. He is a front-line health care worker and represents 
Ward 4 as an elected member of the Regina District Health 
Board. Vic Polsom, and Vic is from Last Mountain-Touchwood 
. . . candidate. He works for the Justice department as a fines 
option coordinator. 
 
Rena Sinclair who was just nominated for Regina Qu’Appelle 
last night. She’s an employment and training consultant. 
 
Joanne Johnston, who is here also with her business manager, 
George Mitten. Joanne will represent the constituency of 
Cannington. Active in the community of Redvers where she has 
served on several local economic development hospital boards. 
 
John Patterson. John is a Liberal candidate for the constituency 
of Regina Northeast. He works for the Department of Justice as 
a correctional service officer. 
 
And one more gentlemen I’d like to welcome is a business 
administration student at the University of Regina, the 
campaign manager for the next MLA for Melfort-Tisdale 
constituency, Ken Magnus. 
 
And to Leigh, welcome Leigh Spencer. 
 
Welcome all of these people to the Assembly. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. Very noisy, Mr. Speaker. I would like to join with the 
Leader of the Third Party in recognizing and welcoming 
councillor Jim Stiglitz as well. Jim is one of my constituents. 
He plays that role very well and I fully expect that he will 
continue that in the years to come. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would 
like to join with the colleagues in the House in welcoming the 
Liberal candidates and would-be candidates to the Assembly 
today, particularly those from my constituency, Joanne and 
George. I’ve known them for a long time and I look forward to 



336 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 1999 

them also carrying on as my constituents in the future. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Support for Children and Families 
 
Ms. Stanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In this province 
there’s a long and honoured tradition of caring for children’s 
needs and helping people gain independence. This government 
has inspired the development of a National Child Benefit and 
established the Saskatchewan’s Action Plan for Children. 
 
The action plan brings people together in an co-operative spirit 
to provide children with school lunches, school breakfasts — 
like the Neville Goss School in Lloydminster — immunization 
programs, and expanded community education. 
 
Working together like this, Mr. Speaker, is the Saskatchewan 
way. Children in my constituency have benefited. And because 
this year’s budget got increased funding of $14 million, they 
will continue to grow, to benefit, to prosper, and to get the 
education that they need. Respecting our children’s needs now 
helps build and maintain our collective futures. 
 
But not only children need assistance. The government’s 
building independence strategy helps low-income families get 
off the social assistance treadmill. Eighteen hundred families 
last year are off social assistance because of this program. 
 
In the Lloydminster constituency, building independence has 
been just that. It helps build independent, strong families. It’s 
one thing to talk about the family as an important social 
structure, but it’s another to provide the supports that help 
families stay together. 
 
I want to thank this government and my colleagues for 
providing that. Thank you. 
 

Holy Week 
 
Mr. McLane — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
week marks Holy Week for Christians across the globe. 
 
Holy Week is the most important period of the year for many 
Christian faiths. Christians celebrate Christ’s triumphant 
entrance into the Holy City of Jerusalem on Palm Sunday and 
the Last Supper and his betrayal on Holy Thursday. 
 
The most solemn of days is Good Friday, marking Christ’s 
crucifixion. This is followed by a vigil and Easter Sunday 
celebrations marking Christ’s conquest over death and love’s 
triumph over sin. 
 
This week reminds Christians that life is not without its troubles 
and difficulties. By facing those difficulties with love, we build 
courage. Courage in turn produces faith, and faith builds hope, 
and hope, Mr. Speaker, shall never disappoint. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to wish everyone a good Holy 

Week and also an enjoyable and happy Easter. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Red Coat Road and Rail Line in Weyburn-Big Muddy 
 

Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and good 
afternoon. Today I rise to extend my hearty congratulations and 
a message to Mr. Lonnie McKague, Mr. Kevin Clemenz, Mr. 
Ed House, and Mr. Roger Dahl. 
 
These four people formed a committee that through endless 
hours of hard work, personal sacrifice, and good old 
Saskatchewan perseverance saw the formation of the Red Coat 
Road and Rail Ltd, a short-line railroad in Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
The formation of the Red Coat Road and Rail comes after 10 
long months of negotiations with Canadian Pacific Railway and 
will see the short line operating on some 115 kilometres of track 
between Pangman and Assiniboia that was slated for 
abandonment. 
 
The Red Coat and Rail is an organization that consists of 
representatives of communities adjacent to the rail line 
including many rural municipalities, three villages and towns, 
Ogema, Pangman, and Viceroy. These projects are very 
dependent on local community support and we certainly have 
seen that here. 
 
I want to say to the members present that I’m extremely pleased 
to see this valuable section of branch line saved and to remain 
in productive use for the communities along this stretch of rail. 
 
The Saskatchewan Wheat Pool still has two elevators along this 
line, one in Pangman and one in Ogema. The bottom line is that 
by supporting the development of this short line, local 
producers are supporting the long-term viability of a portion of 
the grain handling system in place in Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, I know that all members that are 
concerned with and live in rural Saskatchewan will join with 
me in congratulating all those involved in this project. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Signs of Spring 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This time of year, 
after a long, cold winter, we are all very anxious to see the 
arrival of spring and in fact signs of spring have occurred for a 
number of weeks already. The first birds to return were the 
horned larks back in February, and more recently bluebirds, 
robins, meadowlarks, marsh hawks, and a host of other birds are 
arriving on a daily basis. This is always very encouraging after 
a long, cold winter. 
 
Also other signs of spring include the emergence of the rodents, 
such as the Richardson’s ground squirrel which has been 
hibernating all winter. And plants begin to come to life as well: 
the crocus buds have come out on the south-facing hillsides 
already, and the pussy willows will soon be emerging from their 



March 30, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 337 

protective shells. 
 
Well not only plants and animals and birds get excited about 
spring but people do as well. We are shedding our heavy winter 
clothes. We will probably be . . . A number of people will be 
into cleaning windows this weekend and raking yards as we get 
ready for spring. Also gardens is always an important time; 
many people are already purchasing bedding plants and of 
course the seeding of spring crops within a month’s time will be 
underway. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this is an encouraging time of year for all of us 
to get out and enjoy the great outdoors. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Gas Price Hike 
 
Mr. Renaud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I know all members 
enjoy the member from Indian Head-Milestone and his annual 
hymn to spring. Spring is a long time coming in Saskatchewan 
and we look forward to his special acknowledgement that it’s 
on its way. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, there’s another sign that spring is on its way, 
one that doesn’t make us feel so good. And we all saw it last 
week if we visited the gas pumps, especially in Regina here. 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, up four cents a litre. What’s amazing is that 
this price hike came barely 15 hours after the world crude prices 
went up. And if I remember correctly it took about 15 months 
after it dropped for the pump price to come down — a bit. 
 
Now I know the meaning of that old seasonal phrase — spring 
forward. fall back; these prices really sprang forward. Now, Mr. 
Speaker, we know this pricing is not the responsibility of the 
individual retailer, their profit margin is rigidly controlled. We 
know it’s not the provincial tax because it hasn’t been raised in 
over six years. And the federal tax is the same. Could it be 8 per 
cent are independents today, compared to 22 per cent a few 
years ago? Or could it be the lack of enforcement of the 
Competitions Act by the federal Liberals. 
 
For sure, Mr. Speaker, it just doesn’t add up. What you want to 
bet though is that the member from Indian Head and I will be 
back with the signs of fall . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. The hon. member’s time has 
expired. 
 

Remembrance Day Writing Competition Winner 
 
Mr. Jess: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rose in this House last 
session to congratulate a constituent of mine on winning a 
Remembrance Day writing competition. It will seem that my 
constituency has more than its fair share of young, talented 
writers. But I am again this year asking the Assembly to join 
with me in congratulating another winner of Remembrance Day 
competitions. 
 
Last fall Kaeley Kindrachuk, an 11-year-old grade 5 student at 
Hafford Central School, participated in the Remembrance Day 
competition at her school. Her poem in the junior category 
placed first at the legion level and second at the zone level. Her 

essay, also in the junior category, placed first at both the legion 
and the zone levels. Her essay has now placed first at the 
provincial level and has moved on into national level of 
competition. I know her parents Diana and John Kindrachuk of 
Speers, Saskatchewan are justifiable proud of Kaeley, as are her 
three sisters. Kaeley is the eldest of four girls in the Kindrachuk 
family. 
 
Please join with me in congratulating Kaeley for winning the 
provincial Remembrance Day essay competition, and wishing 
her and her essay every success at the national competition. If 
any of the members of this legislature would be interested in 
using Kaeley’s writing for the Remembrance Day ceremonies, 
that can be arranged. 
 
I am not surprised by this young lady’s exceptional talent as I 
am quite familiar with the ability of this family. Her aunt, 
Doreen Madwid, has worked at my constituency office for a 
number of years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Express 
 
Ms. Murrell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to bring to the 
attention of this Assembly yet another achievement of a group 
of highly talented, well known, and well-loved Saskatchewan 
entertainers. I want to commend Saskatchewan Express on the 
recent launch of their CD (compact disc) called Star Power. 
 
Saskatchewan Express has thrilled audiences throughout our 
province and beyond with their live performances for nearly 20 
years. They’ve performed in cities, towns, and parks, at special 
events, conventions, and conferences. Now their Star Power 
CD will allow people to take this beloved group into their 
homes. 
 
The youngest stars who join Saskatchewan Express come from 
urban and rural settings all across our province. It provides 
these young people with a chance to experience theatre and the 
performing arts before they become part of the professional 
entertainment world. And their talent does become part of the 
entertainment world. Many Saskatchewan Express performers 
go on to successful careers in performing arts in such places as 
Toronto, Florida, and New York. 
 
Please join me in congratulating all members of Saskatchewan 
Express — past and present —for their hard work and 
dedication. A special thank you to Carol Gay Bell, the general 
manager and artistic director for Saskatchewan Express. 
 
Anyone who has had the pleasure of seeing a Saskatchewan 
Express performance will agree that this group is indeed one 
aspect that helps make Saskatchewan the greatest place to live. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Charity Foundations 
 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, my question is for the Minister of Labour. Madam 



338 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 1999 

Minister, it appears that you also set up one of these charity 
foundations to run your constituency office shortly after the 
1991 election. In November 1991, your NDP (New Democratic 
Party) campaign manager, Kelly Miner, and your business 
manager, Don Axtell, set up the Cathedral Area Property 
Association Corp. Will you confirm that this NDP charity 
foundation managed your constituency office using money from 
your MLA expense allowance? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, what we have here is 
a pattern by the opposition, where one day they come into the 
House and they make all kinds of wild allegations about a 
number of companies about which the government could not 
expect to have all of the details and therefore can’t answer at 
that point in time. Subsequently, subsequently those people that 
are involved with those corporations make very clear 
explanations of what has happened, contrary, contrary to the 
very wild allegations that member is making. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, yesterday that member also made wild 
allegations about a former member of the House, by the name 
of Bob Lyons, including he said that there was a house missing. 
I hope he’s found the house, Mr. Speaker. And I hope he also 
had a chance to talk to Mr. Lyons to let Mr. Lyons know what it 
is that his concerns were because Mr. Lyons takes the point of 
view that as a private citizen he would like that member to go 
outside the Legislative Assembly to put forward his complaints 
and so that Mr. Lyons will have the opportunity of suing him if 
appropriate. In other words, put up or shut up! Will you do that, 
Mr. Member? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair will want to remind the minister to 
use language in the House and debate that is befitting of 
parliamentary discourse. We’ll also want to remind the Leader 
of the Opposition that question period — Order! — that 
question period is a time for putting to ministers of the Crown 
questions that involve their responsibilities as ministers of the 
Crown. And I want to remind the hon. member that that is a 
criteria that must be met in order for questions to be acceptable. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, my questions relate to the proper use of monies and 
I’ll direct my question either to the Minister of Social Services 
or to the Minister of Labour, if they wish to answer the 
question. 
 
And the question is very simple. Did the NDP charity 
foundation receive MLA expense allowance money and did it 
manage the constituency office? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
understanding in that particular case that upon dissolution all 
the assets were transferred to the Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation, Mr. Speaker. And further it indicated 
that the Legislative Assembly took the position that in their 
view all the payments that were made to the association that 
you talk about, Mr. Member, were in compliance with the 
directive governing constituency office and services, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank the minister for 

that response. Now, Madam Minister, the 1992-93 financial 
statements shows a payment of $1,748 to Regina Lake Centre. 
What does that payment represent? Is it a payment to your NDP 
constituency association? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, there he goes again. 
He’s doing what he did in previous days — throws out all these 
allegations in the Legislative Assembly, throws them out, you 
know. Subsequently, subsequently we find that people are able 
to provide very clear explanations contrary to his wild 
allegations. 
 
What this member’s questioning shows, Mr. Speaker, is that 
particular political party finds itself in a mudhole, in a political 
mudhole. And they find that they can’t get out and that the only 
thing that they can do is sling mud — sling mud, lots of mud, in 
the hopes that some of it will stick, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan should not be 
confused by this. What we see here is good old-fashioned 
pre-election mudslinging. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, Madam Minister, if this 
payment went to your NDP constituency association, I think 
you would have to agree that’s an inappropriate use of 
taxpayers’ money and it should be paid back. 
 
Madam Minister, management companies were banned in June 
of 1993, yet this NDP charity foundation continued to operate 
and provide office management services until at least March of 
1996 when it filed its final financial return. 
 
Madam Minister, were you paying your MLA expense accounts 
to the Cathedral Area Property Association to act as a 
management company after June of 1993? 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Before permitting the hon. 
minister to respond, again I want to remind the Leader of the 
Opposition that in question period, questions, as I’ve said, must 
be put to ministers in respect of their departments for which 
they are responsible. It’s . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Order. 
Order. Order. Order. 
 
Now the minister indicates he wishes to respond and I’ll permit 
that, but I ask for all the members to be attentive to the rules of 
the House. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Speaker, for the last 
time this member, this member in my mind and I think in the 
public’s mind is confusing some very legitimate questions 
about accounting, confusing those, confusing legitimate 
practices which are clearly explained after the fact — confusing 
those with practices that were endemic in that political party 
during the 1980s. 
 
What were those practices, Mr. Speaker? Those practices 
amounted to stealing. And for that reason a number of their 
former members have gone to jail. 
 
Now you ought not to confuse the two. There are legitimate 
questions as to accounting, Mr. Speaker. We have those all the 
time. God knows we debate those in the Legislative Assembly. 
But he ought not to confuse that with thievery, which is what 



March 30, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 339 

those members did during the 1980s, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Now the hon. minister 
recognizes that the accusations he makes is well beyond the 
bounds of what’s permitted by parliamentary debate and I will 
ask that he will withdraw that remark and apologize to the 
House. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, it was fraud; I guess 
it wasn’t thievery. And my apologies to the House for using that 
word. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. The minister knows that the 
standard that’s acceptable is to simply withdraw without 
qualification and apologize to the House. And I’ll ask the hon. 
minister to do that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I apologize to the 
House for any comments that might give offence to the 
members. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, my questions are for the 
Premier then. Mr. Premier, the Minister of Energy also had an 
NDP charity foundation acting as a management company. 
From 1986 to 1991, Pine to Prairie Management took in over 
$130,000 of taxpayers’ money from the expense accounts of the 
member for Prince Albert Carlton and the Minister of Energy. 
 
This NDP charity foundation was run by the 1991 campaign 
manager, Don Cody. And once again, this NDP foundation was 
struck from the corporate registry in 1993 for failing to file 
financial returns. At that time it had $1,800 in the bank and over 
$5,000 in fixed assets. There is no record of where this money 
in assets wound up. 
 
Mr. Premier, how did this company build up a surplus, which 
was against the rules? And Mr. Premier, why did this company 
simply stop filing financial statements as required by law? 
Where did the surplus go? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, isn’t it refreshing 
that in Saskatchewan that anyone can go to the Department of 
Justice to the corporations branch and to be able to retrieve the 
kind of . . . to be able to retrieve the information that the 
member is bringing forward. That it’s information that has been 
sent to the corporations branch in accordance with the laws of 
the province, and that anyone in the public can retrieve that 
information. 
 
What a welcome departure that is, Mr. Speaker — a welcome 
departure from the practices in the 1980s where, if it wasn’t for 
some happenstance bumbling across the safety deposit box, we 
might never have found out the total extent of the fraud which 
was committed by the Saskatchewan Tory Party in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Isn’t it refreshing that we have this 
public information provided in a totally legal way, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, there’s 
also some very strange entries on these financial statements. 
The 1989 statement shows $23,000 spent on insurance, and 
nearly $26,000 spent on advertising. That’s a lot of money just 
to insure and advertise an MLA office. The foundation also 
failed to file a financial statement for 1988, which leaves about 
$40,000 unaccounted for. 
 
Mr. Premier, would you be prepared to release all the financial 
records of this NDP charity foundation to show that all the 
money was spent properly? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, what we have been 
seeing, what we have been seeing, is that after the member 
makes his wild allegations in the Legislative Assembly and puts 
it forward as a statement of fact, we usually find that — he 
doesn’t provide us the whole picture; he provides us part of the 
picture — but what we find that after he makes all these 
allegations, the spokespeople for these corporations provide 
very clear explanations of what took place. And it’s anything, 
it’s anything but the picture that the member tries to paint for 
us, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again this is a very sorry party that’s stuck in a 
very big mudhole. Their only hope for getting out of that 
mudhole is to take some of that mud and start slinging it, Mr. 
Speaker. Like I said, good old-fashioned pre-election 
mudslinging — that’s what this is, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Financial Support for Farmers 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Whether you know it or not, Mr. Minister, there’s a serious 
crisis on the farm in Saskatchewan. The Saskatchewan Party 
has been warning your government since last May about this 
problem. And what was your response, Mr. Minister? You did 
nothing. You said there was no farm crisis at that point. 
 
Then you refused to negotiate with Ottawa on a farm aid 
package. And then one day last January you declared the crisis 
over. And then after refusing to negotiate, you bought into a 
federal farm aid program that won’t do a single thing for 
farmers. 
 
Mr. Minister, farmers need financial assistance right now or 
they won’t be able to put a crop in this spring. What specific 
things are you doing to ensure farmers will get help before 
seeding? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, this is quite interesting. 
The opposition who for weeks and weeks just said, quit trying 
to get the best deal for Saskatchewan farmers and taxpayers, 
just put your money in, just put your money, I mean . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . They want to deny it? I’ve got the 
clippings? They may want to deny it, Mr. Speaker, but it’s in 
the press. It’s recorded. 
 



340 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 1999 

Your leader just said, Mr. Hermanson said, just put your money 
in. I’ve got the clips. I’ve read them in this House before. And 
now to stand up and say this thing’s no good. It’s nice to play 
both sides of the fence when you’re in opposition. Course if 
you’re going to be in . . . they’ll be in opposition forever so they 
might as well get used to that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government, this government worked to get 
the best deal for Saskatchewan farmers and taxpayers. We did 
that in light of all the opposition saying just put your money in. 
I’ll tell you they have to answer to Saskatchewan producers 
because we put our money in. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Funding for Highway Maintenance 
 

Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We have some serious 
questions on behalf of people’s priorities of this province. Mr. 
Speaker, the Minister of Municipal Affairs said yesterday the 
state of our roads is, and I quote, “very good.” 
 
I would think this came as quite a shock to the member from 
Athabasca, who once said in this House that, and I quote: “Our 
roads have been called everything from Grant Devine’s golf 
course to a bombing range.” 
 
While the Minister of Municipal Affairs thinks roads are in very 
good shape, the member from Athabasca, once again on May 
27, 1998 said that our roads are in, quote, “very poor shape.” 
 
However the minister did say in general, I take that to mean that 
even she admits that there are really brutal roads out there. Can 
the minister tell us what roads she feels are not in very good 
shape? What roads she feels are not in very good shape. What 
roads are the greatest threats to public safety? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I 
appreciate the question from the member opposite because 
when he talks about the member from Athabasca, we’re going 
to be actually going up there on Thursday to do a ribbon cutting 
of a new road that is in very good shape, which is Wollaston 
Lake. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — And we’ll certainly, certainly be 
announcing some other good work that we will be doing in the 
North, as we will be doing right across this province. 
 
But I must say from the members opposite, from the Liberals 
when they did ask the other day like, how many dollars does it 
take to fix a road or to improve a road, no doubt they don’t 
know. Because what we get from the federal government is zero 
dollars, and that’s what they think fixes roads in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, my understanding is it’s the NDP 
government that’s responsible to the people of this province, 
and they’re the ones responsible. And I wonder if the minister 
going to Athabasca will be flying or driving, because if she 
drives she will have an experience. 

The Liberal Party is today saying we will redirect the fuel tax 
back to where it should be, on our roads. We’re not alone in 
believing this should happen either. Besides the thousands of 
people in Saskatchewan, the member for Coronation Park once 
felt the same way too, quote: “I always thought that a gas tax 
was something of a user pay system. If you’ve introduced wear 
and tear on the highways and roads, you pay for a little bit each 
time you fuel up.” 
 
Well clearly this is not happening under this scenario. The 
reintroduction of the gas tax was nothing more than a tax grab. 
And then the member asked, “So to what purpose is a road tax 
if it isn’t going directly into the roads.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll ask the same question that the member for 
Coronation Park asked on May 16, 1988. So what is the purpose 
of the road tax if it isn’t going to all the roads? Is it like he said, 
just a tax grab? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I’m interested in this 
question because it was prefaced on the occasion of the 
unveiling of something called Priorities 1999 election platform, 
by the remnants of the Liberal Party. Now they’re applauding 
and, Mr. Speaker, I’ve not had an opportunity to do a complete 
analysis of this but I will be doing it in the next few days. 
 
They will have $350 million a year more in expenditures. Oh 
yes — 195 in Health, 135 in Highways on your road tax 
question, 22 million on scholarships; that totals to 350 million. 
And where are they going to get the money from? Even by their 
own press release, no more than $70 million by cutting travel, 
advertising. You can do away with the entire Legislative 
Assembly and you would save all of 6 or $7 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that question and this so-called platform has got 
about as much weight as the Tory platform has. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, We’re talking about 
priorities and obviously the Premier does not really care for the 
priorities of the people of this province. The NDP government 
claims that it will finish twinning the Highway 1 by the year 
2012. With 275 kilometres needing to be twinned that means 
this government plans to only do about 19 kilometres a year. 
That’s pathetic and the Premier and the minister knows that. 
 
Over two years there were seven deaths on that part of the 
highway, on the ones that aren’t twinned. That means for every 
40 kilometres of un-twinned piece of highway there has been a 
fatality. Often we hear of accidents on those stretches that 
involve head-on, head-on collisions, accidents that would be 
prevented if the highways were twinned. Because the minister 
is waiting 12 years to finish the job, more lives will be lost that 
could be saved if the minister increased the twinning of the 
highways. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the minister content to put lives at risk just 
because her government doesn’t see twinning highways as a 
priority? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I will refrain from 
responding to the, I think, rather inflammatory and unfortunate 



March 30, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 341 

language about putting risks and people lives at risk based on 
that question, but I will make one point. In the United States of 
America on many bridges and overpasses and some selected 
roads that are interstate, Washington contributes 90 cents to the 
cost of that road. 
 
In Canada, Ottawa, those Liberals, that rump third-party group 
which is destined for oblivion after the next election, they get 
zero, Mr. Speaker, zero. There’s not a penny from Mr. 
Chrétien’s government, not a penny to help out twinning out 
interprovincial roads or trans-Canada highways. You tell us 
why the Liberals don’t give money for highways to save lives. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier keeps talking about 
rumps. Well that’s about all that the people of this province get 
from the NDP government is their rumps. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
amazing what eight years in government can do to New 
Democratic principles. It’s amazing that once a vocal NDP 
MLA for Highways now cowers in the corner not saying one 
peep about our roads. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is quite different than what the member for 
Regina Coronation Park used to say in this House. On May 16, 
1988 the member for Coronation Park stood in this House and 
said, and I quote: 
 

We desperately need things to be happening in terms of 
highways. I very much urge you to get on with twinning of 
highways. 

 
The member said we desperately need something to happen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister, why was twinning Highway No. 1 
so urgent 10 years ago but all of a sudden because the NDP are 
in power it’s no longer a priority? 
 
An Hon. Member: — No, Channel Lake became a priority. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, $2.5 billion for the 
Liberals is nothing — $2.5 billion. Saskatchewan taxpayers 
alone is nothing. I want the Leader of the Liberal Party at the 
end of question period to table to this House, or out there to the 
press gallery, your letters to Prime Minister Chrétien or to 
David Collenette asking for federal contributions. 
 
Table the faxes, table the e-mails — while he’s waving them. 
Table them. And if they’re tabled and written — keep waving 
them — then tell the press how come they don’t even listen to 
you, the Liberals in Ottawa there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Funding for Health Care 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question today is to the Minister of Finance or to the Minister of 
Health. 
 
The Speaker: — Order! Order, order. Order. I’ll ask for the 

co-operation of members on both sides of the House. Order. 
Order. Order. I’ll ask all hon. members . . . 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 
the Minister of Finance or the Minister of Health. Mr. Speaker, 
as people are well aware in this province, recently the Premier 
of Alberta, Mr. Klein, set a precedent by firing an entire health 
board because they were over their spending budget for the 
year. 
 
I want to ask the direct question to the ministers: do you plan to 
adopt this type of policy in Saskatchewan? Do you plan to fire 
the Regina Health District Board that has run the huge deficit? 
And will the new money from the Health budget be going to 
pay off Regina Health District’s debt? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
as the member may know, last Friday in the provincial budget, 
the Government of Saskatchewan made a $195 million 
additional commitment to the people of this province when it 
comes to health spending. Mr. Speaker, that is an increase of 
over 11 per cent. And in this next fiscal year the people of this 
province, through their tax system, will pay $1.9 billion — the 
largest amount of money this province has ever spent in its 
history — on health services that are delivered to the people of 
this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve said in this legislature before and I’ll say it 
again, Mr. Speaker, that 28,000 people every year in the 
province of Saskatchewan receive home care services. Mr. 
Speaker, every year 800,000 days of in-patient hospital care in 
this province; every day . . . or every year 650,000 visits to an 
emergency room, 4,600,000 visits to a physician, and 925,000 
visits to a specialist; Mr. Speaker, over 5,000 MRIs (magnetic 
resonance imaging). 
 
Mr. Speaker, our health system is delivering a phenomenal 
amount of service to the people of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Next question. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a 
supplemental to the same two ministers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on Monday morning as I was driving in to work, I 
heard the Minister of Finance on a radio talk show. He was 
talking about the health care and the budget and he said that all 
of the extra money that he was targeting into the health care 
would be targeted money to front-line services. 
 
Now my question to the Minister of Health is how can you 
claim that health boards are independent entities? How can you 
claim not to be responsible when things go wrong if you dictate 
how the money is to be spent? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, in the budget that was 
delivered by the Minister of Finance on Friday, we made it 
clear to the people of this province that we were going to deal 
with issues that were of utmost importance to the people of this 
province. 
 



342 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 1999 

Mr. Speaker, in this budget we will have additional funds to 
deal with breast cancer and breast cancer assessment. That is a 
tremendous issue for the women of this province. And, Mr. 
Speaker, we’re putting funds into the breast cancer care and 
breast care in order to begin to avoid breast cancer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as well we have women in this province and men 
in this province that are waiting a long time for bone density 
treatment in order to deal with osteoporosis. We’re putting 
money into that kind of care for the people of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re going to have a mobile CAT (computerized 
axial tomography) scan for southern Saskatchewan that will 
mean faster diagnosis, Mr. Speaker. And that’s important. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, we’re putting additional money into 
services so that our front-line workers can provide the kinds of 
services that they want to and the people of this province want 
them to provide. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a 
supplemental to the same minister. 
 
Madam Minister, I understand that as of tomorrow there will be 
several health care workers that will be in a strike position. I 
want to know how the budget is going to help rural health care 
in general and how it’s going to help those health care workers 
that are now going to be in a strike position? How are you going 
to resolve the problems that exist with the workers, for 
example, in the town of Gull Lake who are contemplating this 
day whether or not they will go on strike tomorrow? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
as the people of this province will know that the Saskatchewan 
Association of Health Organizations and several health care 
unions are presently in the midst of bargaining a very complex 
set of collective agreements. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we in this province have moved to a situation 
where there are basically five unions in this province that are 
trying to negotiate a whole bunch of different collective 
agreements into one, Mr. Speaker. We are talking about 
hundreds and hundreds of articles of language, we’re talking 
about thousands and thousands and thousands of pages of 
collective agreements that have to be melded into just a few, 
Mr. Speaker. This takes time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are hopeful that with the budget that was 
presented in this legislature last Friday, that SAHO 
(Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations), the 
employer and the various health care unions can continue to 
bargain collective agreements and arrive at mutually agreed to 
settlements. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, a very good question and a 

very complete answer for 21; and with leave of the Assembly, 
to also submit answers to questions 22 right up to 30. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
The Speaker: — The answers to items 1 through 10 are 
provided. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that the Assembly resolve itself 
into the Committee of Finance, and the proposed amendment 
thereto moved by Mr. Gantefoer. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and it’s 
my pleasure to be able to participate in this important budget 
debate. Mr. Speaker, time in this debate is precious, but 
however I do want to begin with an item that is a little 
peripheral to the budget but I think important to this House and 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, hot off the press from the Liberal Party in my mail 
box this weekend, I found this news release. The headline, Mr. 
Speaker, on this news release is the following: 
 

New poll shows Liberals gaining and Sask. Party slipping 
in provincial and rural support. 
 

Now in the body of the news release, Mr. Speaker, it reads: 
 

The poll conducted the week of February 22 asked 1,000 
voters if a provincial election were held today, which party 
would be the first or second choice among voters. 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, listen to this: 
 

When looking at first choice, the NDP had 53.9 per cent of 
decided voters while the Saskatchewan Party and the (Liberal 
Party had) . . . 21.9 and 20.3 per cent respectively. 
 

Now the Liberals then use a little bit of a tricky bit of 
mathematics, Mr. Speaker, and they come up with an 
arrangement of these numbers to show that they are now in 
second place. 
 
(1430) 
 
So this week the Liberals are telling us they’re in second place. 
Last November I remember the Tories telling us they were in 
second place. Now this is the first time in my twelve and a half 
years in the legislature I’ve heard parties in this House trying to 
get the people to believe they’re in second place. 
 
This, Mr. Speaker, for all the world, all the world, this reminds 
me of the old Abbott and Costello routine: who’s on first, 
what’s on second. 
 



March 30, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 343 

Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell you who’s on first. It’s the government of 
this Premier, the government that just presented this budget. 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve just been delivered another item hot off the 
press from the Liberal Party, and I want to say a little more 
about that later, this being their new policy document. 
 
But before, before I do that, Mr. Speaker, you and I, you and I, 
having been privileged to represent the citizens of Moose Jaw 
for these twelve and a half years, on more occasions than I can 
remember now have been present at the Hillcrest curling club in 
Moose Jaw to give best wishes to championship teams that 
were going off to compete in national competition. More times 
than I can remember now, we’ve had Saskatchewan curlers in 
this legislature after winning provincial, national and world 
championships. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you and I come from a city of great curlers and we 
all come from a province of great curlers. 
 
So it seemed to me maybe appropriate in this budget debate that 
I would begin with an analogy from the curling rink. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in my view, this province is now in the ninth end 
of the 20th century. And if we are in the ninth end of the 20th 
century, I tell you Team Saskatchewan has the hammer going 
into the next millennium. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — I say that, Mr. Speaker, I say, as Wilfrid 
Laurier said of our nation on the eve of this century, Wilfrid 
Laurier said this will be Canada’s century. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on the eve of the 21st century, we can proudly say 
this will be Saskatchewan’s century. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I say that, I say that, because of 
the God-given natural resource of our land, the richness of 
natural resources — be it oil, be it potash, be it the land. 
 
I say that because of the wealth of people that occupy our 
province. Mr. Speaker, we have, in my view, the people with 
the greatest entrepreneurial spirit in Canada, but an 
entrepreneurial spirit that has not blinded them to the values of 
co-operation and compassion. We have the people in Canada 
with the greatest spirit, the greatest determination. If you want 
the proof of that, Mr. Speaker, note how this province is the 
only province that will stand behind its football team no matter 
what. No matter what. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have opportunities of education in this 
province unequalled in Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have the history of compassion and 
co-operation that puts us in good stead to march into the new 
century. 
 
We have in this province, Mr. Speaker, the strongest and the 
richest Aboriginal culture of any province, any people in 
Canada. We have, Mr. Speaker, in this province the most 
multicultural population of any province in Canada — the only 

province in Canada where neither French or English form the 
majority. We are from the whole world and we can relate to the 
whole world. We have a spirit, a people, and a base of resource 
that will carry us into the 21st century. We are the people and 
the province that have the hammer in the ninth end of the 20th 
century. 
 
So the question becomes, then, Mr. Speaker, for the people of 
our province — the question that the people of our province 
will face over the course of the next 12 months — who is it that 
will manage this great potential? Who is it that will manage this 
great possibility as we go into the 21st century? The single most 
important question facing the people of our province in an 
upcoming provincial election will be this question — who has 
the people, who has the plan, and who has the principle to carry 
this great province into the 21st century? Who has the people, 
who has the plan, and who has the principle. 
 
So let me, Mr. Speaker, in the time allotted to me say just a 
little bit of my observation of some of the plans and the people 
that will present themselves to the voters of Saskatchewan in 
the next election. Let me begin with my good friends in the 
Liberal Party. They have some people, Mr. Speaker — although 
some of us have described it lately as the amazing shrinking 
caucus. Mr. Speaker, we cannot fault the Liberal Party for the 
actions of some of its former MLAs who in the dead of night 
moved over to the Conservative Party. We cannot fault the 
Liberal Party for that. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, in my view the people of this province, the 
people of this province, will long remember what this group of 
men and women did in terms of its former leader. This province 
will not soon forget the attitude and the activity of that party in 
respect to the member from Greystone, the former leader, who, 
while I may have disagreed fundamentally with her policies, I 
and many people in this province held her and do hold her in 
high regard as an individual and as an elected member. And 
there will be many in this province who will not forget the 
treatment afforded to that leader by that caucus and by that 
party. 
 
They elected a new leader, Mr. Speaker — Dr. Melenchuk. His 
first major commitment as leader was to chain himself to the 
doors of the Plains hospital. Mr. Speaker, that commitment, that 
commitment never came true. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say something about the plans of the 
Liberal Party, and they have become a little more apparent 
today apparently, as we have the release of their election 
platform. It is a difficult thing to follow the plans and the 
planning of the Liberal Party. Let me give you one example, 
Mr. Speaker, and members present. 
 
We have heard members of the caucus in the House and outside 
this House indicate that their party, their caucus has been 
discussing the matter of a ban on replacement workers in 
periods of labour dispute. We’ve heard the member from Wood 
River, we’ve heard the Leader of the Liberal Party indicate that 
in fact they are discussing such a ban. 
 
That’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, because another member of that 
caucus, the member from North Battleford says very clearly 
they’re not discussing such a ban; they’re not discussing such a 



344 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 1999 

policy. 
 
Now this is not a large caucus, Mr. Speaker. This is not a large 
caucus. And I would recommend that they do have a caucus 
meeting and decide this once and for all — what is the policy of 
the Liberal Party in Saskatchewan. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Who’s on first? 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Who’s on first, as my colleague from Regina 
asks. 
 
More significantly, Mr. Speaker, has been their evolving policy 
around health care. Now I have in my hand, Mr. Speaker, the 
Liberal Party policy statement dated March 23 headlined, 
“Melenchuk announces major health initiative as the first plank 
in the Liberal election platform.” 
 
Members will have given this careful study, Mr. Speaker, as 
should the people of our province. In this announcement the 
Liberal Party commits to the following: 
 

We will make health care the top priority of the Liberal 
government, and to demonstrate that commitment a Liberal 
government would create 10 to 12 regional hospitals in 
Saskatchewan in addition to the regional hospital facilities 
now located in Saskatoon and Regina. 
 

Mr. Speaker, there are no regional hospital facilities in 
Saskatoon or Regina. In Saskatoon and Regina we have our 
base hospitals. The regional hospital facilities in this province 
are located in Moose Jaw, Swift Current, Yorkton, North 
Battleford, and so on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Liberals commit therefore to creating 10 to 12 
new regional hospitals, I take it like those in Swift Current, 
Moose Jaw, Yorkton, North Battleford and so on. However 
when I turn over the page of their news release what do I find? I 
find they are committing a sum total of $2.2 million per hospital 
for this project. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ve spent some time in the ministry of 
Health — $2.2 million does not create a regional hospital, Mr. 
Speaker; $2.2 million does not create a new regional hospital, 
and they intend to create 10 to 12 of them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, adding a new piece of diagnostic equipment to an 
existing facility does not create a regional hospital with a full 
range of services that the citizens of that region should expect in 
a regional hospital. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I add up the total value of the Liberal health 
plan as advertised on March 23, I come to a total of $70 million 
— $70 million — sum total. Mr. Speaker, that was their 
promise on March 23, a week ago, that they would spend $70 
million. They sat and they listened to the budget. They heard 
this government not promising to spend $70 million; they heard 
this government say, we are spending in this budget year $195 
million more. Almost three times as much as the Liberals were 
promising a week ago. 
 
Now, today we are delivered the 1999 election platform, one 
week later. And lo and behold what has happened to the 

commitment around health funding? It has jumped to a total of 
$195 million — $195 million. Last week they were telling us, 
our major commitment, making health the top priority, would 
be to insert 70 million new dollars. They’ve listened to the 
budget delivered by the Minister of Finance and the Minister of 
Health, and now the policy says, well no, no, make that, no, that 
was a mistake, now we’re going to put in $195 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker if this is the kind of planning that the 
Liberal Party is offering to the people of Saskatchewan, that 
plan will be rejected, Mr. Speaker. If in fact as this document, 
their first health care platform document indicates, this is the 
first plank, well, Mr. Speaker, I wouldn’t want to walk that 
plank into an election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the citizens of our province are looking at 
their alternatives in the next election, they’ll be looking at the 
Conservative Party, the Tory Party, there’s no doubt about that. 
I want members present and the people of Saskatchewan to be 
very aware that the party which describes itself now as the 
Saskatchewan Party is, in fact, the Conservative Party of the 
1980s. It’s the same people, it’s the same policies, it’s the same 
party, Mr. Speaker. It is the same party; there is no doubt in my 
mind. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, these folks try to pretend that they are the 
Saskatchewan version of unite the Right. This is the unite the 
Right movement in Saskatchewan. Well, Mr. Speaker, a long 
time ago I was taught that two wrongs don’t make a right. Two 
wrongs don’t make a right no matter how you put them 
together. 
 
We have here members of the Conservative Party who are 
ashamed of their history. We have members of the Liberal 
Party, opportunistic for their political future, coming together to 
form what they describe as a new political movement. That’s 
not a movement, Mr. Speaker. That’s not a movement born of 
the grassroots. That’s a movement born of desperation — 
desperation. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . well the 
member now from his seat asks why I’m not running. I’ll say a 
few words about that . . . I’ll say a few words about that in a 
moment. I would like to ask him to stand up in this House and 
defend how he can run for that party. Formed in the dead of 
night without consultation with his constituents, having 
committed, Mr. Speaker, to his constituents that he would not 
do such a thing. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the members of the Saskatchewan Party 
once in a while . . . well, Mr. Speaker, it’s obvious the member 
opposite is very sensitive about this matter, and so they should 
be sensitive, Mr. Speaker. And we’ll be watching very carefully 
when it comes in this legislature to the vote on the legislation 
which would prevent such unaccountable activity. We’ll see 
how that member and others vote across the way. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, in my view it is a dangerous thing, it is a 
dangerous thing — and members on this side of the House at 
least will agree — it is sometimes a dangerous thing when a 
Tory makes a speech. It’s a dangerous thing because once in a 
while, Mr. Speaker, the truth pops out. Once in a while the truth 
pops out of what they should really be thinking about and what 



March 30, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 345 

they’re really doing. 
 
Now, very recently, very recently the member of the 
Conservative Party was in Prince Albert. He was there 
addressing the chamber of commerce. And while in Prince 
Albert at that chamber of commerce meeting, Mr. Speaker . . . 
this is all reported here in The Prince Albert Daily Herald, of 
March 6 this year. The leader of the Conservative Party, Mr. 
Elwin Hermanson, was in Prince Albert speaking with the 
chamber of commerce executive, and I will just quote directly 
from the article in the P.A. Herald, quote: 
 

During his chat with the Chamber Of Commerce 
executive, he was asked about candidate nominations 
(with) . . . the prospect of women running for the Sask. 
Party. His reply? Words to the effect that it’s difficult to 
get women involved in politics, since “their concerns are 
(in) . . . the home” and “they don’t like dealing with 
conflict.” 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the article goes on to say that: 
 

Some of the women who heard his remarks dealt with their 
immediate conflict — between wanting to ring his red neck 
and the knowledge that such an action would be illegal — 
(they dealt with the conflict) by walking out of the 
meeting. 

 
Mr. Speaker, once in a while, once in a while the truth pops out, 
whether they want us to know that or not. 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have had some time to consider some of the 
plans of the Conservative Party in their document which is 
called The Way Up, or the way out. I as a former minister of 
Health am deeply concerned, deeply concerned about their plan 
for health care in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they have two planks in their health platform. 
They are these, simply put. They would conduct, quote, “value 
for money audit of the health care workers in our province.” 
They would conduct, quote, “money for value audit of our 
health care workers in the province.” 
 
And their second plank is they would at the rate of inflation cap 
expenditures to health, which is essentially a freeze on health 
care. They would cap at the rate of inflation expenditures to 
health. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that would mean that had they prepared the 
budget which is now under debate in this House, a cap at the 
level of inflation in new spending in health would have meant 
in this health care budget there would have been 18 million new 
dollars. That’s what it would have amounted to in this budget. 
And they’re proposing to hold this cap on, this freeze, for five 
years. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, every health care worker in the province 
should take note of this. Everyone who believes in publicly 
funded medicare should take note of this commitment to freeze 
funding to health care in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 

Because I’ll tell you the outcome, Mr. Speaker — $18 million 
more in a health care budget does not provide for new 
technology, does not provide for relief of waiting list concerns, 
does not provide for new drug coverages. It essentially freezes 
the wages, salaries, and benefits of every health care worker and 
every health care professional. That’s what it does. And only 
for five years. 
 
So if it is the plan of the Conservative Party through their health 
care platform to freeze funding for health care, to starve the 
system, to starve the system for five years, I’ll tell you the 
result. Those in this province who have the resources will 
clamour to go to the private sector. They will clamour to go to 
the private sector. They will so weaken the publicly funded 
medicare in our province that we will see the demise of that 
medicare. That’s the result of freezing health care funding for 
five years as they have committed — committed — in their 
platform document. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they have other plans. They have a plan to tax . . . 
to cut taxes in this province, to massively cut taxes in our 
province. They have a plan to cut taxes to the extent, to figures 
that I’ve heard, of about $2 billion. At the same time they tell us 
they’re going to repave and rebuild every road in the province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it’s been said before, it’s worth saying again 
— this doesn’t add up. It does not add up, Mr. Speaker. You 
cannot, you cannot simply massively cut the tax revenues to 
government, increase its spending in a major area, and continue 
to try and deal with your debt and deficit problems. It just 
doesn’t add up. 
 
Unless, unless — and members should note, and the people of 
Saskatchewan should note, there is a way you can make this 
add up. There is one way to make this add up, and that’s to do 
exactly what these people did in the 1980s, and that’s to start 
selling off the assets of the province at fire-sale prices. 
 
I listened very carefully, Mr. Speaker, very carefully to the 
member from Saltcoats who spoke in this House the other night, 
determined that this government should renew and change the 
laws to do with the out-of-province ownership of the 
agricultural lands of our province. This member said in this 
House — I could get the Hansard and quote directly — he said 
that we should, quote, “open the borders for the sale of our 
farmland.” And then he said, quote, “What that would do is to 
bring new money into the province..” It’s in the Hansard. Open 
the borders, sell the land, bring in new money. 
 
Now that’s fair enough. But, Mr. Speaker, if you’re willing to 
sell off the land to bring in new money, if they’re willing to sell 
off the land, then how safe do you think are the Crown 
corporations owned by the people of Saskatchewan? How safe 
are the assets of the people of Saskatchewan? We have seen, we 
witnessed in the 1980s, how a Tory government at that time 
tried to balance their books by selling off the assets. What 
happened? Larger deficits and a higher debt. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am concerned when these people intend to 
spend, to cut the taxes, and not explain to the people of 
Saskatchewan how they’re going to make it add up. Well 
there’s only one way in my view, Mr. Speaker, and that’s to sell 
off assets. 



346 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 1999 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say just a very brief word about the Tory 
Party plan for social assistance. It’s not fully described. But the 
result of their plan, they claim, will be to move 25,000 — no, 
check that — 25 per cent of the social assistance caseload off 
social assistance, a full 25 per cent through something of a work 
for welfare nature kind of scheme. 
 
It’s not fully described in their policy documents. I hope it’s not 
like the policies of Ontario. But I hope that one member or two 
from that caucus will stand in the House and explain to the 
members and the people of Saskatchewan how it is they intend 
to move 25 per cent of the welfare caseload off, putting them 
onto the street. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I review the most recent statistics from the 
Department of Social Services in terms of the caseload, about 
12,000 of the entire caseload, about 12,000 individuals are 
described as fully employable, that is, capable of earning an 
income outside of social assistance that would give them basic 
living — 12,000 people. 
 
Now the total caseload today is in the neighbourhood of 65,000 
people — thankfully, mercifully, down. But by my calculation, 
25 per cent of 65,000 is 16,000 people. Only 12,000 people in 
the existing social assistance rolls are described as fully 
employable. 
 
The other 4,000 therefore must come from those other 
categories, primarily women with single children . . . single 
women with children, the disabled. I hope that one member of 
the Tory Party will stand up and explain to this House just who 
it is they intend to put off the welfare rolls, just who it is they 
tend to force onto the streets without the support of the 
community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have seen in Ontario, in the Harris Ontario, 
Tory-led, the result of that kind of Conservative welfare reform. 
For goodness’ sakes, we’ve got the mayor of Toronto — he 
certainly would not be described as a friend of the New 
Democratic Party — the mayor of Toronto saying stop it. 
 
There are now 80,000 people in the city of Toronto homeless, 
80,000 in the city of Toronto — that’s half the population of the 
city of Regina — homeless, in Canada’s largest and richest city, 
as a result of some of the policies, the Conservative welfare 
policies in Ontario. Mr. Speaker, these plans do not inspire in at 
least myself, much confidence in either the Liberal or the Tories 
parties for the future of our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have before us in this House a budget under 
debate that I believe speaks clearly to the priorities of 
Saskatchewan people, clearly to the priorities that have been 
identified to me in my work in the constituency of Moose Jaw 
Wakamow and the city of Moose Jaw and beyond there where 
people have said very clearly to we as legislators, that our 
priorities are health, our priorities are a decent and a fair tax 
system, our priorities are education, our priorities are 
transportation. 
 
Each of those priorities, Mr. Speaker, is adequately and more 
than adequately represented in this budget. In this budget, we 
add $195 million to health care expenditures in this province. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Sixty-seven million, Mr. Speaker, 67 million 
of those dollars are the contribution from the federal 
government in the renewal of federal funding — 67; $128 
million — $128 million are new funds from the people of 
Saskatchewan to fund their most social program, medicare . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . $67 million. 
 
The member from Melville asked me, how much from the feds 
— $67 million. It’s interesting that he would ask that question 
because a week ago he had a news release, as I referred to 
earlier, saying that the sum total commitment from the Liberal 
Party was going to be $70 million. 
 
Now that was 67 from the federal government. That meant the 
sum total commitment from the province would have been 
three, opposed to this budget which doesn’t promise new 
money in the future but provides it today, Mr. Speaker, provides 
it to deal with the waiting list issue, to deal with providing 
better cancer care, to deal with providing better women’s 
health, to deal with providing better benefits —wages and 
salaries and benefits — to our health care workers, Mr. Speaker, 
as well as dealing with the Y2K (Year 2000) problem in Health 
which is important. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget lowers again the provincial sales tax, 
from seven to six. In three years, from nine to six — a 33 per 
cent decrease in three years. Mr. Speaker, I say, I say, and I say 
it without fear of contradiction even though here I’m not 
agreeing with some of the budget literature, I say we have the 
lowest E&H (education and health) tax in all of Canada — the 
lowest. 
 
Because our province to the west, our neighbours and our 
friends in the province of Alberta have a tax on health care. 
There’s no doubt about that. Every family of four in the 
province of Alberta, as we were reminded of by the member 
from Estevan the other day, is now paying $860 health care 
premium. In Saskatchewan that same family of four is paying, 
on average, provincial sales taxes of between 6 and $700 — 6 
and $700 as opposed to an $800 health tax in Alberta. 
 
Mr. Speaker, but what we sometimes forget about the health 
premium concept as it exists in Alberta and it was identified in 
a very recent edition of The Edmonton Sun from the 
Department of Health in Alberta, now 123,000 families in the 
province of Alberta are delinquent in their health care premiums 
— 123 families. And these, Mr. Speaker, are not the lowest of 
income families. These are families . . . because the lowest 
income families are not required to pay the premium. These are 
low- and middle-income families who are falling delinquent in 
their health care premium. And what’s happened to those 
families? Well the compassionate Government of Alberta has 
now assigned credit collection agencies, credit collection 
agencies to 40 per cent of those families in delinquency. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have now in Saskatchewan the lowest 
education and health tax in all of Canada — in all of Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, this budget continues our battle 



March 30, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 347 

with the debt. This is the sixth straight balanced budget, the 
sixth budget where we’ve seen dramatic decrease in debt. The 
debt-to-GDP (gross domestic product) ratio in our province is 
now much healthier than it was even three and four years ago. 
 
There’s a billion dollars going into the education and training of 
our young people and our children. Funding to our roads, up 40 
per cent in this budget. Eighteen per cent more for our 
municipalities this year. And, Mr. Speaker, perhaps proudest of 
all when I review these budget documents, I think we as a 
people, as a province, should be proudest of all that in this 
budget again, funding for the child action plan has gone up — 
gone up this time 26 per cent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — We as a province, we as a people, Mr. Speaker 
— not we as a government, but we as a province, we as a 
people, are investing in our families, in our children, in ever 
increasing and better ways. When the child action plan was 
formed only just a few years ago, the first level of funding was 
$4 million. That has now grown, Mr. Speaker, in this budget to 
a total of $67 million. And we ought to be proud of that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I talk about people and I talk about 
principle, I want to share with this House before I take my 
place, a couple of quotes from an individual I believe to be 
someone who will play an important part in the history of this 
province when it’s written a hundred years from now. 
 
This man said, in reference to this child action plan and these 
kinds of programs, this man said: 
 

There are those who argue that the best way to deal with 
hungry children is to throw their parents onto the street. 
People who argue that people actually want to be on 
welfare. Well I don’t agree. I say that hunting for votes on 
the back of the poorest and the weakest is despicable. I say 
that playing politics with the lives of the family and 
children who have so little is despicable. I say our province 
is stronger than that; our province is kinder than that. I say 
our province is better than that. 

 
Mr. Speaker, those words spoken by the current Premier of the 
province of Saskatchewan, the member from Riversdale. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, we set before this Assembly a 
budget that represents a balanced plan, a strong plan, a 
well-thought-out plan, a plan that speaks to the priorities of 
Saskatchewan people. I’ll be very proud when it comes time to 
be voting in favour of this budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s not a budget that looks back. It’s not a budget with its eye in 
the rear-view mirror. It’s a budget with its eye on the next 
century. It’s a budget that captures the potential and the 
possibility of this great province and all that we have. That will 
take us and that gives us the hammer that takes us into this 21st 
century. 
 
(1500) 
 

I want to share with this House one more quote form this same 
Premier, quote: 
 

We have accomplished much already. In jobs, in health, in 
education, and building rural life, and building safe 
communities, and secure families. But our eyes must be on 
the horizon. Our challenge is not to look back, but to look 
forward. 
 
The Canadian theologian Gregory Baum once said an idea 
about the future enters into the consciousness of people 
and determines the kind of life they live. 
 

Well friends, that’s what politics are all about. Ideas of the 
future. Positive progressive ideas. Ideas that when they’re 
implemented in the words of Gregory Baum will enter our 
consciousness and determine our life — a more humane 
compassionate life for Saskatchewan and for Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is the vision of the current Premier of this 
province. That is the vision of this government, that is the 
vision and the hope that is contained in this budget. 
 
Just two more things, Mr. Speaker. I listened with interest today 
to the Minister of the Environment as he gave us his annual 
spring report. And he reminded us that not far from here in the 
roadways and ditches, and I can take you to places just south of 
Moose Jaw on the No. 2 Highway, I could take you there this 
afternoon, and you would see the little buds of the little 
crocuses sticking through. 
 
Now as you know, Mr. Speaker, as much as I love the lily — 
our Saskatchewan lily, our provincial flower — as much as I 
love the lily in its great beauty, it has sometimes seemed to me 
that if we needed and wanted a new provincial flower, I would 
choose the crocus. I would choose the crocus because, you see, 
the crocus is not like the wild rose, not like the wild rose. The 
wild rose, it waits for June, it waits for June when all is sunny 
and kind and warm. 
 
But not the little crocus, because the crocus, the crocus is 
courageous, the crocus is the most courageous of our wild 
flowers. He sticks his little head out, says Imogene Sorely — 
Imogene Sorely and Jo Carr who wrote a little poem about the 
crocus — he sticks his little head out . . . and she sticks her little 
head out even when the danger of frost is not passed. Risking 
for something better. 
 
Why? Because the crocus believes in spring and has something 
personal and emphatic to say about it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are not wild rose people. We are crocus 
people. We believe in something. We believe in this province. 
We believe in its future. And we’re not unwilling to stick our 
necks out at some times in some points at risk, Mr. Speaker, 
because we’re still yet a pioneering province and a pioneering 
people. 
 
And so when I hear that the crocuses . . . when the Minister of 
the Environment reports today that the crocuses are out, or 
beginning to poke through, I tell you that’s a great sign, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s a great sign. And I think it’s reflected in the hope 
and the optimism of this budget. 



348 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 1999 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, this. A fair number of my colleagues and 
friends and acquaintances in the city of Moose Jaw have been 
asking me of late, since I will not be contesting the next 
provincial election, a number of them have asked me, so what 
are you going to be doing? Well, Mr. Speaker, I can’t answer 
that question. I do not know the answer to that question on what 
I will be doing after the election. 
 
But I do know the answer to the question, what will I be doing 
between now and the election? I know the answer to that 
question. I’ll be doing whatever I can to ensure that Mr. Ivan 
Costley will be the member of this legislature representing 
Thunder Creek. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — And I’ll be doing what I can to ensure that Mr. 
Ron Bishoff is the member of the legislature representing Arm 
River. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — And I’ll be doing, Mr. Speaker, of course, 
what I can do to ensure that the current member from Moose 
Jaw North will be available to be re-elected Speaker in the next 
House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — And I’ll be doing whatever I can to ensure that 
Deb Higgens, Debbie Higgens, will be the next member from 
Moose Jaw Wakamow to take this seat. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — And I, Mr. Speaker, will be doing everything 
within my power to ensure that the member from Riversdale, 
the current Premier of the province of Saskatchewan, will be in 
this House leading this province into that 21st century which 
will be Saskatchewan’s century. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will be voting for the budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s been 
interesting to listen to different members of the Assembly speak 
to the . . . in the current budget debate and give their reasons as 
to why they would support or would reject . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Ms. Stanger: — To introduce a guest and I wanted to do it 
before the member got going. And I thank the House if they 
allow me to do that. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Stanger: — In your west gallery, Mr. Speaker, is one of 
our mayors from northern Saskatchewan, Ray Laliberte from 
Buffalo Narrows. And I want to introduce him to you and 

through you to the legislature and have everyone welcome Ray 
to Regina. It’s a long way and we’re glad to have you here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

(continued) 
 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as I was 
indicating in the beginning of my debate here, as I listened to 
the debate here . . . and certainly, Mr. Speaker, we all know that 
the debate in this Assembly will have pros and cons. 
 
There will be members who will be very favourable, speak very 
favourable of a specific Bill or in this case the budget that was 
presented by the Minister of Finance. There will be those of us 
who will take a different view. Those of us who will offer 
compliments where compliments are due, and those of us who 
will criticize where criticism is due. 
 
The one thing I’m not sure members on the government side are 
very proud of today when we look in the province of 
Saskatchewan, one of the headlines in the papers, in the paper 
today said, province leads in sex offences. And we look at so 
many areas in this province, and so many government members 
have stood and tried to tell us why they are supporting a budget 
— because it’s giving leadership in this area. I believe just the 
previous speaker talked about the areas of leadership. 
 
The unfortunate part, the stats and the information that we see 
on a daily basis is not actually putting Saskatchewan at the top. 
In most cases we’re basically at the bottom of the pack. And it’s 
unfortunate that the one area where we tend to be leading all 
other areas is in sex offences. 
 
And we’d hope that over the period of years we can begin to 
address that because I don’t think that’s a dubious headline that 
any province would want to have. And it’s something that I’m 
sure the members, while they talk about all the positives, 
certainly would have to look at. And I can see why they 
continue to refrain from even discussing some of the areas 
where they were actually leading in this country versus the 
areas that they are taking a follower role in. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when you talk about this budget, current budget, 
what I find very interesting about the budget, at the end of the 
day this budget . . . And I will say, as I indicated earlier, Mr. 
Speaker, there are areas where I feel that we need to give the 
government a compliment for the positive parts of the budget. 
 
In the constituency I represent, and certainly being along the 
eastern side of the province, a reduction in the sales tax is 
something that all businesses would welcome, especially with 
Manitoba being our neighbour to the east. And Manitoba I 
believe currently still has an 8 per cent sales tax. So a sales tax 
of 6 per cent for a lot of businesses along the eastern side of our 
province is going to be a benefit, much like Alberta. Anyone 
who’s on the west side finds it much easier to go into the 



March 30, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 349 

province of Alberta to do some shopping. 
 
But the thing is, Mr. Speaker, in that regard I will compliment 
the Minister of Finance, I will compliment the Minister of 
Finance for taking the document The Way Up and looking at it 
and saying, yes, that is achievable. Obviously, Mr. Speaker, the 
WEFA group that went through all the numbers in the 
document of the Saskatchewan Party, who are also a consulting 
firm for the province, were able to indicate to the Premier and 
to the Finance minister that it is possible, more than possible to 
raise the provincial sales tax by one point. And we certainly 
compliment the Minister of Finance for doing that. 
 
One of the areas though, as we’ve seen, that while the sales tax 
reduction was certainly complimented by many people across 
the province, a lot of leadership across this province continues 
to indicate that the tax burden in this province, despite what the 
member from Moose Jaw Wakamow indicated, the tax burden 
is still a major hindrance in job creation and development and 
economic growth in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I can see, Mr. Speaker, after the budget speech, which I’m 
sure the Premier and the Minister of Finance were looking at, 
and as I believe the Premier had indicated he is ready to go to 
the polls or he would look forward to going to the polls possibly 
in June and fighting a June election based on this budget. But 
when I look at the number of groups across this province that 
looked at the budget and gave this budget a failing grade, one 
begins to wonder whether or not the Premier may be beginning 
to get cold feet, especially when we find that this year, what is 
the province doing. 
 
If this budget, as the Premier has indicated or as the Minister of 
Finance has indicated, if this budget is everything that they 
pretend or that the government tells us that it is, if this budget 
has so much to offer the people of this province, if this budget 
has so much to offer the electorate of this province, why is the 
province all of a sudden deciding it has to spend hundreds of 
thousands of dollars in order to promote its budget? Almost 
three times what it spent over the last three or four years to 
promote the budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as soon as I see a government starting to spend 
more money to promote a budget, which it’s telling us is such a 
good budget for the taxpayers of this province, you have to 
begin to ask yourself, do they really believe themselves that the 
budget they presented the other day is really — or almost a 
week ago now — is really the election budget that many people 
believe it is. 
 
But many people, on the other hand, really don’t believe is 
going to give the government that inside track to when they go 
to the polls in June or even earlier for that fact; the Premier 
could certainly call an election before June. There’s no doubt 
about it. The Premier’s in a position; this government’s in a 
position to go to the polls. Certainly the Saskatchewan Party is 
ready to go to the polls at any time when the Premier calls an 
election. 
 
But time will tell whether or not we will be at the polls before 
or even June, or whether or not we’ll be going later on, and the 
potential — certainly, I believe, the Finance minister is a — 
was listening to the open line the other day — indicated that 

they . . . certainly he hasn’t ruled out the fact that the Premier 
could even go later on. And that’s quite possible. 
 
I think the debate taking place around this budget is certainly 
going to indicate whether or not the people of Saskatchewan 
will be asked to go to the polls to give either a new mandate or 
to present another party with a mandate to govern the province 
of Saskatchewan into the year 2000 and beyond, into the 21st 
century. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we look at the budget, the government can 
talk about what it is putting into health . . . Pardon me. The 
hundred . . . and I believe about . . . so almost $190 million 
more into health care. The government talks about putting more 
money into health care than it ever has before. And, yes, $1.915 
billion is a substantial chunk of change into the health care 
system. But, Mr. Speaker, $1.915 billion does not tell the 
residents of Saskatchewan that they can continue to expect the 
same types of services that . . . or the same level of services that 
they have today. 
 
When I say that, Mr. Speaker, what I mean by that is, can 
communities across this province expect to see the level of 
acute care beds hold the line, or further reductions? You know, 
in one of the communities I represent in the Moose Mountain 
Health District . . . Mr. Speaker, when I see a health district 
decide that they’re going to reduce the number of beds in a 
facility to the average daily census . . . and the community of 
Kipling, for example, has 12.7 average daily census, and just 
recently the health district board took out every bed down to 
that level of 12. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it seems to me when an average is the 
difference between a high and a low, as I find as I talk to people 
around the community and around the constituency, their 
concern is, when you physically remove the beds to that level, 
and that level then becomes your high, what’s the average going 
to be next year? 
 
That’s the question that the Minister of Health is going to have 
to ask when we get into the ongoing debate and the line-by-line 
debate in the different departments. What guarantee does the 
$190 million have, what does it give to the people of this 
province? What does it say about the availability of acute care 
beds in their community or in their vicinity? Because, Mr. 
Speaker, we will acknowledge the fact that there will not be and 
there isn’t a hospital in every community and there will not be a 
hospital in every community. 
 
(1515) 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I firmly believe that you need to have acute 
care facilities and services at least in a proximity because we 
cannot rely on sending an individual from the community of 
Shaunavon all the way to Regina for emergency care, or in my 
area from Kipling or the Wawotas or the Redvers of this world, 
two and a half to three hours out. 
 
And as I was talking to an ambulance driver the other day, Mr. 
Speaker, who had come to visit me, the fact that when they get 
to the city all of a sudden they’re stuck looking after a patient. 
And whether it’s a patient who’s been maybe in a very difficult 
situation, Mr. Speaker, they find they’ve got to try and manage 



350 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 1999 

that patient and look after that patient because there isn’t access 
to the emergency wards in the city of Regina here. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the public of Saskatchewan are going to look 
at the $190 million and say what does that do to give 
guaranteed access to the emergency services that I need in, or 
close to, the community that I live in? What is that going to do 
to guarantee the acute care beds or that level of care beds that 
currently are needed? 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . And the member from Regina 
South wants to enter the debate. Certainly I welcome the 
member from Regina South because the member from Regina 
South does not have the same length of time to get access to a 
hospital that many people in my constituency have. The 
member from Regina South is . . . unless you run into the 
situation we did today crossing the Albert Street bridge and 
you’re down to one-lane traffic, Mr. Speaker, that may slow 
down access to the Pasqua and the General, depending on 
where you’re living. 
 
But certainly when you look at rural communities, many rural 
residents are a great distance from a health care facility. So they 
will look at the $190 million and they will ask themselves what 
does that do to guarantee me access to a facility that will give 
me at least a chance at living another day if I’m in a difficult 
and extreme emergency situation, Mr. Speaker. So those are 
some of the concerns that we need to be mindful of. 
 
If government can talk about $190 million, what I hear on an 
ongoing basis, $190 million really at the end of the day is going 
to be nothing, number one. 
 
And I was pleased to see that the member from Moose Jaw 
Wakamow did acknowledge today, he’s the first member that 
acknowledged that a good portion of the funds going into health 
care are actually coming from the federal government this way. 
If those funds weren’t there, we wouldn’t have $190 million. If 
we didn’t have equalization payments, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. 
Speaker, if we didn’t have increased equalization payments, this 
government would not even have the privilege of being able to 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Now I don’t know that 
all hon. members need a reminder to know that they’ll have 
plenty of opportunity to put their remarks on the record. And 
I’ll encourage all hon. members to put their remarks on the 
record and not be shouting them from their desks. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, when we 
look at the government rhetoric over the last few days and the 
last few weeks certainly at the SARM (Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities) convention in Saskatoon, 
the Premier talked about the province putting $85 million into 
the NISA (Net Income Stabilization Account) program. 
 
Well you know it was interesting. Everyone I talked to thought, 
hmm, boy, that’s 85 million, until all of a sudden they realized 
that it was only $10 million of provincial money and $75 
million of federal money. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Toth: — But the Premier presented it as if it was his 
money — and it was somebody else’s. That’s the same thing 
that’s happening in health care — smoke and mirrors, smoke 
and mirrors. 
 
The member from Saskatoon is now saying it’s all taxpayers, all 
taxpayers. Well, Mr. Speaker, I find that very interesting. On 
one hand if it’s an issue that the opposition raises regarding 
funding, then it’s all taxpayers; if it’s a government member, 
it’s their money. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all I’m saying, as the member from Moosomin, is 
that the constituents of Moosomin want to know whether or not 
the $195 million increase in health care spending will actually 
provide the adequate care and services. Mr. Speaker, what I was 
disappointed in, in the comments by the Finance minister . . . 
And the Health minister’s talked about this — some of the 
questions we’ve raised about transfers of patients from centres 
like Regina out to some of the rural areas for convalescence 
after surgery, freeing up beds in the larger centres, which I 
commend. I compliment the government for that except for the 
fact that we found . . . I’ve had a couple of patients come to me 
with the fact that they’ve ended up with ambulance bills as a 
result of that. 
 
And it would seem to me that the cost in a smaller rural setting 
is much less than the cost in the larger urban centres. So I’m not 
exactly sure why the department, in trying to free up some beds 
so that you can open up some wards to encourage ongoing 
operations to address the waiting lists, why rural residents 
would again be hit with what we begin to term as a two-tiered 
health system. Why that cost should be theirs when a resident in 
or the area surrounding Regina would not have that cost put on 
their tab. 
 
But the area I’m disappointed in as well is the community of 
Moosomin. And a group of individuals in the community of 
Moosomin have worked very diligently and worked very hard, 
have overcome many hurdles that have been put in their place 
by the district Pipestone Health Board in order to get the 
operating room up and running again in their community. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, when you look at it, the operating room in 
our large centres, all of the funds to put the equipment in place 
has come from the Department of Health. The community of 
Moosomin, just over $100,000 is going to come all out of the 
local sources to put the operating equipment in place. And the 
minister has indicated that they are going to then do a pilot 
project. Mr. Speaker, my guess is had we not been into an 
election mode, the minister may not have given the approval for 
that operating room to go ahead. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I would suggest to you the people of 
Moosomin all in the past, the people of Moosomin have . . . that 
hospital has provided a very positive service and a 
complimentary service to that community, and I fully expect, 
Mr. Speaker, that when everything is said and done and this 
pilot year is over that we will find the community of Moosomin 
has again shown that smaller communities like Moosomin, like 
the Moosomin hospital, can provide a level of service that the 
people have come to expect in the past and believe it’s still 
available and able to be accomplished. 
 



March 30, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 351 

So I’m looking forward to the study being done at the end of the 
year, a study that I believe will show that that hospital in 
Moosomin definitely has a place. A study that will show that 
other communities of that size with a facility of that size could 
certainly help address the long waiting lists we have in the 
province of Saskatchewan when it comes to surgeries. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would be remiss if I did not talk about highways 
and the condition of the highways in the province of 
Saskatchewan. Here again, I would say the people in my 
constituency, number one, are grateful for the fact that 
resurfacing of No. 1 is taking place west of Moosomin. There 
are a number of areas, kilometres west of Moosomin, that 
definitely need to be resurfaced. It’s like you’re going over a 
washboardy road many times. 
 
The road gets pretty rough. In fact a young patient just the other 
day, coming in as a result of appendix attack, asked his dad if 
he could drive a little more carefully. It was getting pretty hard 
riding in the vehicle as a result of the problems he was having 
with his appendix. 
 
And so we’re pleased to see that there is resurfacing of No. 1 
west of Moosomin. We’re also pleased to see that the 
Department of Highways has also made a commitment to begin 
grading of No. 8 Highway south of Moosomin down to the 
valley. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you’re aware, there was some grading done on 
No. 8, north of 48 to just south of the valley. And so to see the 
department moving ahead with some grading south of 
Moosomin is important and we’re really pleased to see that. 
And I compliment the Minister of Highways and her 
department for recognizing the need to grade that piece of 
highway. 
 
And certainly that’s an area we’re going to be following with 
very closely because we want to make sure that when the 
dollars are spent in that area that we have a highway that will be 
able to sustain the level of traffic, especially with the grain 
traffic that is moving on trucks up and down our highways now. 
Mr. Speaker, we definitely need to make sure that we do have a 
level of road, a grade, that will sustain that level of traffic on it. 
 
When it comes to highways in my constituency, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I would be remiss if I did not talk about the fact that 
No. 48 from the Manitoba border right through to the 
community of Kipling is certainly in bad and major need of 
repair. 
 
In fact, just a week ago we had a funeral in our community for a 
younger gentleman who happened to unfortunately lose his life 
in that storm just outside of Saskatoon and a group of people 
had come through from the community of Virden. In fact the 
pastor, who took the service, came from Virden who had been a 
very good friend not too many years ago with this young 
gentleman. 
 
And as I was chatting with individuals who had come along 
they asked me is there a smoother road that we can get on to go 
back to Manitoba rather than travelling on 48. That was 
unbelievable. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, interestingly enough 
the Manitoba portion from the Manitoba border to Virden just 

recently was upgraded and it certainly is a nice stretch of 
highway to drive on. 
 
From our area, it’s actually — if we’re going into Manitoba to 
visit some family or friends — it is the portion of road that is 
much closer but as a result of the condition of Highway 48, that 
piece of highway that still needs some major work on it, many 
people refuse to drive on it. They tend to drive on the grid road. 
 
So this is an area that when we get into debate with the 
Department of Highways . . . I’m looking forward to the debate. 
I’m looking forward to entering into debate with the minister 
and, number one, finding out what it costs to build a highway in 
the province of Saskatchewan — kilometre or a mile of 
highway — and seeing if there’s ways we can put forward ideas 
that we can address and build more roads with the current 
highway budget. 
 
Although, Mr. Speaker, we would like to see the government 
begin to live up to its commitment to that $250 million a year. 
They announced three years ago $2.5 billion over 10 which is 
250. Right now we’re about 90 million short of that 
commitment in the last three years. 
 
And based on the economy of this province one begins to 
wonder whether or not we’ll ever achieve that goal. The 
province might find itself in a situation where all of a sudden it 
needs a billion dollars in the last year just to come up to that 
commitment. So we’re going to be following up on that very 
carefully. 
 
And that’s one of the platforms we have brought forward — 
putting $250 million into highway maintenance with a plan to 
double the No. 1 Highway across Saskatchewan, certainly the 
Yellowhead and other . . . and certainly do major work on other 
major arteries throughout this province. So, Mr. Speaker, that’s 
an area we’ll be debating. 
 
The area of education — and I have a community . . . a couple 
of small communities in my constituency that face the situation 
of a capital construction project. I know that communities have 
gone to the district school board to seek guidance and seek 
approval for a project. And the difficulty in that situation is the 
fact that it took a number of years to amalgamate the two 
communities into one school. It’s difficult right now to argue 
two facilities. So the argument is should it be in this community 
or that community. It’s an ongoing debate between two 
communities, but certainly it’s an area that needs to be 
discussed and addressed. 
 
And when I look at the budget that was presented before us, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, the sad part about this budget is that the 
increase the government talks about and the Minister of 
Education will be bringing to our attention will not cover, as the 
SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees Association), even the 
Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation have pointed out, the 
increase in the Department of Education will not cover the 
salaries. And that’s just the teachers’ salaries. What about all 
the other salaries? 
 
And I’ve talked to some of the local board members and the 
concern they have is that in order to maintain the level of 
programming they have there today, the Saskatchewan 



352 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 1999 

taxpayer, through property taxes, is going to most likely see a 
higher tax on their property in order to cover the costs that the 
boards of education are facing. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker . . . or Deputy Speaker, when we look at this 
budget, while we compliment the government for reducing that 
provincial sales tax, while . . . But we’re sorry that they didn’t 
look at the income tax portion of it because that’s a portion that 
hits every taxpayer in this province, and address even a portion 
of it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re not . . . Deputy Speaker, we’re not saying 
we’d do that all in one year. In fact, if the members opposite 
were being truthful with the people of Saskatchewan, they 
would admit that the Saskatchewan Party platform indicates 
over a period of years the provincial sales tax would be reduced. 
 
And the former member of Highways is talking about it means 
debt. It means responsible treatment and level of reduction of 
taxes in line with creating a greater economic climate in this 
province, so that this province, so that this province could go 
ahead and the taxes would be there. 
 
And if the Minister of Agriculture talks about debt, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Deputy Speaker, what I find interesting — that 
member was sitting in this Assembly prior to the 1991 election 
when the current Premier of this province said that he could 
govern the province with $4.5 billion. Now the current 
Premier’s bringing in $5.5 billion and he’s barely governing the 
province. In fact he has sucked the Liquor and Gaming 
commission dry in order to present a so-called positive budget 
to us today. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I realize that when you get into debating a 
budget speech, certainly you’re going to hit a nerve. And we 
recognize that. Certainly government members will hit a nerve 
with us when they speak. But what we are attempting to do and 
what our party plans to do, and coming back to that question 
that the member from Moose Jaw . . . 
 
(1530) 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — Order. Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, in coming back to the member from Moose Jaw 
Wakamow and his comments about the Saskatchewan Party, 
and then of course the Minister of Agriculture decided he had to 
get into the fray as well and I’m looking forward to the debate. 
 
In fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the pleasure of being an opposition 
member at the current time is we’ll have lots of . . . an ample 
opportunity to debate with the Minister of Agriculture when we 
get into his estimates because I guarantee, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
just from what we’ve seen and what we’ve been hearing in the 
last little while, that the agriculture community . . . And when I 
say agriculture community, I’m not just talking to farmers out 
there. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, even in the city of Regina, how many 
businesses are directly reliant on the agriculture community? 
And the Minister of Agriculture knows that. And this budget is 
certainly void of any real commitment to agriculture, the 

economic engine of this province. So we’ll be looking forward 
to that debate. 
 
But coming back to the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow 
who has joined in with his colleagues, which disappoints me a 
little bit. I thought the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow 
would raise himself a little bit above that. But in regards to the 
debate over the forming of the Saskatchewan Party, the 
members of the current government need to realize that there 
was a grassroots group that were asked to sit down and put 
together a formula in regards to the formation of the 
Saskatchewan Party. 
 
And I’m pleased to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, contrary to what 
the member had indicated, I talked to a number of my 
constituents in my constituency regarding resigning and how 
they felt about the issue. Now I will admit, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that I talked to people who would be out there working for me. 
And I talked to people who were Reformers, I talked to some 
Liberal members, I talked to certainly Conservative members 
— that’s the background I came from. I didn’t necessarily talk 
to NDP members. I’ll admit that. But of all the debate I had in 
my constituency, the only people that really came up to me 
were individuals I know would never, and never will — never 
have and never will — vote for me; I knew exactly where their 
vote was coming from. 
 
But the people I talked to had certainly indicated to me that they 
didn’t see that while . . . there was any reason why I should be 
stepping aside. A general election will come along and people 
will determine. By that time you’ve already had a chance for the 
party to get up and running, you’ve had a chance to bring policy 
forward and to show us whether or not you’re a party and 
you’re a member that’s worth supporting and sending back to 
the Legislative Assembly. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I take great pride in having put my 
name forward. I’m pleased to have had the support of many of 
my constituents over the past number of years to stand in this 
Assembly, to represent it, to speak out on their views; to 
represent, speak out on the agricultural issues or on the family 
issues, some of the core family issues. Whether it’s education, 
whether it’s in health care, or whether it’s in highways, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, it has been a privilege and it has been an 
honour. 
 
And I look forward to again representing or going out and 
speaking to my constituents seeking their support when this 
Premier and his NDP government decide to screw up their 
courage and call an election. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Murrell: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. March 26, 
1999 was budget day in Saskatchewan — a day of hope, of 
fulfilment, of expectation, of commitment. A day, Mr. Speaker, 
that charts our course into the new century. A day when we as 
government members experience the satisfaction of achieving 
positive results for our people. 
 
A day of expectation from our people, our chambers of 



March 30, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 353 

commerce, our school divisions, our health boards, our 
municipal governments, our farmers, our labour. A day of 
commitment made by this government to the people of 
Saskatchewan that we would maintain a balanced approach, 
committing to pay down the debt, committing needed dollars to 
necessary services, committing to cutting taxes. 
 
A day, Mr. Speaker, that the people of Saskatchewan await. 
Too often we all have high expectations and often, through the 
good work of the Finance minister and his department, these 
expectations have been met and frequently exceeded. 
 
But we need to be realistic also. In 1991 when this government 
assumed office, tough decisions had to be made. How to get our 
fiscal house back in order after years of deficit and debt in the 
1980s. Tory debt, Mr. Speaker, to the tune of almost $15 billion 
dollars. And debt as all good businessmen know, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, means interest payments to the tune of $2 million each 
and every day. 
 
Several years ago the member from Cumberland said, if $1 
million is owed and you paid $1 per second, it would take 12 
days to pay off this debt. If you owed a billion dollars and you 
paid $1 per second, it will take 32 years, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
to pay off this debt. The debt this province carries is about 
$11.5 billion. And in order to put this debt in perspective, I 
think the tune of “Somewhere Over the Rainbow” is 
appropriate. 
 
People often say to me, why do you continually refer to the debt 
whenever we mention a need for the increased funding to us. 
And I continually remind these people, as I will remind all 
people of this province, that $750 million servicing this 
province debt would be much better put . . . to much better use 
towards services — health care, education, highways — 
services for the benefits of our people. But the debt is a reality. 
That is why Saskatchewan has done more to reduce our debt 
load than any other government in Canada. 
 
In 1991 the people of Saskatchewan told us to get our books 
balanced and then keep them balanced. Mr. Speaker, on March 
26, our Finance minister tabled Saskatchewan’s sixth 
consecutive balanced budget. This is what the Saskatchewan 
people expect of us and this is what we are going to continue to 
do. 
 
The Tories are promising lower taxes. We have delivered lower 
taxes. We have reduced taxes in every single budget since we 
balanced the budget in 1994-95 — a reduction of income tax 
and elimination of income tax for 6,000 Saskatchewan people; a 
reduction of personal income tax from 50 per cent to 48 per 
cent; small business corporation income tax reduction was cut 
from 10 per cent to 8 per cent; a reduction of corporation 
income tax on manufacturing and processing profits; and, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, we have cut the education and health tax from 
9 per cent to 6 per cent, the lowest rate in 12 years. 
 
That is three percentage points off the sales tax in three years, a 
benefit to all Saskatchewan families and a positive step in the 
right direction, especially for the constituencies on the west side 
of the province such as the Battleford-Cut Knife constituency. 
This is a most beneficial tax cut for my people and my 
businesses, for it allows them the flexibility to compete with our 

Alberta neighbours. 
 
Is it enough? No. But it is responsible, and it is continuing our 
commitment to reduce taxes as we can afford them without 
risking our balanced budget or our important services. 
 
In addition to tax reduction, we are also working with the 
federal government to revise the income tax system to make it 
simpler and fairer. 
 
There is one big difference between this government and the 
Tories and the Liberals. This government is committed to a 
balanced responsible budget, and our record shows our 
commitment. The Tories want to freeze health care and 
education spending; to cut taxes instead of paying down the 
debt; to finance tax cuts on the back of the sick, the poor, and 
our future — our youth. 
 
The Tories are playing the same old tune. And, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I had a lot of problems with this one because I had 
several tunes that fit. I thought it was appropriate that we gave 
them the tune “The Way We Were.” The member from Swift 
Current has a different tune. He figures it should be “Roll Out 
The Barrel.” 
 
An Hon. Member: — How about the theme to Titanic. 
 
Ms. Murrell: — Whatever, it’s a theme that fits. Health care is 
and will always be a priority to this government, and is a 
concern to all of us at some point in our lives. That is why the 
number one priority of this budget is health care. 
 
This year’s budget contains the largest new investment in health 
in the history of the province — an increase of 195 million, 
more than 11 per cent above last year’s budget. An increase that 
will benefit cancer patients, covering more cancer drugs and 
new programs for treatment and prevention. An increase to 
benefit the special health needs of women’s health with 
increased funding for detection, prevention, and treatment of 
diseases such as breast cancer, and osteoporosis. An increase to 
ensure better working conditions for our health care providers. 
Increased funding to the College of Medicine to make sure we 
have the doctors and the surgeons we need. 
 
Last year we provided rural practice establishment grants to 
encourage Saskatchewan-trained physicians to practise 
medicine in rural Saskatchewan, and we will continue to do so 
through the medical resident bursary program. In 1998, Mr. 
Speaker, we had 70 per cent of Saskatchewan’s new medical 
graduates practising in the province. 
 
An Hon. Member: — 70 per cent. 
 
Ms. Murrell: — . . . double the number who stayed in the 
1980s. And 26 new physicians have established practice in rural 
Saskatchewan, in communities such as La Ronge, Kindersley, 
and Ile-a-la-Crosse. 
 
Lately rural areas are often incited to fear by opposition rhetoric 
and causing extreme anxiety for the health districts and 
community residents. Let me assure these communities, this 
government has no plan to close rural hospitals and we are 
committed to improving health services in rural and urban 



354 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 1999 

Saskatchewan. Services that will improve and change the way 
these services are delivered. 
 
Health services are constantly evolving, changing every day 
with modern technology meeting our needs in our communities. 
Our health system services 35,000 Saskatchewan residents 
every day. Every day 15,000 residents see a family doctor or 
specialist. Every day approximately 240 surgeries occur. 
Nursing homes care for 9,200 residents every day. 
 
Yes, the delivery of services have changed, and also the health 
services themselves have changed. Hip replacements, cataract 
surgery, CAT scans, ultrasounds, MRIs, mental health services, 
screening for breast cancer and tuberculosis, occupational and 
speech therapy, health promotion and health research — all 
essential services that allow us to have the best health care in 
the world. 
 
And we must continue to have change, to reduce the barriers to 
health information, sharing and improvements in health 
technology; to continue to initiate, to provide information about 
individual responsibility for health, the concept of wellness, 
population health, and the future and the role of the health 
system; to continue development of program service standards 
and objectives; to increase community and individual 
involvement in decision making regarding health services. We 
need to consult and review policies ensuring good health, such 
as social services, environment, and housing. 
 
Through our health boards and our health providers, we can 
have a voice to assure us as individuals and as communities that 
our needs are being addressed. Essentials such as access to 
specialists which are providing services to Battlefords residents 
on a regular basis. Essentials such as renovations to the hospital 
and construction of a much needed long-term wing in Unity 
which this budget has provided funding for. A new building 
with a new name — the Unity and District Health Centre — 
coordinating and amalgamating health services. 
 
And new technology enables the Greenhead and other boards to 
introduce new information to their district, the province, and the 
world via the Internet. Recently I have been attending 
community meetings with school divisions and teachers, health 
boards, and community leaders. And the concerns basically 
revolved around the increased demand of too many needs, not 
enough services. 
 
I feel very strongly that many of these issues will be addressed 
through the primary health services initiatives. The purposes of 
the primary health services initiatives is to build upon and 
complement many of the programs and services provided by 
our district health boards under the umbrella of primary health 
services — developing, coordinating, and integrating services. 
 
Providers in the delivery of primary health services could 
include family physicians, primary care and public health 
nurses, social workers, dentists, chiropractors, home care 
workers, home care nurses, psychologists, pharmacists, 
midwives. 
 
The services provided could encompass clinic visits for health 
problems, prevention programs, prenatal care, treatment of 
illness and injury, referral, counselling, pain management, home 

care, and outreach programs. 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, primary health services is a team 
approach. And team members use their expertise to ensure 
positive results for everyone. Examples of effective team 
approaches include the following. 
 
During a checkup with her primary care nurse, Sharon, a 
40-year-old, expressed concerns about feeling tired. After 
further exploration of the problem, the nurse suspected that 
Sharon may be a diabetic and arranged some simple tests and an 
appointment with the health centre’s doctor. After discussing 
the diagnosis of diabetes with her family doctor, appointments 
were made for Sharon to meet with the district’s social worker 
and dietitian to discuss the impact of her health condition on her 
family and lifestyle. 
 
The social worker, dietitian, physician, and primary care nurse 
met with Sharon to develop a plan of action. Sharon was given 
information on diet and agreed to attend the next scheduled 
meeting of a local volunteer support group for people with 
chronic illnesses. She was given a schedule of nutrition and 
activity classes at the health centre. The social worker noted 
that Sharon had a supportive family, adequate income, and the 
personal resources to manage most issues. 
 
A primary care nurse assigned to coordinate her care called 
Sharon two weeks later to see how she was doing. The primary 
care nurse then consulted with other team members who agreed 
on assignment of responsibilities. Sharon will be contacted by a 
member of the clinic for further assessment and follow-up as 
needed. 
 
And primary health services initiative can also support a 
family’s needs. 
 
Caitlin is a seven-year-old girl who lives on a farm in rural 
Saskatchewan. Caitlin’s grade 2 teacher noticed that her reading 
skills were not progressing and contacted the public health 
nurse. 
 
The nurse performed a hearing test, which was abnormal, then 
referred Caitlin to her family doctor at the primary health site. 
The doctor detected fluid in her left ear, probably the result of 
an ear infection. Medication was prescribed and plans put in 
place for Caitlin to receive reading assistance from the teacher’s 
assistant. 
 
During follow-up the health nurse noted that her parents did 
very little reading to her at home. The information was passed 
on at a regular primary health services meeting and the primary 
care nurse decided to follow up with Caitlin’s mother. 
 
Caitlin’s mom said her husband used to read to the children but 
had lately been drinking heavily because of his lower back pain. 
Because she has difficulty reading herself, she hasn’t been able 
to help Caitlin. 
 
Caitlin’s mom was linked up with a tutor to help her with 
reading and a meeting was arranged for the family to discuss 
Caitlin’s school progress with a social worker. 



March 30, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 355 

The social worker referred Caitlin’s father to his family 
physician to address the father’s problems with depression, and 
to a chiropractor for assessment and treatment of his chronic 
low back pain. 
 
The family agreed to continue counselling with a social worker. 
 
A recent needs assessment completed by a district health board 
highlighted several issues affecting youth in the district. Low 
self-esteem, above-average teen pregnancy rates, and many 
drinking and driving violations were noted. 
 
The primary health service team took the initiative with the 
public health nurse and convened a meeting with members of 
the student council, teachers, parent association, the district’s 
addiction worker, public health, ambulance personnel, and the 
local RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police). 
 
The strategy includes development of a peers helping peers 
program by the teacher, youth council, the parents’ association, 
the district mental health worker, and public health; individual 
counselling about risk factors by the nurse or physician, public 
awareness and education, RCMP check stops on a more regular 
basis that include counselling. 
 
Town council dedicated a week in June to safe driving. Adding 
a drinking and driving component to the school’s driver ed 
program to be delivered by the addictions worker, ambulance 
personnel, and the RCMP. Mandatory addictions counselling of 
the youth in conjunction with the parents if the youth receives a 
violation. 
 
These are valuable people resources that many of us have in our 
communities. People working together to find solutions, a team 
approach. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this program will work 
very effectively with the role of the school task force to find 
solutions of challenges facing our educators, our police, and our 
social workers. 
 
I would be remiss if I did not take this opportunity to 
congratulate the following Greenhead team members who have 
recently achieved continuing education accomplishments: 
Shirley Parkinson, public health nurse; Rob Degenstein, 
Emergency Medical Services; Theresa Skinner, Emergency 
Medical Services; Rhonda Bartlett, Emergency Medical 
Services; Kim Halter, community EMS Emergency Medical 
Services) co-ordinator; and Yvonne Wiesner, director of 
nursing services. Congratulations to all of you on your 
achievements. 
 
I’ve gone into detail, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because I believe 
that we are reforming health care and as society changes we 
must change. 
 
Now I would like to touch on the Liberal platform announced 
recently. The first plank is health care and I quote: 
“Saskatchewan Liberals believe the time for tinkering (in health 
care) is over,” said Melenchuk. And the first tinkering this party 
will do is reduce the number of health district boards from 32 to 
12 to 14, create 10 to 12 regional hospitals. Sounds like a Super 
7 — you pick the number. And with administrative cost savings 
provide expanded diagnostic and treatment services. — the tune 
that comes to mind with this plank is “All I need is a Miracle.” 

Mr. Speaker, agriculture is one of our key sectors and our 
farmers are in a financial crisis. They cannot compete with the 
federal treasuries of the United States and the European union. 
The current downturn in commodity prices, especially grains 
and hogs, increases the urgency of addressing both short and 
long-term solutions. Recently we announced that we will 
participate in the federal agriculture income disaster assistance 
program or AIDA. This is a $140 million commitment by the 
people of Saskatchewan to our agriculture community. 
 
In addition we are providing $20 million in loan assistance to 
hog farmers, an $85 million top-up for producers on their NISA 
accounts, and we are working towards improving NISA. We 
have reduced crop insurance premiums to farmers and excluded 
PST (provincial sales tax) on farm machinery and repairs, as 
well as the exemptions from the fuel tax on diesel, and rebate 
on gasoline. 
 
This budget continues to support our agriculture industry by 
providing more funding to farmers per capita then any other 
government in Canada. We as farmers and rural residents know 
that the farm situation is tough for many of us. And we know 
the reasons — drought, freight charges, elevator closures, high 
input costs, poor commodity prices. 
 
Now we have the Estey report wanting to remove the freight 
cap. The federal government says that there are new rules, that 
we are playing on a level playing field. Some level playing 
field. 
 
Our producers have been left undefended in a marketplace 
distorted by subsidies. Canada provides subsidies amounting to 
the grand total of $15 per tonne. The United States subsidizes 
each tonne of wheat to the tune of $72. The European 
Community subsidizes each tonne of wheat to the tune of $116. 
The tune our federal government is singing is, “I Walk the 
Line”. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our children are our future, and to ensure their 
future, this budget has increased the funding to education and 
training so that our children, our youth, and our working force 
can share the future. Operating grants to schools will strengthen 
programs, school-based services, and access to computers and 
the Internet. Capital funding has been committed for over 100 
school improvement projects, modernizing and creating a 
positive learning environment for our students and our 
educators. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, more than 400 million in K to 12 funding, 
the largest amount ever invested in our students and teachers; 
$208 million in our universities and federal colleges; and 206 
million in training; 31 million more than last year for our 
Saskatchewan training strategy of skills training through 
JobStart and Future Skills; for expanded apprenticeship 
programs, for entrepreneurship training and for SIAST 
(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology) 
and regional colleges. 
 
We are moving forward together, investing in our future with 
our partners educating and building strong links between 
training and jobs. As well we are investing in roads and 
highways — 234.6 million in ’99-2000, a $15 million increase 
to address the challenges facing rural highways, and there’s a 



356 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 1999 

further 10 million in revenue sharing for infrastructure in roads 
and bridges. 
 
Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, we are investing our province’s 
dollars into highways with a concise plan, assisted by our 
partners such as the west central committee and other area 
groups so that our network of roads enables our producers and 
our processors and other value-added products, direct access to 
the marketplace. 
 
To assist our rural communities with RCMP costs, this budget 
commits 1 million more to help keep our communities safe. 
And we are proud of our building independence program and 
our award-winning child action plan — programs that support 
those who are less fortunate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will continue to move forward together with a 
responsible, balanced approach. We are enhancing the programs 
and services people need — health, education, highways, 
justice. We are reducing the debt, targeting 100 million this 
year; and we are promoting growth by cutting taxes, and we 
will continue to do so as we can afford them in a balanced and 
sustainable way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am proud of this budget. It is realistic, 
progressive, and responsible, and truly deserves the theme from 
“Masterpiece”. Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the constituents of 
Battleford-Cut Knife I will be supporting the motion. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Johnson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I would like 
to take just a few minutes to put on record some of the things 
that are in the budget that are of benefit to the constituency of 
Shellbrook-Spiritwood. 
 
But before I carry on with that, I would like to take a little bit of 
time to talk about something that has interested me when I was 
reading some reports. Since the logging industry and the 
forestry industry is a significant portion of the economic 
well-being of people in the Shellbrook-Spiritwood constituency, 
whenever there is material that comes through related to forest 
companies and that, I try to read some of the information. 
 
And just today I was going through NorSask’s annual report for 
last year and it had an interesting paragraph in it that I thought 
would bring some interest to the legislature and some of the 
people who are involved in the lumbering industry. What 
NorSask has done over the past number of years is speeded up 
their operations by putting in a multi-line system for sawing 
logs. And so what they’ve done is they put in a large line, 
cantor line, and then a small log line, and as well what they call 
a peewee line. So here’s what has taken place while they were 
implementing it and some of the problems that they ran into. 
And I think anyone running a business could well enough 
understand what it was about. 
 
Once scanned, the logs are dumped into one or two . . . into one 
of two large log bins or two small log bins or one peewee bin, 
which feeds the cantor lines. Finally the new system was 
tweaked to make things work even better. 
 

The bins were positioned at a better height to reduce the chance 
of jams. Certain belts were speeded up to create a smooth flow. 
And this is the line that I think would be of most interest to the 
MLAs — and most importantly, a computer bug responsible for 
randomly dropping big logs into the peewee bin was finally 
discovered and solved the problem. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, if you’ve been in an area where you were 
working with logs and you realize what happens when you 
place a large log where there isn’t room for it to go, you can 
well imagine what took place — everything shuts down and 
somebody has to get in there to dig the thing out. And NorSask 
ran into this problem because of a computer bug. 
 
(1600) 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, some of the . . . the item that I would like to 
cover that I think is of interest to the people in the 
Shellbrook-Spiritwood constituency is a little bit to do with 
what the Saskatchewan Tory Party has been putting forward 
when they have been going out with meetings, and they’ve 
given some news releases to these meetings related to 
converting hospitals in Hafford and places like that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I notice that the first news release that they put out 
indicated that they were going to have five meetings. And since 
then they’ve had the first three meetings, and I haven’t seen any 
news release about the next five or ten meetings. I think that a 
number of the MLAs on this side have found it very 
entertaining and valuable to have the Tories paying for the halls 
so that we could go there and explain what’s really taking place 
and receive the benefit for it, as the member for Redberry did in 
the one in Hafford. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to point out to the Tory Party in this 
Assembly that one of the places that they indicated on their list 
of — let me see, I don’t know what the number is and I won’t 
take the time to count right now but they have on a list here — 
one of the places is Big River. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it’s of a great deal of interest to me that they 
would have picked that place as one where the hospital was 
closing because some two weeks ago I was up there with the 
assistant minister of Health, and we were looking at the plans 
and the grounds and where they’re going to build a new health 
facility onto the long-term care facility which would actually 
increase the number of useful beds. 
 
And I want to then take just a little bit of time to say that on 
page 12, the Minister of Finance in his speech related to the 
budget said: “In 1999-2000, Saskatchewan’s Health budget will 
increase by 195 million.” Eleven per cent more than it was last 
year, Mr. Speaker, and of that 11 per cent, it says that the 
budget will provide funding for improved nursing home and 
health care facilities in Balcarres, Big River, and Unity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that that’s an interesting thing to point out 
to the Conservatives in the House here, that the places that 
they’ve picked for . . . where there’s a closure and said that 
there’s a closure, are actually some of them that are listed in the 
budget for building. 
 
I’d like to also point out that the Health budget is going to 



March 30, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 357 

provide a 12 per cent increase to district health boards, and they 
will receive $139 million more this year than they received last 
year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Health budget, and what is taking place in 
health care in the province of Saskatchewan in my mind, is 
nothing short of being unique and very advanced thought in 
going ahead. Because what it’s doing is it’s bringing about a 
change to the health care system, revamping it for new 
technology, revamping it for new medicines, and shifting the 
health care from what was implemented by the CCF 
(Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) in this province to 
what is now needed in this new technological world and doing a 
very good job at succeeding at that in a time of real financial 
problems for the province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it isn’t to say that there isn’t problems in 
health care, but I’d like to point out what problems are there in 
other provinces of Canada. And I have here a news release, 
actually a copy of a news report that was in The Leader-Post on 
March 1, ’99, and it goes on to say some of the following: that 
there was 123,000 accounts in arrears for people in Alberta who 
are paying their health care premiums. 
 
And if you extrapolate from that what the Alberta Department 
of Health has said about it, they say that there’s approximately 
three people involved in each one of these accounts. So you’re 
looking at about 370,000 who have not paid up their health 
premium in the province of Alberta, and they owe something to 
the Alberta government of something over 80 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s my understanding that the Alberta government 
has set aside something close to $10 million for collections and 
they’re using not only internally but external collection 
agencies in order to mount this collection program. 
 
And I think that that’s one of the things that needs to be pointed 
out about the difference between the taxation structure in the 
province of Saskatchewan and that in Alberta. And it ties in 
directly with the policies that the Sask Tories in the province of 
Saskatchewan want to implement and that is that they want 
policies implemented where you pay directly for what you’re 
receiving and not policies that tax those areas where there is 
money available and spends it in the areas where there is need. 
And I think that this fundamental difference shows up very 
clearly in what is taking place in Alberta related to their health 
care premiums. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to cover one other item before I sit 
down and that has to do with the remarks that have come from 
the opposition that indicate that they do not believe that we 
have reduced the taxes in the province of Saskatchewan. And so 
I did a little research and checked up on some of the 
information that’s available related to the gross domestic 
production in the province of Saskatchewan for the past 10 
years or so. And I’d like to just bring this information to the 
attention of the House. 
 
In 1989-90, if you do not consider the interest payments that 
were being made by the government of the day, the amount of 
expenditures in the province of Saskatchewan amounted to 20 
per cent of the GDP in that year. And the reason, Mr. Speaker, 
that I removed the interest payments is that if you included 

those interest payments, it would be 22 per cent. 
 
But as has been said by members of the opposition, whenever 
you are operating with a deficit you are really just deferring 
taxes. So I bring . . . so I point out the two differences there. 
But, Mr. Speaker, if you take a look at this budget, 1999-2000, 
the GDP, the expenditures of this government is 19.5 per cent 
of GDP — a half a per cent less than that percentage used 10 
years previously without interest payments. 
 
But if you subtract, Mr. Speaker, the interest payments from the 
expenditures of the government today, you come up with the 
interesting stats that it’s only 16.5 per cent of the GDP that’s 
spent in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So you’re looking at, approximately, in a 10-year period, the 10 
years that there’s been an NDP government in power for eight 
of the years, you come to a position where there’s been a drop 
of over 4 per cent, three and a half per cent in the amount of 
income that the people of the province of Saskatchewan 
generate that is collected in taxes by the province of 
Saskatchewan and spent on their behalf. 
 
And there is a substantial reduction, Mr. Speaker, in the amount 
of taxes that are collected. And that shows up, Mr. Speaker, 
because this government in its managing the economy and 
managing its expenditures have been very interested in seeing 
to it that they did a very good job. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I have looked at some of the other 
comparisons related to that, to the taxes in the province of 
Saskatchewan, and I’d like to just point them out. For anyone 
that wants to look at it, they can look at the budget address 
because they’re in there. But I think that they should be brought 
to the floor of the House and talked about a bit. 
 
If you look at the provincial debts and the provincial debt as a 
per cent of the GDP, in the years 1993 it was about 70 per cent, 
and today it has dropped to around just under 40 per cent or 39 
per cent. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s a significant change in the 
economic viability of the province of Saskatchewan, and I want 
people to understand that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the same can be said if you look at it in terms of 
actual dollars. There’s been a significant drop from just around 
15 billion to about eleven five this year, and that’s a substantial 
reduction in our debt over that same period of time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I thank you for the time that you’ve given me. 
And I will . . . I would like to thank the people in my 
constituency for their support and for the questions that they’ve 
asked me and for the opportunity I have had to represent them. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Well I 
didn’t speak to the Throne Speech and that wasn’t easy because 
I’ve always got a lot to say. But I’m going to speak today 
against the amendment and in favour of the budget. 
 
And I’m going to start by saying a few words about why I don’t 
support the amendment. And it has a lot to do with the authors 



358 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 1999 

of the amendment and my basic lack of trust in anything 
proposed by this opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Now there’s two reasons that I lack 
trust. One of them is their close relationship with Grant Devine 
who, as we’ll remember, recently was at the unite the right 
conference. And you wonder why I would raise that. But at that 
conference, Mr. Devine was supporting the notion that what 
they needed was a new flag of convenience so they could all 
hide their political origins under a new name. 
 
And I have to say that it struck me as having quite a bit of 
similarity to the strategies employed by the opposition here who 
are also flying under a flag of convenience. Now you . . . 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — Order. Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well I know that the opposition will be 
interested in what I have to say next because anybody who was 
following the unite the Right conference knows that was quite a 
debate over policy but there was one policy that in the end they 
managed to agree to. The Reform were holding out for a 
Triple-E Senate; they wanted it equal, elected, and effective. 
And the Tories were holding out for a quadruple E Senate, but 
they gave up their demands when they found out that 
incarcerated was spelled with an “i”. So it was good though that 
they were able to agree on one policy. 
 
The second reason I wouldn’t support an amendment put 
forward by this opposition is because it just doesn’t add up — 
the kind of things that they support. They want lower taxes, a 
higher spending on selected areas, a freeze of key social and 
education programs. And basically I don’t think they address 
the fundamentals of fiscal responsibility, a thriving economy or 
a thriving community. In their view they want to privatize 
public services, sell the Crowns. Now I don’t know how I could 
support an amendment that had such a devious and ill-advised 
origin. 
 
(1615) 
 
The other reason I might have trouble supporting something 
that they put forward is these comments by Elwin Hermanson 
in speaking to the chamber of commerce in P.A., and they 
asked why it was that his party didn’t have more women 
candidates. And he said, well, it’s difficult to get women 
involved in politics since their concerns are with the home and 
they don’t like dealing with conflict. And some of the women I 
guess who heard his remarks dealt with their immediate conflict 
by walking out of the meeting. And I think women thought that 
our fight for progress was over but apparently your leader has a 
desire to take us back into the ice age here. 
 
The other reason I wouldn’t support an amendment put forward 
by this group of people is that they are trying to make ordinary 
citizens afraid that public health care is collapsing to force them 
to abandon medicare and to get into private health models of 
health delivery. And I guess you have your reasons for doing 
that but campaigns of fear against public services, in my view, 
are not the way that anybody would want to go. 
 

Elwin Hermanson goes further by saying that he would support 
the federal government surrendering its responsibility for health 
care to the provinces. And this is just on the heels of finally 
managing to get the federal government to put back 2.5 billion 
of the $6 billion that they removed from health care. 
 
And what’s he prepared to sacrifice on this? The concepts of 
universality and federal funding responsibility. So again I have 
difficulty supporting an amendment that is arising out of that 
ideology. 
 
Let me talk a little bit about the health system in Alberta for a 
moment. I found this a particularly interesting article. It’s about 
the premiums from this non-taxed province where single 
Albertans pay the government 408 per year for coverage, and 
families, 816 a year, which is about 14 per cent of the budget. 
 
Now listen to this because you’ll be interested, because I know 
you care about these things in the opposition. Dave was an 
Edmonton food service worker and the hotel that was hiring 
Dave went bankrupt. And one of the things they’d been doing 
to save money toward the end of the time they were in business 
was they had not been paying for Dave’s health care premiums 
which was part of his employment contract. 
 
So Dave goes to the hospital to get services and he finds out 
that he’s not eligible because his health care premiums haven’t 
been paid. And now he’s afraid to go to a doctor because not 
only will he not get health care but he’ll get turned into a 
collection agency. I don’t think this is the kind of universal 
health program that we’re interested in. 
 
And just a further late breaking report on this approach to health 
care says the government is pledging to crack down — I love 
that language used with people who are only trying to get health 
services — to crack down on the thousands of Albertans who 
try to get doctor services free without paying medicare 
premiums. He estimates about 250,000 Albertans are involved 
and those in arrears are being chased by collection agencies. 
 
I was actually embarrassed to find out that this exists in Canada 
where I was under the belief that everybody was covered by 
health care. So I just say again that I don’t understand why you 
in the opposition would support these kinds of approaches. 
 
And you purport to support small-business people, farmers, 
working people, but yet these people don’t benefit from the 
kind of agenda that you’re putting forward. You’re, in my view, 
putting forward an agenda that calls for an economic free-for-all 
in our society. Certainly all your anti-worker Bills and all the 
other Bills that I’ve seen you table in the House would suggest 
that you’re . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Now the hon. minister I 
know will be aware of rule 28, which requires that debate occur 
through the Chair, and I’m sure that she’ll want to honour that 
in her debate in response to the Speech from the Throne. 
 
Order, order. Order. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you for bringing that to my 
attention. And I notice that you’re interested in what I have to 
say so I will try to direct myself more directly to you. 



March 30, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 359 

The economic free-for-all that you would support will only 
benefit the largest of corporations and are of no benefit to 
small-town Saskatchewan or to small-business Saskatchewan. 
 
There’s a quote here that I want to read to you because I don’t 
know if you’re familiar with Robert Kaplan the author, but the 
headline is, “Corporate power called bad news for democracy”: 
 

Corporations and big businesses are in the early stages of 
becoming the new forms of political sovereignty and in 
fact the 200 largest corporations employ less than 
three-quarters of one per cent of the world’s workforce but 
control 25 per cent of the world’s economic activity. 

 
Now these are situations that lead to unrest, and everybody 
knows that peace and prosperity go hand in hand. And I just 
warn you on your agenda of economic free-for-all that you’re 
not benefiting people that you choose to support. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about then and now 
because of course a lot of us are known as the baby boom 
generation — although I’m neither a baby or booming at the 
moment, but this is a name . . . well maybe a little booming. But 
one of the things that characterizes our generation is the 
pressure that the large numbers of us place on things like 
pension plans and health services. 
 
And recently I was listening to the fellow who’s the Chair of 
the International Year of the Older Person, and he was making a 
presentation to a group of senior women. And one of the facts 
he mentioned during his presentation is that 43 per cent of the 
province’s health budget is spent on seniors. 
 
Now he wasn’t saying this as a way to make people feel bad or 
feel responsible for spending; he was basically saying it’s good 
that we’re able to provide these services but because of the 
large numbers of us that are aging, that this is becoming a more 
expensive proposition. 
 
And I do want to emphasize that a lot of things have changed 
since we were younger. Then, when we were younger, we 
feared being caught with Hustler magazine, but now people fear 
being caught by Hustler magazine. 
 
Then, we would want to get out to a new, hip joint, but now we 
worry about getting a new hip joint. In the old days we had long 
hair all of us, but now some of us are longing for hair. In the old 
days we watched John Glenn’s historic flight with our parents, 
and now we’re watching it with our kids, or our grandkids as 
the case may be. 
 
Then, our concern was passing a driving test, now it’s passing a 
vision test. And then, we used to say whatever, and now we say 
it depends. So a lot of things have changed, Mr. Speaker, over 
time. 
 
But we are a hardy bunch here in Saskatchewan. At 10 degrees 
centigrade, Vancouverites try to turn on the heat and 
Saskatchewanians plant gardens in the same circumstance. I 
don’t know what it is, Mr. Speaker, that you do to inspire so 
much group participation. I’ll just have to be a little more 
careful here. 
 

The Speaker: — Order! Now the Chair is much pleased to see 
the enthusiasm for debate on the budget, but the Chair does 
want to encourage all hon. members to put their considered 
remarks on the record so that everyone may enjoy them rather 
than shouting them across the floor. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Now I don’t 
want to put too fine of a point on it, but we are a hardy people 
here in Saskatchewan. At 10 degrees centigrade Vancouverites 
try to turn on the heat and in Saskatchewan we plant gardens. 
At minus five degrees centigrade Torontonians wear coats, 
gloves, and wool hats and we throw on a T-shirt. 
 
At minus 30 degrees Calgarians fly away to Mexico and that’s 
time for our light jacket., But at minus 300 degrees centigrade, I 
don’t know if I can say — do I have to say heck freezes over? 
— and the Saskatchewan Roughriders win the Grey Cup. So 
we’re a sturdy lot of people that manage to survive a lot. 
 
And balance, I would say, is the hallmark of this province. 
We’re progressive people but we also have a conservative side 
to us. And in a way you would think that would be very fertile 
ground for a group of people with a conservative philosophy, 
but the thing that creates problems for them is people in 
Saskatchewan also like to co-operate. And when we were 
elected in ’92, voters said, let’s co-operate to clean up that sorry 
Tory mess that was left behind. And I think it was very clear 
that that’s what people wanted us to do. 
 
So our first term of government was really about fiscal 
responsibility because it was quite a mess and it took quite a 
while to get it in hand and to balance the budget, even though 
we were the first government in Canada to eliminate our deficit 
and come in with a balanced budget. 
 
Now the second term of government we dedicated ourselves to 
helping strengthen communities and strengthen the kind of 
decision-making processes and community participation that 
took place. 
 
And I believe that our third term will be about the new 
millennium and building on the foundations that were 
constructed in the first two terms. Because in order to construct 
the kind of world that we want to live in, you need good 
foundations and good fundamentals. 
 
And I want to talk just for a minute about, I guess it’s my 
version of our vision for the new millennium. And I see it as 
being a world-class workforce in a world-class workplace in a 
world-class economy, all supported in the environment of 
world-class communities and environment. 
 
And I just want to talk a little bit about how I see us building 
the fundamentals of these different parts of this vision. 
 
For a world-class economy, there’s more people working in 
Saskatchewan than ever before in the history of the province. 
So while the opposition might be critical of our achievement, 
Mr. Speaker, it’s better than anything that they or any of the 
predecessors have ever done. 
 
Our jobs are of better quality for those that are less fortunate 
than in Alberta. Women fare better in Saskatchewan. Our 



360 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 1999 

incomes for women are at a higher level than they are in 
Alberta. And in that mecca of plenty, they are showing 
increasing levels of poverty. 
 
Now Alberta charges more for university education and spends 
less on health. And if we base our provincial comparison on 
sales tax alone, Alberta might be the place to be; but if we base 
it on car insurance and health premiums, then Saskatchewan 
clearly wins in a landslide, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In the area of taxation, we’ve rolled back the sales tax 
harmonization. Prior to 1991 . . . and I’m sure the members 
opposite will remember that families were paying PST on 
children’s clothing, medication, residential electricity, gas and 
other essential goods and services. 
 
In 1992 the child component of the Saskatchewan tax reduction 
was increased by $50 per child. In 1995 the debt reduction 
surtax was eliminated for low-income earners and reduced by 
150 per taxpayer up to 300 for a dual income household. 
 
I know it creates a lot of pain for the opposition to listen to this 
but if we go over it enough times they’ll remember it. 
 
In 1997 the PST was reduced by 2 per cent, and of course 
we’ve gone another point now. The base on our personal 
income tax rate was reduced by 50 per cent to 48, and there’s 
additional relief at that level now flowing from the federal 
changes which affect our Saskatchewan tax base. 
 
And the Saskatchewan Child Benefit and the Saskatchewan 
employment supplement were implemented. And I think these 
are important tax changes that have affected families in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The other fundamental that’s important for a world-class 
economy is that the debt has dropped from 70 per cent of GDP, 
which is just a startling figure that anybody would have run it 
up that high, to 40 per cent now in 1999, and will be less than 
35 per cent by 2002. 
 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, we stand a good chance of continuing 
to have this success as long as the opposition isn’t elected. 
 
Now the next point I want to move on to is the notion of a 
world-class workplace. And when we talk about a world-class 
workplace in Saskatchewan, we talk about safe, fair, and 
co-operative workplaces. On the safety front, we have a number 
of Acts that protect workers, including occupational health and 
safety, labour standards, radiation health and safety regulations, 
prevention services branch. 
 
In the area of fair workplaces, we believe that people have a 
right to benefit from the profit created by their labour and the 
services that they provide. And so we have a number of 
mechanisms to ensure good collective bargaining. 
 
And we actually have the . . . And probably the opposition and 
the third party chirping will be interested in this figure — that 
we have the lowest number of time-loss days from labour 
disruption of any province in Canada. And I think that’s a very 
good record for our level of co-operation in solving disputes. 
Part of that is a result of the fact that the Department of Labour 

is taking a much more proactive approach to offering 
dispute-resolution services to people in the community. 
 
The other issues that exist for workers include The Pension 
Benefits Act 1992, The Construction Industry Labour Relations 
Act 1992, The Workers’ Compensation Act 1979. These are all 
ways that we try to make workplaces safe. 
 
(1630) 
 
Probably one of the areas that people will find the most 
interesting will be the Farm Safety Advisory Committee 
because a lot of our accidents in Saskatchewan happen on the 
farm, Mr. Speaker. And we’ve had great success, actually, with 
the children’s . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I think all hon. members will 
find it a great deal easier to listen if they aren’t using their 
mouths at the same time. And I will recognize the Minister of 
Labour and ask for the co-operation of all hon. members to 
allow her to proceed in debate on the budget in an uninterrupted 
manner. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker. I was hoping actually, 
when I prepared my remarks, that people would hang on every 
word, but I obviously will have to do a little more work here to 
get their attention. 
 
The Farm Safety Advisory Committee is an important 
committee. And one of the things that we do, actually — I think 
one of the members of the House, her daughter was involved in 
getting this started — is the farm calendar program where 
children do posters about farm safety issues and are able in their 
classrooms to learn about issues about how to safely be 
involved in farm operation, and issues about riding on 
machinery and those kinds of things. And it’s been a very 
successful program because we do have still more deaths than 
we would want to see in the farm occupation. And so we’re 
very pleased that our department has a farm safety advisory 
committee and that they’re doing that kind of work. 
 
This year we also were involved in the balancing work and 
family initiative, because many people are feeling pressured by 
the demands of a two-income family to try to also pay the 
attention they want to pay to their families. So we tried to work 
in a very positive way in achieving a high quality workplace in 
Saskatchewan where people’s needs are met while at the same 
time meeting the needs of the employers for a highly, highly 
skilled workforce. 
 
And that’s why we move on to the discussion of world-class 
workers. In the time that we’ve been elected we’ve 
implemented a new training strategy in Saskatchewan and 
started to reorient all of our institution towards being more 
responsive and more meaningful to both young people and 
employers. Whether the government is the employer or the 
private sector is the employer, to provide those kind of 
employees that really have the relevant training and experience 
for today’s world. 
 
We’ve made improvements to the student assistance program in 
last year’s budget that makes it easier for students with children 
to attend school and not end up with burdensome debt loads. 



March 30, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 361 

We’ve created an employability assistance program for disabled 
persons, and there’s more people out in the workforce today 
who are disabled than there ever has been before. And I think 
people appreciate that chance to contribute. 
 
The apprenticeship and skills training area, there’s a new model 
being developed that . . . the legislation is in front of the House 
this year. And it combines education, labour, and business in an 
industry-led approach to apprenticeship and skills training. 
 
In the area of the changing nature of the workforce, there is a 
Metis development fund and as well an Aboriginal employment 
development program which is helping speed up the entry of 
Aboriginal people into the labour market. And these are very 
successful programs that are based on partnerships between 
people who see that our common future lays in dealing with 
these kinds of issues. 
 
In the area of economic and co-operative development there’s 
been more empowerment of communities through 
neighbourhood development organizations. And the 
environment and resource management area of course works 
closely with SARCAN on assisting people to get into the labour 
market through that door. 
 
So I think we have a world-class workforce and a world-class 
education system. And I think that when you hear reports from 
businesses outside the province, they say one of the reasons 
they like to do business in Saskatchewan and one of the reasons 
why they actively recruit Saskatchewan people for their 
companies is because we have a strong work ethic. And because 
we’ve made an investment in education, we have the kind of 
highly skilled people that people want to hire. So I think that 
speaks well for the kind of choices that we’ve made in investing 
in people. 
 
The next thing I want to speak to is a world-class community 
and certainly a whole range of initiatives, from the 
Saskatchewan child benefit, the child action strategy, the office 
of disability issues, the new housing strategy, assistance for 
people on social assistance for school supplies and other 
expenses like that. We’ve got the Ombudsman and the 
Children’s Advocate that make sure that people get the services 
they’re entitled to. 
 
In areas of labour law we’ve increased parental, maternity, and 
adoption leave so that people can spend that important time 
getting their family started. 
 
We have The Victims of Domestic Violence Act that helps 
protect women in their homes against violence. We’ve moved 
into areas of restorative justice to make sure that criminals are 
not just punished but that in future we have a society where we 
have fewer people committing crimes because we’ve taken 
better approaches to justice. 
 
This year we’ve got the child abuse strategy and resources 
allocated to that. So I just want to say that I think we’ve done a 
lot of work with the integrated school-based programs, 
expansions to community schools, in this year’s budget in 
creating that environment for strong communities and 
world-class communities that hopefully the United Nations will 
continue to recognize in the future. 

The last comments I want to make, Mr. Speaker, involve a little 
bit about the budget. And we know this budget was about 
paying down the debt, cutting taxes, enhancing health care, and 
those being the main priorities that people identified to us in the 
pre-election consultations. 
 
Now I just want to comment a little bit on the remarks of the 
Leaders of the Opposition and the Third Party regarding the 
budget. 
 
Now Elwin Hermanson, I could go over his remarks but I think 
that there’s such a huge lack of credibility there that there’s 
really not much point in spending much time on it. And I think 
you’ve probably heard enough about it that you could give that 
speech by now, Mr. Speaker, even though I know you wouldn’t 
because it would compromise your independence as a official of 
the House. 
 
Now Jim Melenchuk shows a little common sense when he says 
that this wasn’t a bad budget. And I think the opposition should 
get on board with Mr. Melenchuk, who has the honesty to 
recognize a good thing when he sees it. One minute, Myron. So 
I’m just going to close by affirming that I speak against the 
amendment for all the reasons that I’ve stated and in favour of 
the budget for all the reasons that I’ve stated. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Renaud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I was sitting 
back the other day thinking a bit about the budget and those 
wonderful words from our Finance minister and trying to 
absorb them and determining what it really means and . . . but 
first I had to go back and think about where we came from. 
 
Because I remember in about 1990 I was nominated to run for 
our party in the constituency of then Kelsey-Tisdale and we 
realized there was some great difficulties in Saskatchewan, 
great financial difficulties. There was no budget passed in 1991. 
When we did in fact win the election I believe it was the Gass 
Commission that opened the books to find out exactly the 
situation of the province. So I was sitting back and looking back 
at all of those things — where we came from in 1991, the 
deficit. 
 
The government of the day was spending a billion dollars a year 
more than what it was taking in and of course when that 
happens, you’re creating a huge debt. Well when you create a 
debt, Mr. Speaker, there’s interest to pay. So you have to pay 
the bills. You have to pay the interest on the debt. So when you 
have to do that, you have to take money from other areas to be 
able to do that, and the previous administration were borrowing 
great sums of money to try and give the services but on the 
other hand were just creating this debt and of course huge 
interest payments. 
 
So what was happening then is the province . . . I guess we were 
sort of passing the debt to our children, doing things today what 
would have to be paid for by our children in the future. And of 
course when we came to power we didn’t believe that that was 
the correct way to do it and so we had to really go to work and 
we had to tell the people of Saskatchewan the real situation, and 



362 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 1999 

we did that. And we rolled up our sleeves and we got the scrub 
brush out and away we went. 
 
Wasn’t easy at the beginning because we, ourselves, the New 
Democrats, had to raise taxes in fact. We first of all got rid of 
the PST which was a really bad tax. It was sort of like the GST 
(goods and services tax) where it taxed us on our haircuts and 
on services to our vehicles and meals in the restaurant and our 
children’s books and children’s clothes and all those kinds of 
things. Well that wasn’t good and we knew that so we got rid of 
that. 
 
But we did have to raise the E&H tax because we had to get this 
debt under control. We had to stop the deficit, the spending 
more than what we were taking in each year. We had to bring 
that to a level to balance the budget as we say so that the debt 
wouldn’t increase and we could in fact start paying it down and 
then we would pay less interest and then we would have more 
. . . we could have more money for services that the people of 
Saskatchewan really wanted. 
 
So that’s what we did, and we did have to, like I say, raise the 
taxes to some degree and we had to ask each department in the 
province to go back and to see where there were efficiencies 
within those departments. And I know, as Minister of 
Highways, we took the Department of Highways and we . . . we 
looked at management and we looked at the operation . . . the 
buildings we had out in the country and all of those things, and 
we made reductions there so that the taxpayers of the province 
of Saskatchewan wouldn’t have to pay for some of those things 
and we could be as efficient as possible, still giving the 
services. With a little bit of increase . . . with the increase of 
taxes try to get this balanced budget, and of course in 1994 
finally we got the province turned around. And all of a sudden 
we had a balanced budget. And you know, Mr. Speaker, that 
now today when I’m speaking in this House I’m talking about 
the sixth balanced budget — sixth. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Renaud: — What a change, what a change from the 
previous Tories over there sitting across not listening to this and 
they should. But sitting there and spending a billion dollars a 
year, Mr. Speaker, more than what they were taking in, in 
comparison to a government who look for every efficiency 
within government, had to in fact increase taxes for a while just 
to get everything balanced. And . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
I think yes, Mr. Speaker, I do believe that they’re listening and 
I’m very glad because they probably can learn something. 
 
Like I mentioned, in 1994 we finally had the economy of the 
province turned around, and the finances are still very fragile, 
Mr. Speaker. But we were able then to start reducing taxes little 
by little and enhancing services little by little, and paying down 
that huge debt, because we didn’t want that debt over our 
children’s shoulders when they take over this province. We 
don’t want that. 
 
So little by little we continue to do that and that’s what we call 
the balanced approach. And that’s sort of I guess the flagship of 
this government, of the NDP government, is that balanced 
approach where we balanced the budget. And we take the 
surplus and we take one-third of that surplus and we put it to 

reducing taxes, the taxes that we ask the people of 
Saskatchewan to pay to get our financial house in order to begin 
with. And we take one-third of that surplus, Mr. Speaker, and 
we pay down that huge debt. 
 
And do you know that since 1994 we have paid $3.4 billion on 
that debt that our children will not have to pay in the future, Mr. 
Speaker. We rolled up our sleeves; we took that scrub brush 
out; and we looked at every nook and cranny for all the savings 
we could and we found some, Mr. Speaker, and now we have 
less of a debt and I’m very proud of that. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we also take one-third of that surplus and we 
put it into services to try and enhance services as those services 
need it. And in this budget of course we looked at health care 
primarily, but certainly looked at education and highways and 
other programs as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I want to talk just a little bit about health care. Well in the 
health care field, Mr. Speaker, there are lots of changes 
happening — not only in Saskatchewan but across this great 
nation. You see in the health care field there’s new technology 
being developed and invented every day. And a province that 
will provide that service to its people must purchase that 
equipment when it can. 
 
There’s also new drugs, Mr. Speaker, new drugs invented every 
day. And those new drugs are not inexpensive; they’re very 
expensive. And we have to supply . . . as a government we have 
to try and supply as best we can those drugs to the people that 
need them. 
 
(1645) 
 
And demographics, Mr. Speaker, in the province of 
Saskatchewan as across Canada, are changing. I think it was 
about 1939 when rural Saskatchewan peaked in population. 
Since 1939, rural Saskatchewan, the population has been 
declining. I know; I’m the eldest of a family of seven, lived on a 
quarter section or a section of land, and in those days there is 
lots of farmers that lived on sections of land, one section, raised 
large families. Now some of those farms are much larger, 
families are smaller in size generally, and so there has been a 
movement to the urban centres from the rural setting and the 
rural areas of the province. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, I think I’ll go back to about 1985. It was 
my understanding at that time that about 60 per cent of the 
people in Saskatchewan still lived in rural areas and 40 per cent 
lived in urban. Well now that’s reversed, Mr. Speaker. Now 
there are about 60 per cent that lives in the urban centres and 40 
per cent in the rural settings. 
 
So can a health care system that was built for the ’50s and ’60s 
and ’70s, could it provide the services necessary to the people 
in the ’90s and in the year 2000? Well I think it needs changes, 
and all systems need to be changed and looked at on a 
continuing basis because of new technology, the cost of 
services and new drugs, and certainly demographics and those 
kinds of things, because the services that people demand now 
and ask for and need must be provided to them but they may be 
provided in a different way. 
 



March 30, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 363 

And so our government is taking charge of that and in this 
budget, Mr. Speaker, we are spending more in health care than 
ever before in the history of the province of Saskatchewan — 
$1.9 billion, Mr. Speaker. About 42 cents on every dollar that 
the government takes in from taxes and from royalties and 
wherever we get our money from to provide the services to the 
people of Saskatchewan, 40 to 42 cents, Mr. Speaker, goes to 
health care. What are we going to do with that extra money, Mr. 
Speaker? We’re going to look at waiting lists for surgeries. 
We’re going to try and improve that. We’re going to look at 
better treatment in regards to cancer, and also women’s health 
services — osteoporosis, Mr. Speaker, and breast cancer. 
 
Twelve per cent of the . . . 12 per cent increases to the district 
health boards. The district health boards now provide services 
in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, because we feel it’s better to 
provide services in the northeast . . . services that the people in 
the northeast need in comparison to the services perhaps in the 
southwest may be altogether different — the needs may be 
altogether different. So health districts will look at their needs 
in their districts and provide those services, Mr. Speaker. And 
so that’s why we went to the health district concept and we 
believe it’s working very well. Certainly there is . . . Everything 
hasn’t run as smoothly as we would like but when we’re 
working with a health care system as big as the one in 
Saskatchewan, it’s not easy to change, and it’s been there for a 
long time. 
 
And of course there’s the scare tactics by the opposition, which 
. . . As you change the system, as people in the local 
communities change the way they deliver services to their areas, 
there’s always the scare tactics of the opposition who say, well 
your hospital’s going to close or this is going to close or this 
isn’t going to happen or whatever. And so we have to beware of 
that as well. 
 
I know that, talking a little bit about the scare tactics, I was in 
Carrot River at a meeting the other day where the Saskatchewan 
Party, I believe, advertised to have this meeting about the 
Carrot River hospital. And there the health district, I believe, 
are talking of changes to the services offered in that community. 
And they’re talking about an amalgamated service with acute 
care and swing beds and respite care along with the long-term 
care home. 
 
And of course the opposition party were there to tell people that 
this was no good. But of course the opposition didn’t have their 
plan. They didn’t have or couldn’t tell the people what they 
would do if they were government. And I think the people there 
really kind of expected that. They didn’t expect that the 
Liberals, who were also there, Mr. Speaker . . . The Liberal 
leader, Mr. Melenchuk, and the Leader of the Tories, Mr. 
Hermanson, were arguing amongst themselves about who 
would be the greatest. 
 
And the people were not there to hear that political debate, Mr. 
Speaker. They were there to hear what the opposition would do 
if they were in power or what the Liberals would do if they 
were in power. But of course they didn’t have any answers for 
them. They were just saying that the NDP are bad. 
 
And I don’t think the people bought that because you know 
what happened, Mr. Speaker, is that the 200 people actually 

asked the NDP candidate for that area all the questions. And so 
the Liberal leader sat there and the Tory leader sat there and 
didn’t participate much in the meeting at all after the questions 
were asked of the NDP MLA. 
 
So I know that they’re scare tactics and I don’t think . . . They 
haven’t got a policy really. I know that the Tory Party says 
they’re going to freeze spending on health care. And I know 
they have support from the Canadian taxpayers association. Mr. 
Truscott, I believe who worked for Mr. Hermanson, says that 
we shouldn’t spend any more money; we should freeze all the 
spending, in fact. And I believe that Mr. Hermanson agrees with 
that that we should freeze spending on health care. 
 
But I want to say that with the cost of new technology, which I 
just talked about a little earlier, and with the costs of new drugs 
that come onto the scene daily and with the changes in services 
that are required, ambulance services, and all the other services 
required in rural Saskatchewan that it’s impossible, I think, to 
freeze funding in health care. I think you must react to that. 
 
So I would hope that the people of Saskatchewan realize what 
freezing health care funding really means. Does it mean that we 
are going to move to the American system of health care where 
you have a private insurance firm that might insure you, or 
might not, depending on your health situation. And I know 
myself with perhaps a bit of a heart condition, would I get 
insurance? I don’t know under an American system. 
 
And so I would be very reluctant to elect the Saskatchewan 
Party because — or the Tories I guess — because I would be 
very scared that I would not be able to get health care services. 
So that’s why I would not want to go that way, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I know that I call the other party Tories — the opposition 
Tories. They call themselves the Saskatchewan Party, Mr. 
Speaker, but I call them the Tories because I think there’s some 
reason for that. And I need to tell the people of Saskatchewan 
that there is a reason for that because if you look in the phone 
book — and I think many of us have explained it before — if 
you look in the Regina phone book for the Saskatchewan Party, 
it will be listed there. And if you look under the Progressive 
Conservatives or the Tory Party, it’d be listed there. But funny 
thing — it’s the same address and the same phone number so I 
imagine it’s the same people. 
 
And, yes, if you look at who’s working for the new Tory Party, 
the Sask Tory Party, it’s certainly the same people that worked 
for Mr. Devine and his crew. And if you look at the candidates, 
I think you’d find the very same people working for the Tory 
Party, or for the new Tory Party, as you did for the old Tory 
Party. And it goes on and on and on. 
 
And then if you’d take a look at their policy, Mr. Speaker . . . 
And I think I have a copy. The Way Up it’s called and it’s a 
very appropriate title because if you . . . the way up is . . . if 
you’ve taken people to the bottom, you certainly have to look 
for the way up. And I know that their party in the 1980s took us 
to the bottom and we’re struggling and slowly coming to the top 
under this government. 
 
And this budget, I think, Mr. Speaker, talks about that because 
. . . After the budget I talked to some people and one person told 



364 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 1999 

me that it was . . . he called it a stable . . . stable budget is the 
word he used, Mr. Speaker. Another person said it’s a sound 
budget, it’s a sound budget; it’s got strength. Another person 
said, it’s a common sense budget. 
 
It’s not like the Tories that say, oh, we’ve got to cut . . . you 
should’ve cut taxes more. You should spend more for 
highways. You should spend more for this, and you should 
spend more for that, and . . . And I don’t know where they get 
that from, but that’s not where the people are. 
 
Another person said, Mr. Speaker, it’s a realistic budget. And 
that’s right. The Tories’ voodoo economics, I guess is what I 
like to call it. It’s just it doesn’t add up. It just doesn’t add up. 
It’s the spend-and-borrow economics, Mr. Speaker. It just 
doesn’t add up. I think what I’d like to call it, it’s 
let-our-children-pay economics. 
 
And I think that’s what I’m so scared about. That’s why 
actually that I sought the candidacy in Carrot River Valley this 
time, to make sure that the Tory government does not get into 
power because I don’t think we want that let-our-children-pay 
economics back into this province again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to carry on. But being that it’s close 
to 5 o’clock I would like to move adjournment of debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:57 p.m. 
 
 



 

 


