





























































Hansard: December 06, 1999


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 5 
 December 6, 1999 
 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the Chamber at 
2:02 p.m. 
 
The Speaker: — May it please Your Honour: 
 
The Legislative Assembly has elected me to the office of 
Speaker. 
 
If, in the performance of my duties, I should at any time fall 
into error I pray that the fault may be imputed to me and not to 
the Assembly, whose servant I am. On behalf of the Assembly 
and its members, it is my duty to claim all their traditional 
rights and privileges, especially that they may have freedom of 
speech in their debates, access to your person at all reasonable 
times, and that their proceedings may receive from you the most 
favourable consideration. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I am commanded by His 
Honour the Lieutenant Governor to declare to you that he freely 
confides in the duty and attachment of the Assembly to Her 
Majesty’s person and government. His Honour is confident that 
the Assembly’s proceedings will be conducted with wisdom 
and prudence and grants the Assembly’s claim to its traditional 
rights and privileges. 
 
I am commanded also to assure you that the Assembly shall 
have ready access to His Honour upon all reasonable occasions 
and that their proceedings, as well as your words and actions, 
will constantly receive from him the most favourable 
construction. 
 
His Honour the Lieutenant Governor was then pleased to open 
the session with the following speech as tabled: 
 
Mr. Speaker and Members of the Legislative Assembly: 
 
It is my pleasure today to welcome you to the First Session of 
the Twenty-Fourth Legislature of Saskatchewan. 
 

A Brand New Day 
 
Today marks an historic new beginning – a new dawning of 
optimism and hope. 
 
In September, the citizens of this province decided they wanted 
a fundamentally new approach to government. 
 
They said they want their representatives to stop shouting, to 
come to this place with open minds, prepared to work together 
again in the great tradition that built Saskatchewan. 
 
A great writer once said, “The real voyage of discovery 
consists, not in seeing new landscapes, but in having new eyes.” 
 
Today marks the beginning of just such a voyage, with the new 
eyes, the new vision, of a fundamentally new government. 
 
It is an historic coalition, with a four-year mandate to renew and 
strengthen our province’s government. A coalition founded on a 
new spirit of co-operation and openness. 

It is common in a Speech from the Throne to review past 
accomplishments. 
 
But this is a brand new day. 
 
This is a day to talk about what still remains to be done. 
 
And there is much left to be done. 
 
Because too many of our families in Saskatchewan are still 
having a hard time making ends meet. 
 
Saskatchewan is blessed with strong economic growth and low 
unemployment. 
 
But too many of our children are still growing up poor. Too 
many of our families have waited far too long for a real increase 
in their take-home pay, and too many of our farm families are 
back to depression era incomes. 
 
We need to work together to build an economy that works for 
everyone. 
 
We need to do even more. 
 
Too many of our young people are still concerned about 
their futures. 
 
We must work to ensure every young person raised in 
Saskatchewan has fair and equal access to the very best 
education they can achieve. 
 
And we must work to ensure they have bright futures waiting 
for them – right here at home – when they graduate. 
 
We need to do more. 
 
Too many of our rural families are victims of a vicious trade 
war. 
 
We must work together for fairness for our farm producers – 
and we must work together to build a stronger, more diversified 
and self reliant rural economy, supporting prosperous rural 
communities with real futures, standing on their own feet. 
 
We need to do more. 
 
Too many seniors and too many families are still worried 
that our health care system will not be there when they need 
it. 
 
We must work to protect and enhance our health system. 
 
Medicare was pioneered in Saskatchewan by a CCF/NDP 
provincial government. Medicare was turned into a national 
program by a Liberal federal government. Now medicare needs 
to be protected and improved in Saskatchewan by a coalition 
government uniting both parties and working in partnership 
with Ottawa. 
 
And still we need to do more. 
 



6 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 1999 

Too many citizens are alienated from our province’s public 
life. 
 
Citizens want the doors of this Legislature to be opened, and 
their voices to be heard within. 
 
And too many of our Aboriginal citizens remain excluded 
from our social, economic and civic life. 
 
First Nations and Metis people want to have the educational, 
employment and business opportunities they need to be full 
participants and contributors to our province’s economy and 
society, while observing their traditions and culture. 
 
These are the challenges. 
 

HELPING FAMILIES MEET CHALLENGES 
 
The people told my government that its first order of business 
must be to help families make ends meet. 
 
My government is committed to helping build the economy; to 
reducing taxes; and to helping families. 
 

Building the Economy 
 
The people said to keep working together to build our economy. 
 
In the coming weeks, my government will spell out a 
comprehensive new economic strategy, Partnership for 
Prosperity, that will bring working people, businesses, 
communities, cooperatives and government together to continue 
building jobs and growth. 
 
This plan sets out a new roadmap – to build on our strengths; 
invest in research and development; promote better education 
and training; strengthen community economic development; 
improve infrastructure; reduce regulation and other barriers to 
growth; and streamline and improve services that promote jobs. 
 
My government will consult carefully with communities and 
partners to make sure this plan is right for our province – and 
then we’ll roll up our sleeves and make it happen. 
 
To help us compete in the new economy, my government will 
introduce The Electronic Information and Commerce Act to 
promote growth in the expanding world of electronic commerce 
and Internet trade. 
 

Reducing Taxes 
 
The people said they want fair, sensible and sustainable lower 
taxes. 
 
So, my government will introduce a plan to reduce personal 
income taxes in the next budget. 
 
Our goal is to remove thousands of low income families from 
the tax rolls altogether – eliminating an important barrier to 
work, and promoting dignity and self-reliance in the most direct 
way possible. 
 
Our goal is to give every low and middle-income family real 

help to make ends meet, and to help all Saskatchewan families 
save for homes, raise their children, save for their educations, 
and secure good jobs. 
 
Our goal is a tax system that is fairer; that is simple and easy to 
understand; and that helps our province stay competitive in the 
world market. 
 
And tax reduction will be undertaken as part of a balanced 
approach, investing future surpluses into lower taxes; better 
services; and lower debt, always in the context of a balanced 
budget. 
 
We have heard many good ideas on how to improve our tax 
system. 
 
My government recently received the final report of The 
Saskatchewan Personal Income Tax Review Committee. We 
will be listening carefully to what the people of Saskatchewan 
tell us about the ideas contained in that report – leading to a tax 
reform plan in the next provincial budget. 
 

Helping Families 
 
As part of tax reform, steps will be taken to ensure tax fairness 
for all families – including those with a single income earner. 
 
My government will introduce legislation to implement family 
leave, to help families find time for necessities like a child’s 
medical needs and school visits. 
 
My government will work closely with other provinces and the 
federal government to make a national children’s agenda a 
reality. 
 
And my government commits today to increase funds for 
childcare in each of the next four years. Amendments will be 
introduced to The Child Care Act to help improve services. 
 

A BRIGHT FUTURE FOR OUR YOUNG PEOPLE 
 
The people also told us to ensure their children can look 
forward to a bright future – while staying right here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So, my government will work to provide opportunity for all, by 
improving education. 
 

Accessible Post-secondary Education for Families 
 
Everyone in Saskatchewan knows that higher education and job 
training are key to ensuring a bright future for our children in 
the 21st century economy. 
 
It is time to take the next step towards extending the frontier of 
accessible public education. 
 
My government will therefore act to make post-secondary 
education more accessible for families. 
 
The Minister for Post-secondary Education and Skills Training 
and the Minister of Education will consult closely with 
students, parents, educators and communities on the best way to 



December 6, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 7 

implement this commitment in the next provincial budget. 
 

Elementary and High Schools 
 
My government will introduce a plan to place our K-12 
education system on a sound and sustainable footing by, over 
time, assuming greater direct responsibility for financing 
education. 
 
To that end, my government commits today to increase its 
contribution, in steps, as finances permit, until the province 
funds its historic share of the cost of education. As the 
provincial contribution increases, education property taxes 
should be reduced. 
 
My government is committed to early intervention and support 
to ensure that our most vulnerable children have the opportunity 
to benefit fully from their schooling. To that end, my 
government will support and enhance Saskatchewan’s 
award-winning Community Schools program and our 
Pre-Kindergarten program. 
 
In order for our students to thrive, they must have access to 
quality school facilities. My government will provide financial 
support for school construction and renovation projects across 
the province. 
 
We will continue to work with school boards to reduce overlap 
of resources, through initiatives like joint use facilities. 
 
We will work in close partnership with the Labour Force 
Development Board to ensure students are aware of future 
career opportunities and trends. 
 
And we will continue to review and improve our exemplary 
curriculum, to ensure students have the basics and more than 
the basics – the life skills to make a future for themselves right 
here in Saskatchewan in the 21st century. 
 
In support of these goals, my government will introduce The 
Post-Secondary Education, Training and Employment Services 
Act and introduce amendments to The Education Act and The 
Student Assistance and Student Aid Fund Act. 
 

FIGHTING FOR RURAL FAMILIES 
 
People across our province want their government to speak with 
one voice on behalf of our farm families and our rural 
communities. 
 
Saskatchewan farmers can compete with anyone in the world. 
Our products are of the highest quality and our practices among 
the most efficient. In spite of this, many of our province’s farm 
families have hit upon difficult times. They are caught in a 
battle between two titans – the United States of America and the 
European Union – who are throwing the might of their 
treasuries into a fight for control of world markets. 
 
As a result, our farm families find themselves once again being 
squeezed by low commodity prices – the lowest since the 
1930’s. 
 
The issues are both complex and daunting. And they go beyond 

the power of a provincial government to solve them alone. The 
federal government must accept its responsibility to stand up 
internationally for Saskatchewan farmers. But there are steps 
my government CAN and WILL take to respond to these issues. 
 

Emergency Debate 
 
Tomorrow, my government will propose an emergency debate, 
in light of the federal government’s response to Saskatchewan’s 
farm delegation a few weeks ago. 
 
My government will then move that this Assembly’s Standing 
Committee on Agriculture meet in this Chamber to hear the 
voices of farmers and rural leaders on this issue, leading to a 
vote on an emergency resolution. 
 

Provincial Action Committee on the Rural Economy 
 
My government will form a Provincial Action Committee on 
the Rural Economy that will include the rural and farm leaders 
who made up Saskatchewan’s delegation to Ottawa. 
 

World Trade Talks 
 
Clearly, the current round of trade talks will be critical to 
resolving the problem of international trade distorting subsidies. 
My government will continue to aggressively press Ottawa to 
represent the interests of Western farmers at these meetings. 
 
My government will also appoint an eminently qualified and 
respected Special Advisor on Agriculture to support our 
province at the next round of trade talks and to help the federal 
government confront the protectionist policies of our trading 
partners. 
 
But success in the trade talks will come too late for some of our 
farmers. Therefore, we will continue to strongly urge the federal 
government to treat Saskatchewan farmers equitably, and to live 
up to its responsibilities by providing an immediate trade 
equalization payment. 
 

Provincial Steps to Help Farm Families 
 
All parties in this Legislature agree that the Province of 
Saskatchewan cannot compete with the treasuries of the United 
States or the European Union. However, my government will 
marshal its resources to do what it can to deliver a package of 
initiatives to help farm families cope with the worst effects of 
the current crisis. 
 
We will negotiate with the federal government to withdraw 
from AIDA, eliminate the federal red tape and put the 
province’s contribution where it belongs – in the hands of farm 
families. This would provide over $100 million dollars in 
immediate relief to Saskatchewan farmers through re-direction 
of provincial AIDA funds. 
 
My government will work with producers and suppliers to find 
ways to reduce the high input costs facing farm businesses. 
 
My government will pursue steps to reduce the cost of crop 
insurance and enhance producer coverage. 
 



8 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 1999 

We will introduce a farm input costs monitoring program. 
 
And my government will help farm families through this crisis 
by ensuring that existing programs continue to be available to 
farmers who have made diligent efforts to meet their 
commitments. 
 
My government will ensure that farmers are not denied program 
benefits as a result of the current crisis by extending 
provincially administered farmland lease backs by three years. 
We challenge the federal government to do the same for its 
lease backs. 
 
And we will develop extended payment terms for crop 
insurance and Lands Branch customers having difficulty paying 
their bills as a result of the current income crisis. 
 
My government will also work to build a more prosperous 
future for the agriculture industry. 
 
In addition to negotiating with the federal government for 
enhanced farm safety net programs in the short term, my 
government will pursue a long term safety net program that can 
actually meet farmers’ needs in disastrous situations like the 
one we currently face. 
 
Saskatchewan is making strides in value added processing, 
specialty crops and other unique and innovative areas of 
production. My government will support the long term success 
of the industry by working to extend availability of equity 
capital for processing and value-added activity in the agri-food 
sector. 
 
My government will also introduce amendments to The 
Department of Agriculture Act and The Farm Financial 
Stability Act, which will support increased diversification. 
 
Together, we will find a way for older farmers to retire with 
dignity and for our sons and daughters to take their place on the 
land and raise the children who will one day follow in their 
footsteps. 
 

BETTER HEALTH CARE 
 
The people have told my government they want health care 
services for their families to be protected and improved. 
 

Better Health Services 
 
My government will introduce steps to strengthen regional 
hospitals. These investments will allow citizens access to better 
health services closer to home – both taking the pressure off 
health facilities in Regina and Saskatoon, and making health 
care services more convenient for patients. 
 
Steps will be taken to improve emergency medical services, 
particularly in rural and northern Saskatchewan. We will also 
take steps to standardize ambulance fees. 
 
Legislation will be introduced to allow Licensed Practical 
Nurses to fully use their skills on the health care team. 
 
Steps will be taken to reduce waiting times for key health 

services. 
 
My government will work to expand home care services. 
 
An emphasis will be placed on the health of children and 
expectant mothers. 
 
My government will work in close co-operation with our 
partners to train, recruit, and hire more health providers. 
 
And we will work to develop clear, measurable, achievable, 
regularly monitored and regularly reported goals for health 
services. 
 

Governance 
 
The people have told my government to direct every possible 
dollar into front line care – and to make sure the health system 
is being properly run. 
 
To that end, my government will ensure that district boards are 
properly accountable to this Assembly for funds allocated to 
them by this Assembly. 
 
My government will work to clarify the roles and 
responsibilities of our partners in the health system — 
simplifying governance; strengthening accountability; and 
ensuring that administrative costs are kept to a minimum. 
 
And my government will assume greater responsibility for 
negotiating collective agreements with health providers. 
 
In support of its health system priorities, my government will 
introduce amendments to The Health Labour Relations 
Reorganization Act and The Medical Professions Act, and 
replace The Licensed Practical Nurses Act. 
 

OPEN, ACCOUNTABLE AND 
RENEWED GOVERNMENT 

 
I said earlier that the people of Saskatchewan want their voices 
heard. They want to see their business done differently. 
 

Consultations and Legislative Committees 
 
As I have announced, in the weeks to come my government will 
be consulting citizens about a new economic strategy; tax 
reform and other budget priorities; accessibility to 
post-secondary education; and – through a provincial action 
committee – about the future of our rural communities. 
 
My government will refer a number of important issues to 
legislative committees for public discussion and consensus 
building, followed by action. 
 
• This Assembly’s Crown Corporations Committee will be 

asked to review and recommend legislation regarding a 
permanent body to review our monopoly utility rates. 

 
• My government will ask this Assembly to establish a 

Special All-party Legislative Committee to recommend 
government, community and police action to address the 
issue of sexual abuse of children through prostitution. 



December 6, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 9 

• Also, my government will ask this Assembly to establish a 
Special All-party Legislative Committee on Tobacco 
Control to consider and report on the impact of tobacco 
use, especially by children and youth, and to recommend 
strategies to protect the public from the health risks of 
smoking. 

 
Clarifying the Offices of the Ombudsman and the Children’s 

Advocate, and Updating the Provincial Auditor Act. 
 
The Ombudsman and Children’s Advocate Act will be amended 
to clarify their powers. My government will also introduce 
amendments to The Provincial Auditor Act to update this 
legislation. 
 

Government Accountability 
 
Citizens have the right to know more of what their government 
is trying to accomplish. 
 
To that end my government will begin to implement a 
comprehensive government accountability project. 
 
Government departments will clearly spell out their goals and 
achievements in annual reports to the people of this province. 
They will be accountable for their performance, and their 
achievements will be measured against key benchmarks. 
 

DIGNITY AND SELF-RELIANCE 
FOR ABORIGINAL PEOPLE 

 
My government is committed to working with First Nations and 
Metis people so that they will be full partners in our province’s 
economy and society – while preserving and building on their 
own unique heritages and communities. 
 
Our Saskatchewan is inclusive of all people – from the small 
northern community of Camsell Portage, to the wider 
Aboriginal community, and to the province as a whole. A real 
Aboriginal renaissance is occurring in Saskatchewan. 
Aboriginal people and institutions are building positive 
partnerships with businesses and governments. Now is the time 
to recognize, respect, and celebrate this renaissance and its 
contribution to our great province. 
 
In recognition and respect for Aboriginal institutions, my 
government will introduce The Saskatchewan Indian Institute of 
Technologies Act. 
 

OTHER KEY PRIORITIES 
 
Here are some other important priorities my government will 
act on in the coming weeks and months: 
 
• My government will provide funding for additional police 

officers to make our communities safer. 
 
• My government will introduce a forest renewal program, 

to plant at least 100 million trees over the next four years, 
and will increase its assistance to municipalities fighting 
Dutch Elm disease. 

 
• My government will begin a careful consultation with 

employers and working people on how The Labour 
Standards Act can be improved and updated – including 
measures to permit people to choose time off rather than 
extra pay for overtime – giving workers more choices as 
they balance work and family. 

 
• And my government will commission a full, independent 

review of SGI’s no-fault insurance system. Details of this 
review will be announced in coming days. 

 
A NEW START 

 
The next provincial election is at least four years away. 
 
The people told us on September 16th to set aside the rancour 
and discord of the election just past; to stop shouting at each 
other and past each other; and to work together to better serve 
the people who elected this Legislature. 
 
They told us to work together to make it easier for families to 
meet challenges. 
 
They told us to work together to provide a brighter future for 
our children. 
 
They told us to work together to fight for our farm families. 
 
They told us to work together to protect and enhance our health 
system. 
 
They told us to open up government, to renew it, and to make it 
a partner with all of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And they told us they want First Nations and Metis people to be 
full partners in our province’s economy and society. 
 
Working together to move forward, with balance and common 
sense, a step at a time – into the 21st century. 
 
I know the elected Members of this Assembly heard the people 
of Saskatchewan. I know the Members will keep faith with the 
people of Saskatchewan, and with the mandate that the people 
have given them. 
 
God speed to you all. 
 
God bless Saskatchewan, God bless Canada, and God save the 
Queen. 
 
His Honour retired from the Chamber at 2:29 p.m. 
 
 
Prayers 
 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

Notice from the Chief Electoral Officer 
 
The Speaker: — I wish to inform the Assembly that the Clerk 
of the Legislative Assembly has received from the Chief 
Electoral Officer lists of the names of such members as have 
been returned to serve in the legislature. 
 



10 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 1999 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Pro Forma Bill 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
a Bill respecting the administration of oaths of office be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill read a first time. 
 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

Introduction of Pages 
 
The Speaker: — I wish to at this time inform the Assembly 
that our pages for this session are with us today and you will 
recognize some of them, and it’s my pleasure now to introduce 
them to you. First of all, Dean Mulhall. I’d ask them to stand. 
Daniel Abramson, Jill Fraser, Melanie Bratkoski, and Tanya 
Weber. Ladies and gentlemen, hon. members, these will be your 
pages for the session. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

TABLING THE SPEECH FROM THE THRONE 
 
The Speaker: — I wish to also inform the Assembly that in 
order to prevent mistakes I have obtained a copy of the speech 
of His Honour the Lieutenant Governor which I now lay on the 
Table. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Speech from the Throne 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, 
seconded by the Deputy Premier, the member from Regina 
Elphinstone: 
 
 That the speech of His Honour the Lieutenant Governor be 

taken into consideration on Tuesday, December 7, 1999. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Printing of Votes and Proceedings of the Assembly 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
Minister of Education, the member from Saskatoon Northwest: 
 
 That the Votes and Proceedings of this Assembly be 

printed under the authority of the Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Members to Compose Lists for Standing Committees 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I now move, 
seconded by the Minister of Economic and Co-operative 
Development, the member from Saskatoon Idylwyld, by leave 
of the Assembly: 
 

That members Lingenfelter, Bjornerud, D’Autremont, 
Kasperski, Van Mulligen, be constituted a special 

committee to prepare and report, with all convenient speed, 
lists of members to compose the standing committees of 
this Assembly, provided under Rule 94. 

 
That the said standing committees be severally empowered 
to examine and inquire into all such matters and things as 
may be referred to them by this Assembly, and to report 
from time to time their observations thereon; with power to 
send for persons, papers and records, and to examine 
witnesses under oath. 
 
That the said special committee consider the size of the 
standing committees and to report thereon with all 
convenient speed. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 

Battered Women’s Awareness Week 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At this time I 
ask for leave to make a statement regarding Battered Women’s 
Awareness Week and my remarks will be followed by a 
statement from the member from Kelvington-Wadena, and I 
would then ask for a moment of silence. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you 
to the House. November 30 to December 6 was proclaimed 
Battered Women’s Awareness Week in Saskatchewan, and this 
week is proclaimed annually by the Provincial Association of 
Transition Houses of Saskatchewan. It brings into focus public 
attention of the issue of women who are abused by their 
partners, by those closest to them. 
 
This week concludes today, December 6, a day proclaimed by 
the Canadian parliament in 1991 and is Canada’s national day 
of remembering and action on violence against women. And 
that day was chosen because it was 10 years ago that 14 young 
women were killed in Montreal at École Polytechnique. What 
happened on December 6, 1989 sent shock waves of horror in 
disbelief throughout the country. And while the deaths of these 
young women is commemorated on this day, December 6, it has 
also become an occasion to raise awareness of violence against 
women in our society. 
 
And as much there are those who don’t want to acknowledge 
this, violence continues to be a reality for far too many women 
and children in our province. And we know that education and 
prevention are the most effective ways of breaking the cycle of 
violence and there are community-based programs throughout 
the province that are working towards that goal. But as 
individuals we can also take steps to change attitudes and 
behaviours and I think this week recognizes that we all have a 
responsibility to take action to stop violence and abuse. 
 
And if I could say that our goal would be to create a society 
where nurturing takes precedence over conquering, where 
healing takes precedence over punishment, and where the 
energy spent on anger is redirected towards creativity in all of 
our work, we can teach our children both through our words 



December 6, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 11 

and actions and supervision of their play that violence is 
unacceptable and we can commit to non-violent problem 
solving and discipline. We can support those in our 
communities who are dealing with a violent relationship and 
ensure that we don’t blame the victim. 
 
Battered Women’s Awareness Week is a time to reflect and 
take action, and I thank all of those who are showing their 
personal commitment today through the wearing of the ribbons 
and the buttons. Today at the University of Regina, 14 young 
women in the university each took the voice of one of the 14 
women killed in Montreal, and it was a very powerful visual 
representation of the young and innocent women that were 
killed at that time. 
 
And now I will ask that the member from Kelvington-Wadena 
would make a statement. After that, that we would rise and join 
legislatures across the country organized by the federal minister 
responsible for the Status of Women, Hedy Fry, to observe a 
minute of silence and remember those who have lived with 
violence and consider what we can all do personally to end the 
violence against women. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today 
marks the final day of Battered Women’s Awareness Week. It 
is also the 10th anniversary of the terrible tragedy that took the 
lives of 14 young women in a Montreal university. 
 
I’d like to draw your attention to some numbers, Mr. Speaker. 
Across Canada, over 50 per cent of women have experienced at 
least one incidence of physical or sexual abuse since the age of 
16. One in four women is or has been abused by the man they 
live with. In Saskatchewan, over 4,000 women and children are 
admitted to safe houses every year. And more disturbingly, over 
2,000 are turned away. 
 
Mr. Speaker, domestic violence is a crime in every province in 
this country and it must be stopped. Victims of abuse need to 
know that they are not alone, that it is not their fault, and that 
there is help available. 
 
Saskatchewan has a network of transition and interval houses, 
safe homes, and shelters. But this is not enough, Mr. Speaker. 
There is so much more that needs to be done. More funding is 
needed to provide counselling, legal aid, food, clothing, and 
financial assistance. Our children need to learn that abuse they 
may see at home is wrong. Our education system must take a 
leading role in preventing further abuse. 
 
It is up to all of us, Mr. Speaker, to put an end to domestic 
violence. I encourage everyone here today to think about what 
they can do as a person to help victims of abuse everywhere, 
and I encourage everyone here today to work together to make 
this world a better place for everyone. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, ladies and 
gentlemen, would you please rise and join us in a moment of 
silence. Thank you. 
 
The Assembly observed a moment of silence. 
 
The Speaker: — Thank you. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Hours of Sitting 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, 
seconded by the member from Saskatoon Riversdale, the 
Premier, that by leave of the Assembly: 
 

That this Assembly, notwithstanding rule 3(1) of the Rules 
and Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan shall reconvene at 10 a.m. on Tuesday, 
December 7, with routine proceedings commencing at 1:30 
p.m.; and further the sitting day shall continue until the 
Assembly is adjourned. 
 

I so move. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I now move this House 
do adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — If I may, by leave of the Assembly, before 
putting the question on the adjournment motion I just have a 
couple of announcements to make. 
 
First of all, I would like to sincerely thank the First Regiment, 
Royal Canadian Horse Artillery, a Regular Force unit from 
Shilo, Manitoba for participating in the ceremony on the arrival 
of the Lieutenant Governor for the opening, as well as the 10 
Field Regiment, the Reserve unit from Regina and Yorkton for 
the 15 gun salute. I also extend our sincere thanks to Dr. Ed 
Lewis for playing the Vice-regal salute during today’s 
ceremonies. 
 
And I would also sincerely like to thank all our guests and 
members of the public who have joined us here this afternoon 
for the observations. 
 
Ladies and gentlemen, following the ceremonies here I would 
like to invite everyone to join their Honours, the Premier, the 
Leader of the Opposition, and members of the Legislative 
Assembly at the Speaker's tea which will take place 
immediately following the Chamber ceremony. The tea will be 
in two locations — room 218 in the west wing and room 255 in 
the east wing. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 2:44 p.m. 
 



  

 


