





























































Hansard: March 29, 1999


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 293 
 March 29, 1999 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I have a petition to present on behalf of the 
Saskatchewan disenfranchised widows group. The prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to have the Workers’ 
Compensation Board Act amended whereby benefits and 
pensions are reinstated to disenfranchised widows and 
whereby all revoked pensions are reimbursed to them 
retroactively with interest to April 17, 1985. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition come from the two 
cities of Melfort and Saskatoon. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present today on behalf of the disenfranchised 
widows of Saskatchewan. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to have the Workers’ 
Compensation Board Act amended whereby benefits and 
pensions are reinstated to disenfranchised widows and 
whereby all revoked pensions are reimbursed to them 
retroactively with interest to April 17, 1985. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from the Manor, Oxbow, 
Glen Ewen and Carievale areas of my constituency. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present to do with the farm crisis in Saskatchewan. 
The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
demand that the federal government work with 
Saskatchewan to put in place a farm aid package that 
provides real relief to those who need it and that the 
provincial government develop a long-term farm safety net 
program as it promised to do when it cancelled GRIP 
against the wishes of the farmers. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the petitioners are from the communities of 
Saltcoats and Whitewood. 
 
I so present. 
 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As well to present 
petitions, reading the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to have the Workers’ 
Compensation Board Act amended whereby benefits and 
pensions are reinstated to disenfranchised widows and 
whereby all revoked pensions are reimbursed to them 
retroactively with interest to April 17, 1985. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will every pray. 
 

And Mr. Speaker, the petition I’m presenting today is signed by 
individuals from the city of Saskatoon. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I rise on behalf of individuals 
concerned about the intrusion of Social Services into parental 
rights. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide a review process with respect to family 
intervention to ensure the rights of responsible families are 
not being violated. 
 

The signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are all from the 
community of Melfort. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too rise 
today to present petitions on behalf of the citizens of 
Saskatchewan and the farmers within our province concerned 
about the agriculture crisis that they’re facing. And the prayer 
reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
demand that the federal government work with 
Saskatchewan to put in place a farm aid package that 
provides real relief to those who need it and that the 
provincial government develop a long-term farm safety net 
program as it promised to do when it cancelled GRIP 
against the wishes of farmers. 
 

And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Cudworth, Humboldt, Carmel, Aberdeen, and Saskatoon, 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I bring a petition on 
behalf of people from the communities of Gull Lake, Maple 
Creek, Tompkins, and Swift Current. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call on federal and provincial 
governments to dedicate a significantly greater portion of 
fuel tax revenues toward road maintenance and 
construction so Saskatchewan residents may have a safe 



294 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 1999 

highway system that meets their needs. 
 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will every pray. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am happy to rise 
again today in the House to present a petition on behalf of the 
people of Saskatchewan. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call on federal and provincial 
governments to dedicate a significantly greater portion of 
fuel tax revenues toward road maintenance and 
construction so that Saskatchewan residents may have a 
safe highway system that meets their needs. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition has been signed by the good folks in a 
number of a communities including Lucky Lake, Dinsmore, 
Beechy, Rosetown, Macrorie, Outlook, Delisle, Birsay, and 
Demaine, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
petitions on behalf of citizens who are concerned about the state 
of our highways and the need to put more priorities towards 
maintaining and constructing them. 
 
The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call on federal and provincial 
governments to dedicate a significantly greater portion of 
fuel tax revenues toward road maintenance and 
construction so Saskatchewan residents may have a safe 
highway system that meets their needs. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Those who’ve signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
communities of Eston, Elrose, Coleville, Kerrobert, and 
Kindersley. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I join with my 
colleagues here today in bringing forward petitions in regards to 
the terrible state of our highways in Saskatchewan. The prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call on federal and provincial 
governments to dedicate a significantly greater portion of 
the fuel tax revenues toward road maintenance and 
construction so Saskatchewan residents may have a safe 
highway system that meets their needs. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed these petitions are 
from the Climax, Frontier, Orkney, Val Marie, Shaunavon areas 
of the province. 

I so present. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
most certainly pleased once again to rise on behalf of a lot of 
concerned people in the province. And I’ll read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide essential funding and ensure the delivery of 
scientifically proven, diagnostic assessment and 
programming for children with learning disabilities in 
order that they have access to an education that meets their 
needs and allows them to reach their full potential. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
All the people who have signed this petition today, Mr. 
Speaker, are from Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have here this 
morning from the administrator of the village of Lancer a 
petition, and I’ll read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately start work on the rebuilding of our secondary 
highway system to provide safe driving on what are 
becoming known as pothole roads, to enter into 
negotiations with SARM and SUMA for a long-term plan 
of rural road restoration reflecting the future needs, and to 
provide safety for all drivers as the new trucking 
regulations changes safety factors on these roads. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And these folks of course all come from the community of 
Lancer and there are a couple here from Abbey as well. And 
I’m happy to present it on their behalf today. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the petitions presented at the 
last sitting have been reviewed and found to be in order. 
Pursuant to rule 12(7) these petitions are hereby received. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
extreme pleasure today to introduce to you and through you 
to members of the Assembly, 27 grade 8 students seated in 
the west gallery. 
 
I was able to bump into them for a few moments after a meeting 
and before I went into my office, and shook a few hands there, 
Mr. Speaker. They are an interesting group who I’m told will be 
asked questions later. And I’m sure they’ll have a lot of 
questions to ask me when I meet with them. They’re 
accompanied today by their teacher, Mr. René Pelletier, and I’d 
ask members to join in giving them a warm welcome. 
 
They also have smiles and waved a bit at my seatmate, the 
member from Regina Qu’Appelle Valley, and I think that’s 
because a number of their lives were touched in their 



March 29, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 295 

kindergarten years by a wonderful teacher, Mr. Speaker. Please 
join with me in a warm welcome to the Pilot Butte students. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Murray: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and certainly with 
my seatmate, the member from Regina Wascana Plains, I 
extend a very warm welcome to the fine group of grade 8 
students sitting opposite. But also, Mr. Speaker, I have the great 
pleasure of introducing, sitting in the east gallery, a group of 33 
grade 9 to 12 students. These students come to us from 
Sherwood High, but that’s Sherwood in North Dakota — our 
good neighbours to the south. 
 
These students are members of the science club and I 
understand that they all have achieved very high grade 
averages. So we’re delighted that they’ve taken time from their 
busy schedule to join us here in the gallery, and I would ask all 
my colleagues to join in extending a warm welcome. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Humboldt Broncos Win Division Title 
 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Humboldt Broncos were the winners of the SJHL 
(Saskatchewan Junior Hockey League) north final this weekend 
defeating the Melfort Mustangs four to three. The Broncos 
completed a four-game sweep of the Mustangs in the best of 
seven Saskatchewan Junior Hockey League north division final. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, Melfort did finish 20 points ahead of 
Humboldt in the regular season, but the playoffs reflected a 
much different picture as the Broncos outplayed and outscored 
the rival Mustangs. The north division title is the first for 
Humboldt since 1991. The Broncos will play the winner of the 
south division final between Estevan and Notre Dame. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is evident that being underdogs doesn’t bother 
the Humboldt Broncos as long as they keep winning. So 
congratulations, Humboldt Broncos, and good luck in the next 
series. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Government Support for Agriculture and Food Industry 
 

Mr. Langford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The 1999-2000 
budget shows the government’s commitment to agriculture. To 
remain competitive in today’s market, we have increased 
agriculture and developments by $3.5 million, bringing the total 
investment to $17 million. 
 
Programs including the quality assurance program, the field 
worker program, rangeland service in east central region, the 
short-term hog loan program, the prairie diagnostic service, and 
the green certificate program will received additional funding. 
There will be a lower crop insurance premium for 1999 and 
agriculture and food grants for 10 major organizations. 
 

By supporting agriculture and the food industry, we believe the 
result will be economic growth and development which will 
benefit everyone. 
 
Congratulations to the Finance minister for recognizing the 
importance of agriculture and rural Saskatchewan in this 
budget. Thank you. 
 

Raising Money for Hurricane Mitch Survivors 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it is an obvious fact that the 
lessons we learn early stay with us the longest — the 
multiplication tables, the major rivers of Europe, the date of the 
Magna Carta. We learned them in grade school, and they stick 
with us. 
 
We learn other things in school as well, not just facts. I want to 
congratulate a group of kids who attend Lakeview School in my 
constituency who are learning that the world extends far beyond 
their neighbourhood. They are learning that they are indeed 
blessed to live in Canada, and most importantly, that we who 
live here have a duty to help those who are not so lucky. 
 
They are putting this knowledge into action, that they will not 
forget as they mature. The students of grade 5 and 6 at 
Lakeview are raising money for the survivors of Hurricane 
Mitch in Central America. So far they have raised over $1,100 
which they will donate to Save the Children Canada, which will 
distribute the money where it is needed. The children raised the 
money under the direction of Marguerite Denis, the teacher who 
has organized the student drive for 12 years. 
 
The students have also learned about Canadian efforts to raise 
the quality of life for children around the world. These 
Lakeview children hope that the money that they have raised 
will contribute to their ultimate goal and ours as well, which is 
the ultimate eradication of child poverty throughout the world. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Health Care in Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is my 
honour and privilege to rise today on behalf of my constituents 
from the town of Kerrobert. Last week my colleague from 
Cannington and I attended a health care meeting in Kerrobert. 
There were over 70 people in attendance at the meeting, Mr. 
Speaker, and I feel . . . We have the names of each and every 
one of them, Mr. Speaker, and I’ll be happy to present that if 
need be. 
 
I feel it is my duty as elected Member of the Legislative 
Assembly to inform the government on how out of touch they 
are with the people of rural Saskatchewan. The people at the 
meeting were outraged at the calamity the NDP (New 
Democratic Party) have created in health care. 
 
I am here to let the members opposite know that every single 
person I spoke to at the meeting that night is concerned about 
what the government has done to the state of health care in this 
province. They are overwhelmed by the fact that their hospital 



296 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 1999 

may be shut down rather than listening to the NDP’s failed 
rhetoric. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have heard over the past few months the 
Minister of Health claim that there are no signs of two-tiered 
health care in Saskatchewan. Well, Madam Minister, if you 
look a little closer you would find out that the town of 
Kerrobert runs their own clinic completely funded by the people 
of Kerrobert, Plenty, and the surrounding municipalities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I sincerely hope that the government starts 
listening to the people of rural Saskatchewan and come clean 
with their plans for the future of rural hospitals. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Swift Current Children’s Choir 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Usually I get up and 
talk about all the good economy activity that is occurring in 
Swift Current. But today I want to bring to your attention the 
efforts of a group of highly talented, an in-tune, group of 
children in Swift Current who are trying to get out of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
These kids, the Swift Current Children’s Choir, conducted by 
Marcia McClean and accompanied by Kathryn Scott, are raising 
money to finance a trip to Ottawa to participate in the Unisong 
Festival, a five-day cultural event in our nation’s capital. This 
group was chosen to represent our province at this event. 
 
They have held several events in town to promote their tour. 
Most recently a banquet and silent auction on March 20, which 
I attended and had a great time. 
 
This is a new group in Swift Current, just in their second year, 
but they are enthusiastic, determined, and they know how to 
carry a tune and sing in harmony — something some of the 
people in the Assembly might think about learning. 
 
I wish them well in their fundraising and in their participation 
once they arrive in Ottawa. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Maintenance of Highways 
 

Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, I can honestly say I don’t like 
Mondays, not because I don’t enjoy my job and it’s not because 
there’s anything I like better than joining this House in serious 
deliberation of the people’s priorities. No, the reason I don’t 
like Mondays is because it means getting in my vehicle and 
driving to Regina. I, like so many other residents of 
Saskatchewan, must get in my vehicle and hope against hope 
that I’ll make it to work without being swallowed alive by 
another road pothole. 
 
One of my constituents summed it up nicely in a piece of 
philosophical prose, Mr. Speaker. And I quote: 
 

Now the Minister of Highways assures us there’s nothing 

so dear 
As good highways, I hear; 
But the fear came upon me as my car bottomed out 
That spending $120 million less than inflation was nothing 

to tout. 
 
So I thought, are the NDP in cahoots with front-end shops 

perhaps? 
No, there must be another answer, I thought long and hard; 
And as a plane flew overhead, the answer came: 
Of course! the NDP don’t drive. 
 
Now those potholes, Mr. Premier, are something to see 
And I’ve reason to believe they’re multiplying, indeed; 
Yes, Mr. Premier, year after year there seem to be more 

holes to dodge 
By we Romanow roadies. 
 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Wanuskewin Dance Troupe Invited to Italy 
 
Mr. Whitmore: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Since July of 
1997 the Wanuskewin Dance Troupe has provided 
championship dancers and music for both First Nations and 
non-First Nations audiences alike. I am pleased to say the 
troupe displays a high calibre of Saskatchewan talent. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this exceptional troupe has been invited to 
perform in northern and central Italy. They arrived in Rome on 
March 25th and received national television coverage. They 
have since gone on a six-day tour which includes Pavia, 
Bergamo, Rome, and Milan. 
 
I would like to congratulate the Wanuskewin Dance Troupe for 
revitalizing and honouring First Nations culture here and 
abroad, and I wish them every success on their Italian tour. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Southey Marlins Win Provincial A Finals 
 
Mr. Flavel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, talking 
about bragging rights, let me start. In Last 
Mountain-Touchwood we have so many great hockey teams 
that we end up playing each other in the provincial finals. 
That’s right, the Strasbourg Maroons under the direction of 
coach Garth Frizzell and the Southey Marlins with Warren Fry 
coaching played against each other in the finals in of the 
provincial senior A championship. The Southey Marlins beat 
the Strasbourg Maroons in a tight, well-played series to 
determine the provincial A championship. 
 
The final game was played last Saturday night before a full and 
loud house in Southey. And the hometown edge obviously 
helped out as Southey won the game 6 to 3. I want to 
congratulate the Marlins and their coach Warren Fry for 
bringing the title to Southey, and I also congratulate the players 
from Strasbourg and coach Garth Frizzell for a splendid effort. 
 
The lesson to learn from this, Mr. Speaker, is that it takes a 
team from Last Mountain-Touchwood to beat a team from Last 
Mountain-Touchwood, a claim no other member in this 



March 29, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 297 

Assembly can make. Thank you. 
 

New Doctor in Melville 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Leader of the Third Party has been busy telling anyone who’d 
listen about what is wrong with this province. He’s been so 
busy, Mr. Speaker, that he’s forgotten his manners and missed a 
chance to welcome a very valuable new member to the city of 
Melville in his constituency. Let me help him out. 
 
Dr. Abdalla Kenshil has recently arrived in Melville to begin 
his job as chief surgeon at St. Peter’s Hospital. Dr. Kenshil 
comes to us from Blackpool in England, where he had been 
practising and doing research. He studied medicine in his native 
Tripoli, in England and Montreal. 
 
His specialty, Mr. Speaker, is gastroenterology, and he will be 
performing general surgery for the North Valley Health District, 
as well as sharing his specialized medicine with his colleagues. 
As St. Peter’s manager Terri Hodges says and I quote, his 
arrival will “enhance all health services and make it easier for 
patients and doctors alike.” 
 
Dr. Kenshil is married with five children who will be joining 
him at the end of this school year, and this is a added bonus to 
this city and this school district. 
 
I am pleased with the arrival of this new health professional and 
I welcome him and his family to Canada and to Saskatchewan. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Advertising of Budget Details 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Finance. Mr. Minister, it must 
have been a tough weekend. It must have been tough to find a 
single person in Saskatchewan, outside of your office staff, who 
really approves of your budget. But try as we might, we 
couldn’t find anyone to give your budget a passing grade — 
that is with the notable exception of your newest member of the 
NDP fan club, Liberal leader Jim Melenchuk. 
 
Mr. Minister, in a desperate attempt to win support of the 
budget for your high tax policy that’s continuing to chase 
people out of the province, you’ve launched a massive 
propaganda campaign with full page ads like this in 
newspapers, television, radio, and an endless supply of 
propaganda. 
 
Mr. Minister, how much money are you spending on this 
propaganda? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, in answer to the first part of 
the member’s question, I want to tell the member that I was all 
over the province this weekend — in my own riding in 
Saskatoon, in Moose Jaw, and this morning in Regina and Swift 
Current — and I found support for the budget all over the 
province, Mr. Speaker. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And the member may not think that we 
should tell the people of the province what is in their budget — 
and it’s their budget, Mr. Speaker — but I think we should be 
telling them. And when the member says we’re not telling 
them, I want to know what part of this advertising the member 
does not agree with. 
 
Is it the part that says better health care? Is it the part that says 
lower taxes? Or is it the part that says less debt? Because the 
message of this budget, Mr. Speaker, is better health care, lower 
taxes, less debt. That’s the direction we’re going in; that’s the 
direction we’re going to keep going in, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
NDP are spending hundreds of thousands of taxpayers’ dollars 
on a propaganda campaign to sell a disastrous budget. How 
many MRIs (magnetic resonance imaging) would that money 
buy? How many CAT (computerized axial tomography) scans? 
How many X-rays, or ambulance trips? How many new nursing 
positions? 
 
Mr. Minister, SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities) president Sinc Harrison called the budget a 
black day for Saskatchewan. University of Saskatchewan 
president Peter McKinnon, the NDP Economic Development 
minister’s husband says, the budget is disastrous for the 
University of Saskatchewan. 
 
University Students’ Union president Sean Junor, the NDP 
Associate Health minister’s own son, says the budget turns its 
back on students. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s too bad the NDP has to spend hundreds of 
thousands of dollars on a propaganda campaign when they can’t 
even convince members of their own family of the wisdom of 
the budget. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you stop this blatant waste of taxpayers’ 
money and stop these ads? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, what these ads do is inform 
the people of the province about the budget, and the message in 
these ads is the message of the budget: better health care, lower 
taxes, less debt. That’s what we need, Mr. Speaker, which is a 
far cry from what is offered by the opposition. 
 
But I want to say to the member opposite who’s saying that 
we’re spending hundreds of thousands of dollars on advertising, 
Mr. Speaker, that I don’t have the bills and invoices yet, I 
believe the budget for post-budget communications including 
publications and advertising will be in the range, Mr. Speaker, 
of about $120,000. 
 
And I want to make this point, Mr. Speaker, that when the 
leader of the Tory party Elwin Hermanson gets up and says that 
a $100 million tax cut is pathetic, when he says the $100 
million tax cut that’s contained in this budget for PST 
(provincial sales tax) and 30 million on income tax is too small, 
how come they’re worried about 120,000, Mr. Speaker. 



298 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 1999 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I guess we, unlike 
the NDP, do worry about $120,000 because for ordinary 
Saskatchewan families that’s a lot of money, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Friday’s budget really didn’t learn a thing 
about this province having the second highest taxes in the 
whole of the country. Young people will continue to leave the 
province; our retirees will continue to leave the province; our 
corporations and business people will leave the province, thanks 
to the NDP. 
 
Mr. Minister, in today’s Globe and Mail there’s an article that 
talks and looks at the momentum of the economies in the 
province, and guess where we finish — dead last. Mr. Minister, 
when are you going to understand that you have to put some 
money in the people’s pockets and not in your own if this 
economy is going to get going. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to answer the 
member’s question. The member seems concerned about taxes. 
And I would say to the people of the province, never listen to 
what the Tories say. Just look at what they do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have cut the PST by three points in two years, from 9 per 
cent to 6 per cent. And they say it’s not enough. But you know 
what they did when they were in office, Mr. Speaker? They 
didn’t cut the PST. They expanded the PST. And they put the 
PST on restaurant meals; then they put it on children’s clothing; 
then they put it on used cars; then they put it on reading 
materials. And then they harmonized it with the GST (goods 
and services tax). 
 
And they come in this Legislative Assembly and talk about 
what they would do in the area of taxation, Mr. Speaker? I don’t 
think so. I think people remember the 1980s and people 
remember what was happening when they were in power. And 
they remember the debt, the $15 billion debt left behind by the 
Tories, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ve been there, we’ve done that, we’ve had enough of them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Charity Foundations 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Premier. 
 
Mr. Premier, the Saskatchewan Party has uncovered another 
one of these NDP charity foundations. This one involves former 
NDP MLA (member of the Legislative Assembly) Bob Lyons. 
That’s the same Bob Lyons who went to court in January to try 
to keep his expense records covered up. From 1987 to 1991, the 
West Side Community Education Foundation took in over 
$121,000 from Bob Lyons’ MLA expense allowances. 
 
This is another NDP-run charity foundation. In fact a number of 
the directors were also directors of the Regina Community 
Development Foundation, and the member for Regina 
Northeast was acting as the solicitor for this foundation while 
he was an MLA. 

Mr. Premier, where did all the money go that flowed through 
this NDP charity foundation? Did any of it go to the NDP? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s my pleasure to answer the questions on behalf of 
the government in my capacity as the Deputy House Leader. 
 
I was interested to hear the member talk about cover-ups. I 
think the biggest cover-up that we’ve seen in Saskatchewan 
history, Mr. Speaker, is the cover-up that occurred in the 1980s 
in Saskatchewan when that member and his party — the 
Saskatchewan Tory Party — Mr. Speaker, perpetrated a 
cover-up the likes of which we’ve never seen and as a result of 
which we have a number of . . . we have a number of former 
members of this House, a number of former members of that 
party, spending time behind cover in bars or behind bars, Mr. 
Speaker, such as Lorne McLaren, who was sentenced to three 
and a half years in prison; such as Michael Hopfner, who was 
sentenced to 18 months in prison, such as John Gerich who was 
sentenced to two years in prison, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So when the member mentions cover-up, Mr. Speaker, it’s very 
strange that this is coming from the Saskatchewan Tory Party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. You 
know, Mr. Speaker, last week one of the answers to the 
question suggested that there wasn’t a shred of evidence. I’m 
wondering whether or not evidence has already been shredded 
because there doesn’t seem to be any answers from the 
ministers opposite. 
 
This NDP charity foundation took in huge sums of taxpayers’ 
money — over $121,000. But they didn’t see fit to keep proper 
financial records. They didn’t file their first financial return 
until June 1992. And that return included only unaudited 
statements for the years 1989 and 1990. Total revenue on those 
statements was about $76,000. That leaves $45,000 
unaccounted for. 
 
Mr. Premier, where did the money go? Where is the missing 
$45,000? Did any of this money go to the NDP? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting that 
this member opposite, a member of the Sask-a-Tory party 
which has its genesis in the Conservative Tory Party of the 
1980s, talks about taxpayers’ money. One of the real questions 
that people in Saskatchewan have is where is the taxpayers’ 
money? Why did you run up a debt of $15 billion? How is it 
that you can expect the Government of Saskatchewan to fund 
properly services and programs, given such a massive debt 
which we’re paying off at the rate of $2 million a year? How is 
that possible, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, when the Sask-a-Tories, when the 
Sask-a-Tories figure, the people of Saskatchewan shudder. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



March 29, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 299 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, it’s 
not just $45,000 that’s missing. There’s a whole house missing. 
 
In 1988 Bob Lyons bought a house and started running his 
constituency office out of that house. And by the looks of it, he 
was using his MLA expense accounts to pay the mortgage. In 
1989 he decided that wasn’t such a good idea. He sold the 
house to this NDP charity foundation and the NDP charity 
foundation made the mortgage payments using Bob Lyons’ 
expense allowances. This house was eventually sold to another 
couple in 1992 and the assets were supposed to go back to the 
Crown. Where did the proceeds from this sale go, Mr. Premier? 
Where did the money go? Did it go back to the Crown like it 
was suppose to, or did any of it go to the NDP? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, if there’s a house 
missing somewhere then I would hope that the member would 
file a missing house report with the RCMP (Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police). And be sure to give them a description of the 
house, the colour, and the make, and what have you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this member, this member, this member indicated 
a few days ago in a statement to the press that we want the 
RCMP to delve into all of those documents to check into 
whether or not those actions are appropriate. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
he has the opportunity to present those documents to the RCMP 
so that they can review those documents, Mr. Speaker. I would 
assume, I would assume, Mr. Speaker, that given the 
Saskatchewan Tory experience in matters of criminality he 
knows how the process works. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Negotiations with Health Care Workers 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
for the Minister of Health. Madam Minister, amidst all the NDP 
backslapping about the budget that keeps taxes high and 
continues to force people and businesses out of this province, 
the Department of Finance official actually provided some 
candid information. They indicated the Health budget contains 
$63 million to settle the NDP’s contract dispute with 
Saskatchewan nurses. 
 
But, Madam Minister, nurses’ union president, Rosalee 
Longmoore says $63 million isn’t enough. In fact, Longmoore 
told CBC Radio (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) that it 
will take a lot more than $63 million to keep health providers 
working in this system. Madam Minister, Saskatchewan is one 
week away from the nurses’ strike and the NDP government 
appears to be out of answers. 
 
Madam Minister, what are you doing to avoid a province-wide 
nurses’ strike that would cripple the entire health care system? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Well if we left it up to the Tory Party, the Saskatchewan Party, I 
think we would have seen a budget in health care that mimicked 
inflation of some 1 per cent or about $18 million. So if $63 
million isn’t enough to settle contracts, then I could assure you 

that $18 million would have been far away from settling those 
collective agreements. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have, if I understand it from the employer, the 
Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations and CUPE 
(Canadian Union of Public Employees) they’ve reached a 
tentative agreement. SAHO (Saskatchewan Association of 
Health Organizations) is still negotiating with the Health 
Sciences Association, SEIU (Service Employees’ International 
Union), the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, along with SGEU 
(Saskatchewan Government Employees’ Union). 
 
I’m optimistic that the employer, SAHO, and the various unions 
will be able to arrive at a mutually agreed to collective 
agreement that’s fair to the people who provide services in our 
health system, fair to the people who are served by our health 
system, and fair to the taxpayers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Highway Maintenance 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
NDP government has neglected the roads of this province for 
far too long. While the Premier and cabinet ministers jet around 
this province, taxpayers are forced to drive on Canada’s worst 
highways. 
 
In a 22-mile stretch of highway from Orkney to Climax, a local 
resident counted the potholes on the road. He counted 238 
potholes in 22 miles — that’s not including the small ones. 
That’s almost 10 potholes per mile, Mr. Speaker. West of 
Climax, someone counted 110 potholes in an 8-mile stretch. 
That’s outrageous; it’s a shame, Mr. Speaker. 
 
With this many unmarked potholes, isn’t the minister worried 
about the safety of our motorists? My question to the Minister 
of Highways: Madam Minister, aren’t you concerned that 
someone travelling at night is going to land in one of these huge 
craters, wreck their vehicle, or worse, are they putting their 
families’ lives at risk? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m very glad to 
have the opportunity to answer the questions raised by the 
member opposite. I’m just wondering what kind of discussions 
go on in the Liberal caucus when his leader, Jim Melenchuk, 
says it’s not a bad budget. 
 
I think that we made a 10-year commitment of $2.5 billion over 
10 years. We’re approximately a third of the way through that 
10-year period. We’ve increased the budget to approximately a 
third of that total amount and we will fulfil that commitment. 
 
I would be more concerned, Mr. Speaker, when their Liberal 
cousins in Ottawa contribute nothing, nada, to our roads. I’d be 
more concerned about highway robbery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
reality is when you’re flying an executive jet, you seldom hit a 
pothole at 10,000 feet. So it’s no wonder highways are not a 
priority with that NDP government. 



300 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 1999 

And unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, Chris Gryde of Climax knows 
first-hand of the NDP’s inability to make highways a priority. 
While driving along Highway 37 to visit his mother in 
Shaunavon, he hit a pothole in the middle of the road and did 
serious damage to his vehicle — luckily for him, it was only the 
vehicle and not the children riding with him. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the hole was so big and deep that the impact broke 
Mr. Gryde’s wheel in half. And it sheared it in half, Mr. 
Speaker. Can you imagine this, seeing . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. The hon. member will be aware 
that he’s not permitted to use exhibits in . . . Order, order. 
Order. I’ll ask that one of the pages will remove the exhibit 
from the Chambers to the Clerk’s office. 
 
Order. Order. I’ll ask for the co-operation of the House on both 
sides, from all hon. members. And I’ll ask the hon. member to 
go now directly to his question, or I’ll recognize another 
member. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 
minister. Will you stand here today and apologize to Mr. Gryde, 
his brother, two daughters for putting their life in danger? And 
will you pay the 280 bucks that he had to pay to get that wheel 
replaced? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Speaker, bearing in mind the 
comments of the Liberal leader, I’m wondering if the exhibit in 
the House today is evidence that the wheels are falling off the 
Liberal machine. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Speaker, we have a ten-year 
commitment to the highways in this province. Despite — 
despite — a record forest fire season, despite putting in money 
for the farm aid program, despite low commodity prices, we 
have still increased our spending on highways, and we will 
continue to do that in a sustainable and responsible way, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Speaker, the Grydes write to us in the 
letter about the NDP’s fuel tax. I’m going to quote from it: 
 

The current government solution seems to be to take the 
revenue from fuel taxes in our area, and instead of putting 
it back into the highways, where it’s initially supposed to 
go, it has been directed to other areas. This process would 
have been fine to me if the highway system was up to snuff 
and excess dollars remain. But this is not the case. They 
prefer to populate our highways with red warning flags or, 
as one local referred to them, NDP election signs. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP spends only $235 million on our roads 
while they collect $370 million in fuel taxes. Now you can call 
that highway robbery. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister admit that her government is 
bilking motorists every time they visit the pump and yet still 
putting their lives in danger? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 
should know better than to talk about dedicated taxes. He’s says 
there’s a shortfall to the road budget compared to the fuel tax. 
All right, we only take in $700 million in E&H (education and 
health) tax but we spend two . . . we spend almost 3 billion on 
education and health. Now where do you think that comes 
from? Mr. Speaker, I’d like to know. 
 
The biggest pothole in this province is the $12 billion debt that 
remains from taking off the fuel tax, from selling off the road 
machinery; and I want to see from the Liberal Party a copy of 
the letter that they’ve written to their federal cousins asking for 
a national highways program. We’re the only industrial country 
in the world that doesn’t have a national program, Mr. Speaker. 
It’s a disgrace. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Maybe it’s about 
time you start talking about what you’re doing, what your 
government is doing. Mr. Speaker, this government is so far 
behind in road repair that they’re foot-dragging is going to cost 
taxpayers millions more down the road. 
 
A couple of years ago the NDP promised to spend two and a 
half billion dollars over ten years, as she mentioned, but like the 
rest of their promises they broke that one as well. In the first 
year, their commitment to highways fell short 38 million; in the 
second year, it was short 21 million; and in the third year it fell 
down by 16 million. So for three years they fell short by 75 
million. 
 
Can the minister tell us how far 75 million would have gone to 
improving highway safety for families, for ambulances, for 
school buses in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Speaker, we will continue to 
increase spending on highways as we can afford it in a 
sustainable manner. 
 
We will continue to ask the federal government for assistance in 
that. They have deregulated the rail systems, made changes in 
the grain transportation system that has caused increasing 
pressure on our roads. We have more roads per capita and more 
roads than all the rest of the country put together, and not one 
cent of help from the federal government — your cousins in 
Ottawa — Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Compliance with The Non-Profit Corporations Act 
 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Justice. 
 
Mr. Minister, your department is in charge of The Non-Profit 
Corporations Act. It is now very clear that a number of 
non-profit corporations set up with NDP MLAs were not 
complying with that Act. Everyone of the corporations referred 



March 29, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 301 

to in the last few days was struck from the corporate registry for 
failing to file financial statements. These are non-profit 
corporations set up by NDP MLAs receiving taxpayers’ money 
from NDP MLAs. Don’t you think they should comply with the 
law? 
 
Mr. Minister, I ask you, what actions have you initiated against 
these foundations for failing to company with The Non-Profit 
Corporations Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I appreciate the member’s question. Mr. Speaker, all I 
can say is that if the member has concerns she should take them 
to the appropriate place. If the member herself is unaware of the 
process that’s involved, then please consult with any of your 
other members in the Saskatchewan Tory party. Perhaps the 
member in front of you who is well-know . . . or versed in these 
things, given his association with the former Tories in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The member also talks about compliance with the law, Mr. 
Speaker. We hope that when the time comes that she will also 
give approval to a law that we’re looking to put into place, Mr. 
Speaker, which is called respect for constituents. 
 
And we would hope that in the future that she would comply 
with a law such as that, that is opposed to in the middle of the 
night — in the middle of the night, Mr. Speaker — turning her 
back on the people that helped elect her, turning around and 
joining some other group, Mr. Speaker, solely because it meets 
your own particular purposes as opposed to living up . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order! Order, order. Next question. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, every 
person in Saskatchewan will know that the appropriate person 
to answer this question and be accountable for it is the Minister 
of Justice. 
 
And so I once again ask the Minister of Justice to stand and 
answer the following question. It seems as though the Minister 
of Social Services doesn’t understand your own Act, Mr. 
Minister. So let me read it to you. Section 147 says a 
corporation that fails to file its annual returns is guilty of an 
offence and liable on summary conviction for a fine of up to 
$5,000. 
 
Mr. Minister, every one of these NDP charity foundations was 
struck from the registry for failing to file financial returns. And 
we know they continue to operate after they stopped. 
 
The Regina Community Development Foundation was busy 
giving its money to an NDP scholarship. Bob Lyons’ 
foundation took in over $45,000 that’s unaccounted for. 
 
Mr. Minister, what actions have you taken against these NDP 
foundations? Or are you looking the other way because they 
involve NDP MLAs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I sure hope that the 
member will take her last comment and make that outside the 
House, Mr. Speaker. Let me just say that in my experience that 
if companies are no longer filing financial reports, it may be 

because those companies are no longer in operation. 
 
Whatever the case, Mr. Speaker, I note that your leader in the 
Sask-a-Tory party has said that he’s taken all of this 
information, provided all of this information to the RCMP so 
that they can review it. And I hope that you do the same. 
 
And again, if you’re not clear on the process, any of the former 
Tories would be able to fill you in as to how the criminal 
process works, Mr. Member. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 236 — The Highway Traffic 
Amendment Act, 1999 

 
Mr. Goohsen: — I give notice of first reading of Bill No. 236, 
1999, An Act to amend The Highway Traffic Act, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to supply an 
accurate answer in a timely fashion to this question no. 20. 
 
The Speaker: — The answer for item no. 1 is provided. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that the Assembly resolve itself 
into the Committee of Finance. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
pleasure to continue on from the brief comments that I was able 
to give on Friday, after the presentation of the budget. And 
actually, initially I was concerned about the fact that the budget 
was being delivered on a Friday, but I found it most useful to be 
able to take that time to go back to my constituency and find out 
what the people in the area were thinking of the budget. And it 
was indeed a very interesting number of conversations that I 
was able to have. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was surprising to me that one of the greatest 
issues that was raised over the weekend with people that I 
visited with was not an issue that really came out of this budget 
at all — other than its lack of being addressed — but really 
wondering what is going to happen if our competitive 
advantage continues to erode. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people in my constituency are very aware of 
what’s happening in the rest of the world, and in particular, 



302 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 1999 

they’re worried about what is happening under the so-called 
general topic of the brain drain. Mr. Speaker, on the weekend 
people were talking a great deal about their concern about what 
was going to happen if our position competitively was going to 
keep falling behind. 
 
I noticed over the weekend Diane Francis had a column that 
spoke of the issue from a national perspective and not from a 
provincial one. And she talked about how much of an effect the 
American economy is having on attracting some of our young 
people, some of our entrepreneurs to that economy. It seems 
that in the United States right now, over 800,000 people that 
were born in Canada are living in the United States — 800,000. 
I was quite surprised, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It was also indicated that the amount of Canadian students 
taking university classes in the United States is gone up about 
fourfold over the last few short years. And from a national 
perspective, that’s very concerning because those people are 
coming from our country and they’re going and making their 
economic futures in the United States to the south of us. And 
when that happens, we lose a great deal of human potential 
from our economy. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, on the weekend, that same concern was 
being expressed in Melfort and Tisdale about what’s happening 
compared to our neighbouring province to the west. You know, 
Mr. Speaker, we’re . . . my constituency is more on the easterly 
side of the province, and so sometimes you begin to think that 
maybe you’re a little bit isolated from the draw from Calgary 
and Alberta. And I have, for some time, personally felt the pain 
of having family members that found it more attractive 
economically to take up their residency in our neighbour to the 
west. And good for them. But increasingly, I’m concerned 
about the fact that the tables are tilting even further in terms of 
what I would call the Alberta advantage. 
 
Now there are many people that still live here, a million people, 
many of whom choose to live in Saskatchewan, and I think that 
that’s an important thing to take note of. Certainly there are 
advantages for living in Saskatchewan: it’s the friendliness of 
the people; it’s the determination to eke out a living. For many 
of our people, they have to be involved where their business or 
their farm or their corporation is and that’s in Saskatchewan. 
 
Every day I’m amazed when I hear stories of generosity and 
selflessness, of compassion and caring that people in 
Saskatchewan have exhibited more often than not in every 
constituency of this province from one end to the other. And 
certainly those type of psychological and human qualities that 
this province has is indeed a great advantage and it’s why most 
of us continue to want to make this province our home. 
 
But increasingly that sense of home . . . home-based 
Saskatchewan feelings are being eroded by the realities of a 
competitive world. Mr. Speaker, it used to be that when you 
graduated from high school, perhaps went to university, more 
often than not you returned to your home community, perhaps 
to the farm, to a business related to your community; that a high 
percentage of our graduating people would return to their local 
communities. Over the years that has eroded and many rural . . . 
in rural Saskatchewan have found it more attractive to build 
their futures in the major cities. 

But now increasingly, Mr. Speaker, our young people are 
graduating from our universities and they are faced with the fact 
that their assets that they’ve acquired through 14, 16 years of 
hard work, their degree and the knowledge that they have from 
that is the asset that they have. And increasingly, they’re 
making decisions about where they’re going to employ that 
asset. 
 
Unfortunately, many of these young people are coming out of 
university with student loans and financial responsibilities and 
they are forced to go to places where the economy is growing, 
where the net return on their investment is going to be 
maximized and, too often than not, they’re going to our 
neighbour to the west. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it always surprises me when I and my wife 
go to visit our children in Calgary that we run into more people, 
more young people, in Calgary that are from Melfort that we 
seem to be running into in Melfort itself. More of my children 
or children’s classmates I think — I’m sure — are working in 
Calgary than are working anywhere around our neighbourhood. 
 
And so this trend is very disturbing. And, I think, as a province 
it is academic if we choose not to ignore it; we must deal with 
it. We simply cannot ignore it any longer. And one of the 
concerns that I’ve had out of this budget is the fact that again 
we haven’t addressed this issue seriously. 
 
Mr. Day, the Alberta Finance minister, announced in his budget 
this spring that in the year 2002 he’s going to make a major 
shift away from a linked tax system — linked to the federal 
income tax system — to one that’s uncoupled and is at a flat tax 
rate of 11 per cent, and at the same time doubling the basic 
person exemption so that people that are less fortunate than 
others will not pay any tax at all. And I understand that that will 
remove over 70,000 people from paying any tax whatsoever in 
the province to the west. 
 
So they’re dealing with the issue of people that are less 
fortunate, and they’re also making their tax regime very 
attractive to the professionals and the people — the business 
leaders — that are creating the wealth in this country. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, while the Finance minister promised us 
some vague study over the next year, nothing was done to 
signal the direction of this government in terms of the issue 
facing us from the competitiveness in the neighbouring 
province. This morning on the radio I heard the Finance 
minister say that while he’s considering uncoupling the 
provincial tax from the federal tax, he pretty much dismissed 
out of hand the idea of a flat tax and that system. 
 
So we’re still going to end up with a pretty onerous system, 
albeit that it might be unlinked from the federal. So, Mr. 
Speaker, I think that that is certainly an area that has to be 
addressed. 
 
The other area that is of concern is I’m hearing increasingly that 
it’s not just our young people that are leaving but people that 
are coming to the end of their careers, either in a professional 
career or a business career. When they liquidate their assets or 
retire from the firm or the business and profession that they’ve 
been employed with, they too are considering leaving this 



March 29, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 303 

province and taking up residency in the province to the west. So 
while it’s a tragedy to be losing our young people, it’s also 
serious when we start losing those seniors who can see that their 
net personal welfare is going to be better off, when all things 
are taken into account, by retiring in the province to the west. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, you don’t have to be really swift financially 
to figure out that if we’re going to lose our taxpayers, how in 
the world are we going to possibly keep up with the increased 
demands for expenditures. 
 
And while this government reacted very quickly to increase 
expenditures a great deal — I believe over 21 departments 
received increased budgets this year — there is no sustainable 
plan that I can see from this government that addresses the issue 
of how we retain taxpayers to stay in Saskatchewan and how 
we’re going to broaden the tax base by encouraging business to 
expand their operations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what has happened over the last number of years 
has been a very simple process. What has happened is this 
government has reached deep into taxpayers’ pockets in this 
province and it extracted a heavy price. In the fiscal year 
’91-92, the tax revenue to the government was 2.1 billion, Mr. 
Speaker. In this fiscal year, ’99-2000, the tax revenue is going 
to be $3 billion. 
 
Now that’s irrespective of the minister saying we’ve reduced 
taxes, we’ve decreased the percentages somewhat. The actual 
numbers say there’s $900 million more coming out of 
Saskatchewan taxpayers’ pockets in this fiscal year than what 
was coming out in ’91-92. That’s just straight out of the 
Estimates, Mr. Speaker, and that is a problem for us. 
 
You know what we’ve ended up doing is changing our 
priorities from building an economy to one where we end up 
having the economy gradually erode on us, so that what’s 
happening is a further interesting fact, Mr. Speaker. In the fiscal 
year 1997-98, the equalization transfer from Ottawa — which is 
separate and distinct from the health transfers — was $8.2 
million, that’s all; $8 million is all that we were entitled to in 
that fiscal year by way of the equalization formula. 
 
(1430) 
 
In this fiscal year, ’99-2000, where the budget is under 
consideration, it’s shot up to $479 million, Mr. Speaker. That 
$470 million more than it was just two short years ago. And the 
reason for that welfare transfer, if you like, is because this 
government has let our economy stagnate. And what we’re 
having then is a whole increase of our dependency on the 
largess of our neighbouring province. And I think that that is 
the concern that we have to have and we have to deal with those 
issues in a fundamental way. 
 
The other area that has to be of concern for the government is 
the absolute dollar values of corporate income tax coming in. 
Now has the rate gone down? No, but the amount collected has 
gone from 188 million last year to . . . I’m sorry, has gone down 
from 231 million in ’96-97 down to 188 million last year. Now 
if the rate hasn’t changed, it means that corporations aren’t 
doing as well. And when they’re not doing as well, they’re not 
creating the jobs, the opportunities for our young people to stay 

here. And so we end up with a situation that our job statistics 
are eroding and we are losing jobs — almost 5,000 of them last 
year — where even Newfoundland created over 6,000 jobs last 
year. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, we always hear the government say 
well things are worse in Saskatchewan. Well they are, perhaps, 
because we’ve mismanaged the economy. But you know, 
agricultural prices and commodity prices were the same prices 
in Alberta as they were in Saskatchewan last year. We talk 
about a terrible slump in oil prices, while the Alberta economy 
is a lot more dependent on oil prices than Saskatchewan’s is and 
many of those same comparisons occur, that are happening in 
our province. 
 
And you know what? While we lost almost 5,000 jobs last year, 
Alberta — in the midst of the same low oil prices and 
agricultural commodity prices that Saskatchewan has 
experienced — in Alberta last year there were 38,600 jobs 
created, 38,600 in one year. That’s more than the NDP’s target 
for this whole decade — in one year. 
 
Next year, the Alberta budget is projecting 30,000 further jobs 
in that economy in one year; and we’re hoping against hope that 
we will make the 30,000 commitment that the government laid 
out in 1991. Mr. Speaker, where the jobs are is where the 
people are going to go to fill those jobs and increasingly they’re 
Saskatchewan kids. And Mr. Speaker, we’ve simply got to see 
an end to that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s not an easy, it’s not an easy thing to do and 
it’s not going to be quick, that’s true, but we have to make the 
commitment and signal the strong direction of where we’re 
going to head in terms of making economic development 
happen in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I note again that the Department of Economic 
Development received an increase. Well I’m not sure for what, 
because really if you got rid of the department altogether and 
just put that money into lower taxes for businesses, you’d 
probably create more jobs than the cocktail party circuit that the 
minister embarked on last fall to glad-hand and network, I think 
was the buzz word, where money was being just wasted doing 
those sorts of things. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s important that we deal with those issues or 
we’re not going to change the way things are. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you know, we’ve often said that what has to 
happen in Saskatchewan is that we have to change the way that 
we look at budgets. We’ve got to stop looking at the General 
Revenue Fund, Liquor and Gaming, and the Crown sector as 
three separate and distinct entities. You know, the liquor cabinet 
has been pillaged this year. Money that normally accrues into 
that is gone. And now the next thing is we’ve got the Crowns 
sitting over there that have been forced to contribute an extra 
$25 million in order to come up with a razor-thin $8 million 
budget. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, what’s happened is we’re putting ourselves 
into a very precarious financial situation where we’ve been 
depending on Liquor and Gaming revenue, money that comes 
out of people’s weaknesses if you like for gambling and 



304 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 1999 

addiction, and end up counting on that money as well as 
massive transfers from the Crowns after they’ve raised their 
prices in order to keep things together because we haven’t dealt 
with the fundamental underpinning of the economy. That means 
we have to expand the tax base in order to create more 
opportunities and more taxpayers in this province. Mr. Speaker, 
that is a fundamental issue that I hope people will address and 
talk about in the debate surrounding the budget speech. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government has embarked on, I believe the 
minister said it would be at least, a $125,000 propaganda 
campaign. You know, and I’ve had people phone me at home 
and said, can they do that? Did you listen to those ads? And I 
hadn’t at that point listened to the radio ads. And, Mr. Speaker, 
they said as far as they were concerned they were blatantly too 
partisan and blatantly were propaganda, and they were offended 
by it. 
 
And I didn’t hear the ads till I was driving in to Regina this 
morning from my home and listened to them. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I found them over the edge as well in terms of the way 
they were saying it. 
 
And what they did say though is they said if you want to have 
. . . you need to have lower taxes and the economy’s got to 
grow. But what they didn’t say is that if you want that to 
happen you should probably support the Saskatchewan Party 
platform because that’s where it’s going to happen, Mr. 
Speaker. So at least they could have finished the ad up and 
made sure that they understood what was in it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the other things that I found interesting is 
the comments over the weekend that were attributed to 
individuals across the province. And I would like to quote from 
a few of them that were quoted in the Saturday’s Leader-Post. 
And I think it is really interesting. There was an article talking 
under the headline “Budget fails, say taxpayers.” And there 
were a number of people who were quoted in that article. 
 
A Mr. Murray Gleim, who is a professional who indicates that 
he earns about $45,000, he said: 
 

“I’ve been pleased with the last few budgets, but I’m a 
little disappointed with this one because I expected more in 
tax cuts.” 
 

And that’s very similar to the kinds of comments I heard in 
Melfort over the weekend. 
 
A Chad Penny, 26, a middle-income earner, said he and his 
live-in fiancee make a combined total somewhere in the 60 to 
$70,000 range. And he too said he was concerned, and I quote, 
and he says: 
 

“If there is no significant change in health and highways, I 
will definitely be looking for a change in government.” 

 
Mr. Speaker, he added he wasn’t overly impressed with the l 
per cent reduction in the provincial sales tax. He said, he would 
rather have seen reductions in personal income tax, Mr. 
Speaker. And he goes on to say: 
 

“Personal income tax is what hits hard. It’s an ugly amount 

of money you have to kick out every year. And the 
government wonders why people our age are always taking 
off to Alberta.” 

 
Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly the point. Here’s a young individual, 
26 years of age, who is already realizing the fact that they are 
under tremendous disadvantage by staying in Saskatchewan and 
it simply has to change because these people are very mobile, 
and particularly at a time when we’re losing jobs in this 
province and Alberta is creating 38,000 of them. 
 
A Mr. Mike Lamb, who’s on social assistance agreed. “The tax 
cut people did get — the drop in the PST — won’t do much, he 
said.” So here’s an individual on assistance who’s supposed to 
be the person that this is all helping, he’s saying it isn’t going to 
help much at all. 
 
A lawyer, Aaron Fox, a high-income earner who makes more 
than $60,000 a year, welcomed the PST cut but he too wanted a 
reduction in personal income tax. Quote: 
 

“We lose people in business either who live here who don’t 
want to come here in the first place because of the high rate 
of tax you have to pay in Saskatchewan. Secondly, it 
discourages people from increasing productivity and 
working harder.” 

 
Another individual who comes from the low-income category, 
Leslie Hudie, 29. She says she’s a single parent who lives off of 
$1,100 a month while raising two school-age children. And she 
says, and I quote: 
 

“For those that are in need of a break right now, they got 
no break. Friday was just another day.” 

 
A Regina university student, Kate Bissell, 43, was equally 
unimpressed, and I quote: 
 

“There was nothing about alleviating financial stress for 
students. This was a budget for the middle-class people. 
Marginalized people were left out. It was a real let down.” 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I was pleased to see that in an article 
because it pretty much summed up and reflected what I was 
hearing in my constituency over the weekend — a great deal of 
concern in every area of the economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the next number of days in this budget 
speech, my caucus colleagues will be talking in more detail 
about their individual areas of expertise and responsibility — of 
health, and agriculture, and roads, and social services — and all 
of the areas of concern that people have in the province, Mr. 
Speaker. And I’m not going to attempt in my address to cover 
all of those topics because they will certainly do it in a very 
admirable way. 
 
What I wanted to do, Mr. Speaker, is to outline the concern 
about the fact that all of the issues that my colleagues will raise 
in terms of the concerns about funding for education and health 
and highways and all of those other issues, because we’re 
failing to deal with the underpinnings of the economy, because 
we’re failing to deal with the level of taxation and 
competitiveness not just between here and Alberta but between 



March 29, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 305 

Canada and the United States; because we’re failing to deal 
with the issue surrounding the transportability of capital and 
talent and investment; because we’re failing to deal with 
creating and growing the economy so there’s more taxpayers 
willing to share the load; because we’re failing to deal with 
those issues, Mr. Speaker, we are going to fail to deal with the 
issues of the funding for all the services the people of this 
province are going to continue to need into the future. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I wanted to say how disappointed I was, 
how disappointed people of this province were with the budget, 
how concerned we are about the drain that’s going to continue 
to erode this province’s economic future and viability into the 
future. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move a motion if I may, 
and the motion moved by myself and seconded by the hon. 
member from Saltcoats reads as follows: 
 

That all the words after “Assembly” be deleted and the 
following substituted: 
 
Recognizes the very modest tax relief set out in the 
provincial budget but regrets that the government 
continues to impose the second largest tax burden in all of 
Canada and has failed to set out a plan for future tax relief, 
and continues to ignore the detrimental impact 
Saskatchewan’s high tax burden has on our economy 
which has the worst job creation record in the country. And 
further regrets that the lack of action on significant tax 
reduction will result in more of our youth leaving the 
province in search of opportunity and more of our 
entrepreneurs and seniors leaving in search of a lower tax 
burden. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this motion I think sums up the concern that I 
heard over the weekend for people. It sums up the concern that 
people have over the future of this province. It sums up the 
disappointment that people feel about this government’s lack of 
understanding in realizing that these are the fundamental issues 
that have to be addressed if this economy is going to change. It 
sums up the feeling of despair and desperation that people are 
feeling. And it sums up how we have to deal with the concern 
that people are facing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at the end of the day, this budget is a goodbye 
budget. It’s saying goodbye to our children; it’s saying goodbye 
to our seniors. And what I heard over the weekend is the people 
of Saskatchewan are going to say goodbye to this government. 
 
I so move, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is out of order. It needs to have a 
seconder, and . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Order. And there 
is not to be debate after the motion has been presented. So the 
Chair heard the hon. member give notice of his motion, but 
would require the motion to be properly moved in order to be 
entered into debate. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, seconded 
by the hon. member for Saltcoats: 

That all the words after “Assembly” be deleted and the 
following substituted: 
 
Recognizes the very modest tax relief set out in the 
provincial budget but regrets that the government 
continues to impose the second-largest tax burden in all of 
Canada and has failed to set out a plan for future tax relief 
and continues to ignore the detrimental impact 
Saskatchewan’s high tax burden has on our economy, 
which has the worst job creation record in the country. And 
further regrets that the lack of action on significant tax 
reduction will result in more of our youth leaving the 
province in search of opportunity, and more of our 
entrepreneurs and seniors leaving in search of a lower tax 
burden. 
 

I so move. 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I hear the Tories 
saying, we were ready for the question; of course they would 
be. Why on earth would they want to debate such a great budget 
as was presented in this legislature on Friday. 
 
The member for Melfort-Tisdale said, this is a good-bye budget. 
And he is dead right. This is a good-bye budget because there is 
no good blood between those of us on the government side and 
those in the Sask-a-Tory side. No good blood at all. 
 
This is a good-bye Sask-a-Tory budget, and I am delighted to 
be standing up in full support of a 1 per cent PST cut, of $195 
million more, Mr. Speaker, for health care — the largest by any 
measure, increase in the Department of Health budget in 
Saskatchewan year over year. The largest, any way you want to 
measure it, any time in Saskatchewan’s history — $195 million 
to address the concerns that my colleagues on the government 
side of the House, the Minister of Finance who went all around 
the province broadly consulting with the people of 
Saskatchewan saying, we’re delighted. 
 
The Minister of Finance laid out the situations, said, here we 
are. We’ve delivered five balanced surplus budgets, Mr. 
Speaker. We’re in position to deliver a sixth. And that’s what 
happened on Friday — number six balanced surplus budget. 
 
We have been paying down debt, the Tory debt at a record pace, 
Mr. Speaker, paying it down, their debt. We have been reducing 
taxes in every single year since we balanced the budget in 1995, 
six years ago. Every single year a component of tax reduction. 
And, Mr. Speaker, as importantly the people in my 
constituency, Regina Coronation Park, and I know all around 
the province were saying, don’t forget the program 
expenditures. 
 
Health, not surprisingly, was one of the issues that came up 
time after time after time. In Saskatchewan, the home of 
medicare, where we started, the Government of Saskatchewan 
funded medicare for five long years, a hundred percent out of 
the treasury of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. We started it and 
then the federal government joined in in 1967 and made it a 
national program, a national program for all of Canada. 
 



306 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 1999 

Mr. Speaker, we are so proud on this side of the House of that 
record, medicare being our gift to Canada — incredibly proud 
of that, and justifiably so. But so are the people of 
Saskatchewan. Because though it was the predecessor of this 
government if you like, that brought in medicare that many 
years ago, just like that was our predecessor’s, the people of 
Saskatchewan know who it was that funded medicare. 
 
Because there’s no free lunch as everyone knows, except maybe 
the Sask-a-Tories — they’re always looking for a free lunch. 
There’s no free lunch, Mr. Speaker. Health care must be paid 
for out of taxes, out of revenue that the government collects. 
Every time any of us see a doctor or go to a hospital, to an 
emergency service, or go for an operation, be it a cataract 
operation or to repair a broken limb or worse — every time any 
of that happens money has to change hands. 
 
Doctors have to be paid, hospitals have to be kept in operation, 
nurses have to be maintained, all of the support staff in health 
care have to be paid. And it’s all paid from taxpayers — no 
secret about that. It’s not . . . it never has been specifically any 
individual MLA or any individual minister who foots the bills. 
It’s the taxpayers that do it and they’re very, very proud of our 
health care system in the province. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, in the consultation about the budget, 
taxpayers were saying things like waiting lists are too long. 
Everybody’s heard that. Waiting lists are too long. Well what 
happened, Mr. Speaker, $14 million goes into addressing the 
length of waiting lists. 
 
The Minister of Health requested a review of the situation and 
asked for a report. How can we address the waiting list, because 
people are telling me it’s a problem. How can we deal with the 
problem? And it’s not just money, but as you know, Mr. 
Speaker, this is the budget debate so I have to largely stick to 
money issues in the budget debate. 
 
But we’ve taken steps. The Minister of Health received the 
report, accepted the report, and has implemented steps that . . . 
recommendations that were recommended in that report to the 
Minister of Health. I’m delighted to tell you that I anticipate 
that situation improving shortly. 
 
But while we’re talking about waiting, one of the things that the 
Sask-a-Tories have done, Mr. Speaker, time after time, is they 
bring up a horror story regarding emergency services or 
regarding health care services. 
 
Well we get very concerned when we hear that maybe 
somebody has to wait too long for an emergency service. Well 
that means then when we’re concerned, Mr. Speaker, we should 
address it. It seems to me a good way to address it is through 
the budget. Because after all, that’s what we do on this 
government side is set broad policy and then provide the health 
care experts with the funds so that they can deliver on the 
wellness, on the health needs of the people of the province. 
 
That’s why this year, 1.9 billion — with a “b” — billion dollars, 
the largest expenditure by far ever in Saskatchewan on health 
care, $1.9 billion for health. And if anyone thinks I’m not proud 
of that, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know where they’ve been for the 
last 5 minutes and I don’t know where they’re planning to be 

for the next 5 minutes, because I am so proud of our health care 
system and I am so proud of our Premier and our Minister of 
Health and our . . . Minister of Health, our Minister of Finance, 
all of my colleagues for our being so solid respecting health 
care and the needs of the people of the province. 
 
We are determined there will be shorter waiting times for 
surgery. There’s also additional money for better cancer 
treatment. There’s additional money for women’s health issues. 
There’s a 12 per cent increase in funding for the district health 
boards, Mr. Speaker — 12 per cent increase in one year. 
Unprecedented. Unprecedented. 
 
Are we proud of our health care system? You bet. And that’s 
why I don’t blame the Sask-a-Tories for saying we were ready 
to vote on the budget. 
 
I suspect that if they had to vote on the budget, if I hadn’t stood 
up or no member of the government side had stood up, they’re 
be in a real pickle. They would have had to find themselves 
saying, gee, our job is to oppose but how in the blazes can we 
oppose an additional 11.4 per cent funding for health care; a tax 
cut; a record amount of money being spent in education, a 
record amount of money being spent in education in 
Saskatchewan; the Highways budget being up; $14 million 
more, Mr. Speaker, on the national leading program, the Child 
Benefit Program, started right here in Saskatchewan, now a 
national program — that being one of our second gifts, if you 
like, to all Canadians — the national child protection program. 
$14 million more takes our share of the funding to $67 million. 
 
This, incidentally, is a program . . . I guess we could hardly take 
credit for the program if it had been in place when the former 
government was there. But I want to point out that despite the 
fact that they left the budget worse than bare — they left the 
province virtually unmanageable — despite that fact, Mr. 
Speaker, since we formed government, we set up the child 
action plan funded 100 per cent from Saskatchewan taxpayers’ 
money, and that child protection program, benefit program, has 
grown every single year. Every budget we present it has grown 
to the point where today it’s $67 million worth of benefits to 
Saskatchewan families, to the children of our great province. 
 
And if you don’t think I’m not proud of that, there’s not much 
point in my carrying on. I couldn’t be more proud than I am 
right now. This is such a delightful budget. It is so good to see 
six straight balanced budgets. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — I have to feel a little bit sorry for the 
Sask-a-Tories. You know it doesn’t hardly matter what the 
issue is, they’re on the wrong side of it. It doesn’t matter what 
enlightened facts they bring out, it’s nonsense. 
 
I’ll tell you, they’ve got . . . I mean people wonder . . . 
occasionally they’ll correct me and say, no it’s not the 
Sask-a-Tories, it’s the Saskatchewan Party. And I’ll say, oh, is 
that why the Sask-a-Tories have the exact same — to a person 
— staff in their caucus office that the Tories had? Is that why 
they have the exact same office, provincial office, in exact same 
building on Victoria Avenue? Of course it’s the Tories. 
 



March 29, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 307 

And of course they’re ready to vote on the budget. They want to 
get through this, they don’t want to give anybody a chance to 
tout a 1 cent cut in the PST and the increase in health funding, 
and all of the other good things that come with the budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in education and training we’re spending $550 
million this year in this budget to improve our K to 12 schools 
— $550 million. That’s a half a billion plus 50 million. Half a 
billion dollars plus $50 million goes into K to 12 education 
right here in Saskatchewan. 
 
(1500) 
 
And the only regret that I know that we have on this side of the 
House is that there isn’t another 550 million to be spent on that. 
Young people are the very future of our province; they deserve 
the very, very finest education that we can possibly provide for 
them. And I know, Mr. Speaker, that day in, day out, there are 
teachers and other professionals in the school system that just 
go to the wall, go far beyond the call of duty to help these 
students — the very future of not only Saskatchewan but the 
future of the world — to see that they get the proper education 
and the proper grounding and the proper benefits that they so 
richly deserve. 
 
So 550 million for K to 12 in this budget. And nearly $300 
million for post-secondary education — $300 million in 
post-secondary education. It’s an amazing, amazing feat. It’s 
amazing that having inherited so few years ago a $1.1 billion 
annual shortfall, that we were able, all the people of 
Saskatchewan but the leadership came from the Premier, from 
our Minister of Finance, the leadership came — they put 
together the budget that led us from those Devine Tory deficits, 
$1.1 billion a year in a very short period of time, Mr. Speaker, 
into surplus budgets. 
 
And what does a surplus budget do? It certainly doesn’t 
immediately help anybody’s pocket, but it certainly helps get 
the bankers from New York and Zurich and Hong Kong out of 
our pocket and out of the taxpayers’ pockets because every time 
we’re able to generate a surplus, we’re also able to pay off some 
debt. And every time we pay off some debt or the mortgage, 
interest payments will go down. And we have been ratcheting 
down interest payments ever since we were able to balance the 
budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if we weren’t spending $2 million a day financing 
the Tory debt — $2 million a day — this $550 million for K to 
12 and nearly 300 million for post-secondary could be virtually 
doubled. Virtually doubled but for the debt they left us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what else is happening in education? We’ve got a 
total of $206 million being used for training and employment 
programs — $206 million in an area that the federal 
government has sort of taken the football and just handed it off 
to the province and said, here you run with it. 
 
And it’s a bit of a double-edged sword, Mr. Speaker. The good 
news is we can run programs better than the federal government 
can at the provincial level; the bad news is it costs a bit of 
money to do that. But $206 million for training and education, I 
think, is certainly a clear indication of where our hearts are. 
You can do an awful lot of training for $206 million. You can 

do a lot of work experience programs for that too. 
 
It is interesting, Mr. Speaker, when I talk about education and I 
compare this with the member for Canora-Pelly who the . . . I 
want to read from Yorkton This Week & Enterprise that it says, 
“Liberals meet with school board.” Obviously this is a little bit 
old, Mr. Speaker, and I quote from the article: 
 

Krawetz, the Liberal Education critic, said the anticipated 
decrease in federal transfer payments reflects an increase in 
prosperity in this province. 
 

That’s what he said as a Liberal. 
 

For example (he said), this year the province reaped a 
windfall in unexpected revenue. 
 

That’s what he said as a Liberal, Mr. Speaker, on education. 
Isn’t that quite amazing? It doesn’t much matter what the 
Sask-a-Tory said when he was a Liberal; the truth of this budget 
is we’ve got the highest payment ever in . . . highest amount of 
money ever going into education and training. Over a billion 
dollars. Over a billion dollars. The largest amount ever. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to go back to health care because, as you 
know, I’ve very proud of what we’ve done here. We put in 
$195 million, new money, into health care this year; $195 
million additional to last year to get better nursing home and 
health facilities. We put money in to get more home care and 
more community services. We put money in for medical 
equipment so that our hospitals and labs will be Year 2000 
ready. We put in $50 million in that alone, Mr. Speaker. We put 
in money for fair, improved working conditions for nurses and 
other health professionals. 
 
I’ve read a fairly lengthy list, Mr. Speaker, of things in health 
care that we’re doing; A hundred and ninety-five million dollars 
is going to go an awful long way and 11 per cent increase in the 
Health department budget, in the health budget in Saskatchewan 
in one year is going to go a long ways in addressing that list of 
concerns, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And not to for a minute lose sight of reducing the waiting list 
for surgeries, and addressing . . . I want to choose my words 
fairly carefully here, Mr. Speaker, because I don’t want to say 
that there is never, ever a problem in an emergency department. 
By the very nature of emergency department, it accepts us when 
we are at our sickest, when we are most desperately in need of 
immediate care. Therefore it’s in all of our interest to have an 
adequately funded, adequately staffed emergency department; 
that in an ideal world you get into the emergency department 
and within three minutes would see a doctor. 
 
But I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, that my family hasn’t had a 
whole lot of personal experience with an emergency department 
for a number of years until three weeks ago when in an — it 
wasn’t terribly serious but now my wife is going to get mad at 
me because it’s her elbow that’s broken, Mr. Speaker — in a 
curling game my wife slipped on the ice, fell, finished the 
curling game, was determined it was only a sprain so we went 
home and went to bed and of course she had no sleep that night. 
And at 6:30 she woke me up and she says, no it’s just too much 
pain; I think there’s something wrong, she said, so we should go 



308 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 1999 

to the emergency department . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
The member for Melfort-Tisdale says what’s this got to do with 
the budget? 
 
What is it that you say . . . what is it that you say about health 
care? Oh, that’s right, I forgot, you’re the party of freeze the 
budget on health care; a five-year freeze on health care, 
five-year freeze. That would mean no 195 million that we 
included in this year’s budget. No. What’s the Sask-a-Tory 
answer? Zap, you’re frozen, zap you’re frozen, zap you’re 
frozen. Wow! 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — And you’re absolutely right when you said this is 
a good-bye budget. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order, order, order. Now hon. 
members will recognize that it is most appropriate of course to 
direct the debate through the Chair, and that when we start 
directing comments to hon. members on opposite sides of the 
House then the debate becomes less than productive. I think 
we’ve just seen evidence of that. I’ll ask the co-operation of all 
hon. members on both sides of the House. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. What’s the Tory’s 
answer to health care? Zap! You’re frozen. That’s their 
response. Zap, Mr. Speaker. By what the Tory platform is, the 
Saskatchewan Health budget would not have increased, Mr. 
Speaker, by $195 million this year — an 11.4 per cent increase 
in our Health budget this year alone. Great news for 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, as I was describing a visit to the emergency department 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Why? Because $195 million, 
some of that money is going to be used, Mr. Speaker, to make 
certain, to make absolutely certain to the extent that’s humanly 
possible, that every Saskatchewan citizen receives the kind of 
care that my wife recently did. 
 
We got to the Pasqua emergency department, Mr. Speaker, 
sometime about 20 minutes to 7 o’clock on a Saturday morning 
and if the Sask-a-Tory stories, their horror stories, were the 
normal course of events, Mr. Speaker, you would expect maybe 
we’d wait half an hour, an hour, two hours before we got any 
help. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, not surprisingly, I wanted to know what is 
the situation in health in the emergency department so I looked 
at my watch when we went in. We registered and you know 
how long it took until my wife saw a doctor? Three minutes, 
Mr. Speaker, from the time we walked in the door until she saw 
a doctor — three minutes, three minutes. It was almost that 
quick. 
 
The member from Saltcoats says, Mr. Speaker, must have met 
you in the parking lot. It almost felt that quick and I think that’s 
about the only way that the service could have been any 
quicker. 
 
And just so that we have a little bit of an understanding about 
the emergency department, Mr. Speaker, there was five other 
people in there. There was a person with a cut on the arm, had 

gotten into the wrong end of an altercation with a broken bottle. 
And there was a number of other things going on in that 
emergency department at exactly the same time. But I want to 
tell you, Mr. Speaker, the service was great. 
 
Then yesterday we had our second opportunity to visit the 
emergency department. This time, Mr. Speaker, it was my 
granddaughter, running a fever. Fortunately, it doesn’t seem to 
have been a whole lot . . . well in fact, fortunately it seems to 
have been less serious than the broken elbow. But after 
consulting with the family doctor, the family doctor suggested 
to my daughter to take my granddaughter to the emergency 
department. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, it was less than a half an hour from the 
time they were in, had seen the doctor — my granddaughter had 
been thoroughly checked, thoroughly checked — and a 
prescription written, and they were on their way to get the 
prescription filled. And hopefully my granddaughter is going to 
get over the tonsil problem and the ear infection. I have every 
confidence in it. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the point I wanted to make there is that the 
emergency department works. I am astounded at the numbers of 
people that have come up to me and said, gosh, you know, I 
was expecting all kinds of problems. I’m thinking of one person 
I met the other day, met at the Regina and District Labour 
Council meeting. And this person said, gee, you know, my . . . 
I’m going to change the relationship just a little bit because . . . 
just to protect them. I didn’t ask, so if I say “aunt,” well it might 
not be aunt; it might be uncle or mother or grandmother. 
 
But this person said, my aunt was diagnosed with cancer on 
January 4 and so we kind of expected there would be some 
problems. Two weeks later, the surgery took place. And, Mr. 
Speaker, they told the family that five years ago, six years ago, 
that would have been the end of it. But now the testing 
equipment is so much more sophisticated that they weren’t 
positive, or they suspected they hadn’t got entirely all of the 
cancer, so there was a couple of courses of chemotherapy. 
 
(1515) 
 
And of course they’re expecting the outcome from all of this to 
be just perfect. I know our thoughts are with my friend’s aunt in 
this. But he was telling me, he said, you know I expect that 
we’d have some trouble, but not one minute of trouble from 
start right through the entire process to when I saw him, not last 
Saturday but the Saturday before at the Regina and District 
Labour Council meeting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I could talk about another friend of mine who went to see his 
family GP (general practitioner) on a Wednesday. And it was 
eight days later from the time he’d saw his GP till he’d seen a 
specialist and been in the hospitals for tests and had his report 
back. Fortunately the report was a good one. 
 
Mr. Speaker, health horror stories. Again I don’t want to 
understate the horror stories because from time to time when 
you’re dealing with 35,000 — 35,000 Saskatchewan people 
every day . . . And that’s what our health department, our health 
services do. They deal with 35,000 people every single day. 
Surely to goodness, out of 35,000 transactions, one of them 



March 29, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 309 

isn’t going to be as perfect as you would hope. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the horror stories are largely a figment of 
the Tories’ — Sask-a-Tories’ — imagination. Largely a figment 
of their imagination. Again I want to say, I don’t want to 
pretend that there can never be anything goes south on us. 
 
And I know that the women and the men that work in the health 
industry throughout Saskatchewan put their absolute best efforts 
forward day in, day out, night in, night out. And, Mr. Speaker, 
they deserve our support. They deserve the support of the Sask 
Party and the Liberals and the governing New Democrats. They 
deserve our support for the 35,000 people that they see every 
single day in not the best of situations. I mean, nobody ever 
went to the hospital because they’re too healthy. Nobody ever 
went to the hospital because they didn’t need help. 
 
I mean, in crisis situations these women and these men put 
forward just phenomenally good efforts on our behalf every 
single day, and I take my hat off to them, Mr. Speaker. They’re 
very valued, very necessary and very, very much appreciated. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, what did we do on taxes in this budget? 
Well we’ve lowered the education and health tax, E & H tax, 
from 7 per cent to 6 per cent. It’s the lowest it’s been in 12 
years, right here in Saskatchewan. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, I talked about taxes having gone down 
this year, but what we forget is that last year there was a 4 per 
cent, 2 points off, the income tax, last year. What happened the 
year before — 2 cents off the E&H tax. So 2 cents off of it two 
years ago, another cent off it this year — that’s 3 cent reduction 
on top of, Mr. Speaker . . . I recall very vividly when we formed 
government in very late 1991, when the Tories had run out their 
five-year mandate and then still took one more day. They 
remained in power for five years and one day. I recall so vividly 
that we had to . . . one of the first things we had to do was recall 
this legislature and pass the budget for the year that had three 
months left in it. 
 
Why did we have to do that, Mr. Speaker? Because the Tories 
ran and hid. They prorogued the legislature in June of that year 
without having passed the budget. It is an amazingly sorrowful 
time . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The member for Saltcoats, 
Mr. Speaker, suggested that might happen again this time. You 
know, member for Saltcoats, you won’t live long enough to see 
a New Democrat government in Saskatchewan run like that. 
You will never live so long and my wish is that you live a 
thousand years. So just so it’s perfectly clear, I’m not wishing 
you any bad luck on your longevity, but you will not live long 
enough to see an NDP government duck and not pass its 
budget. You can take that to the bank with you. You can take it 
anywhere you want. 
 
We’re not the Tories. The people passed their judgment on you 
in 1991. They passed judgment on you in 1991 — pardon me, I 
know in 1991, Mr. Speaker, the member for Saltcoats was a 
Tory. I know that after that he became a Liberal, and now he’s 
back as a Tory. Yes . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Consistent, 
he says. Well you can explain that one; I’m not going to even 
go there, not even going to go into that flip-flop area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am so proud that we have again delivered a 

significant tax cut. It would be nice if the tax cut had been 2 
cents this year or 3 cents. It would be nice. But do you know 
what, Mr. Speaker? Every tax cut we’ve delivered . . . starting 
in 1995, every single year we’ve delivered a tax cut. And every 
single year, Mr. Speaker, it’s been sustainable. Every single 
year. You can take that to the bank with you too. Every year 
when the taxes go down, they’ll stay down with a New 
Democratic government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, I was starting to explain, when we 
formed government in early 1991, one of the last things that the 
Tories had done was harmonized the provincial sales tax with 
the federal GST. Harmonized — sounds really nice, sounds 
really innocent. 
 
But do you know what harmonization does, Mr. Speaker? What 
it does is it takes everything that’s GST payable, GST being the 
federal tax, and that includes health products; it includes 
education products; it includes children’s clothing; it includes 
services. 
 
It’s income tax time and I venture to say that a significant 
number of Saskatchewan people take their income tax to a 
person or a firm to prepare their income tax form. Well for that 
service of tax preparation we pay GST. Under the Tory plan 
we’d have also paid PST on that — lawyer services, all 
services. In fact, Mr. Speaker, if you took your vehicle in for an 
oil change you would pay, under their plan, provincial sales tax 
on the labour for that oil change or on the labour for whatever 
you get done with your vehicle or your tractor or whatever. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the first thing we did on forming government, 
even knowing how bad the deficit was, even knowing how 
terrible it was, was we deharmonized. And I remember the 
debate vividly, the discussion very vividly. I’ll give you a 
summary of it, Mr. Speaker. There were a very small minority 
of people that said, well we should at least consider just leaving 
the PST harmonized because we can always blamed that on 
Grant Devine and the Tories. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, I was never . . . seldom as proud of my 
colleagues as I was at that moment when we said no, as 
desperate as it is, as desperate as the situation is here in 
Saskatchewan, we cannot simply tax the poorest people, 
disproportionately high, because of the mess that the Tories left 
us. We can’t do that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So two years ago we reduced the PST by two points to 7; this 
year we’ve reduced it by another penny to 6 cents. Mr. Speaker, 
I’m delighted with that record, and as the Minister of Finance 
said, both in his budget speech and again earlier today in 
question period, there will be more. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I should . . . I would be remiss if I didn’t talk a 
little bit about debt. In debt, paying down the debt, we promised 
to pay debt down to reduce the mortgage of our children’s 
future. And you know, Mr. Speaker, we’ve done just that. 
We’ve had — as I mentioned earlier — six straight balanced 
budgets. Not one, not two, not three, not four, not five — six; 
six straight balanced budgets. 
 



310 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 1999 

Compare that with the Tory record. In fact I would like to 
compare a lot with the Tory record. I see their platform, Mr. 
Speaker, election platform presented October 31, 1998 and it’s 
called The Way Up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you go through this platform. It’s just an amazing, 
amazing piece of fiction. Mr. Speaker, The Way Up — the Tory 
platform — is a virtual carbon copy of the Tory platform of 
1982. Remember. We all remember, Mr. Speaker, Grant Devine 
who said: 
 

You know Saskatchewan’s got so much going for it, you 
can afford to mismanage it and still break even. 
 

He also said things, such great words of wisdom as: give ‘er 
snoose, Bruce; and don’t say whoa in a mudhole — and then he 
left us in a mudhole. He left us there in the mudhole. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Way Up is way out — way out. The Way Up 
is such an amazing, amazing piece of fiction — unsustainable, 
unsupportable, and it just doesn’t add up. But that doesn’t 
surprise anybody in Saskatchewan because everybody in 
Saskatchewan understands exactly who they are — exactly who 
those Tories are. 
 
So is it any surprise that they would bring the Tory staff to them 
when they ran up the new corporate name — if I can describe it 
that — the new flag of convenience. Is it any problem, any 
surprise rather, that the new Tories would have the old Tory 
staff; that the new Tories have the old Tories’ office; that the 
new Tories have the old Tory headquarters, that the new Tories 
have the same old Tory bagmen would be no surprise at all. No 
surprise at all. So why would we be surprised when the 
platform is the same old platform. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to . . . I’ve got something here about the 
platform and I want to quote, Mr. Speaker, from the Leader-Star 
News, February 27, 1998. “Sask. Party unveils ideas for 
legislation,” it says, Mr. Speaker. Thursday . . . Okay, well I 
won’t try and paraphrase too much. I’ll quote: 
 

The Saskatchewan Party delivered an “alternative Throne 
Speech” Thursday to try and position itself as a clear 
alternative to the “tired, arrogant and out-of-touch NDP.” 
 
Saskatchewan Party Leader Ken Krawetz promised 
government by his party would deliver meaningful tax cuts 
. . . 
 

And the article goes on. Amongst other wondrous things that 
this article says —and I’ll go back to the article for this — it 
says: 
 

Another bill called for the elimination of the Crown 
tendering agreement. 
 
Stronger balanced budget legislation would eliminate 
deficit budgeting except in extreme circumstances like 
natural disasters. Any other deficit budgets would result in 
members being docked pay. 
 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this comes from the Sask-a-Tories. I’ll make 
a comment but I want to read this final paragraph of this. The 

article goes on: 
 

When reporters pointed out that many of the 30 bills sound 
familiar, Krawetz said if a problem isn’t fixed, it makes 
sense to keep lobbying for the solution. 
 

When pointed out that many of these solutions sounded like the 
same old solutions, I mean even the reporters recognized Grant 
Devine, 1982. Even the reporters recognized the tired, worn-out 
Tory clichés. Even the reporters are finally getting around to 
calling those people exactly what they are, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget, this budget . . . I don’t want to stray 
too far from this budget, Mr. Speaker, because any time you’ve 
got 195 million additional dollars bringing the total for health 
care to over $1.9 billion, just about . . . just about $100 million 
shy of $2 billion, Mr. Speaker. But $1.9 billion — biggest 
expenditure ever in health care in this province, an 11.4 per cent 
increase this year over last. Shows where our commitment is. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, when New Democrats stand up and 
say, we will deliver the best health care that is affordable by the 
taxpayers, you know we mean we will do our very best to 
deliver the very best health care affordable by the taxpayers. 
 
(1530) 
 
We’ve got the books balanced; we’re now in a position of 
investing significant sums in people, and it’s the taxpayers’ 
money that’s being invested. But as I pointed out earlier, the 
taxpayers said that health care is their biggest concern. So what 
would you do in a budget? You would put the biggest single 
expenditure increase into the area that people identified as their 
biggest concern, Mr. Speaker — health care: 11.4 per cent this 
year more over last year. An amazing, an amazing record in this 
budget. 
 
And we can do it, Mr. Speaker, because it’s balanced budgets. 
Balanced budgets: something that the Tories are great at talking 
about, but what was their record in office? Zero-for-nine . . . 
actually . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I hear zero-for-nine, but 
it was zero-for-eight, Mr. Speaker. It was zero-for-eight. 
 
Why? Because they didn’t have the courage to stay here in this 
legislature, stand up, and pass their last budget. Instead, they 
fled. They fled — fled this legislature, Mr. Speaker — 
prorogued the legislature. Why? Because they were going to 
lose a non-confidence vote. That’s why. No secret to that at all. 
I was there. I was there in opposition. That was a sinking ship 
and the rats couldn’t get away fast enough, Mr. Speaker — a 
sinking ship. 
 
And now they have the audacity to come and try and say we 
should strengthen our balanced budget legislation. Mr. Speaker, 
this government straightened up their mess — straightened up 
their mess from $1.1 billion annual deficit, from a record of 
nearly . . . a total of nearly $15 billion, total dead-weight debt 
that the taxpayers of Saskatchewan had to pay for. Fifteen 
billion total debt — we’ve shrunk that to 11.4 billion, paying 
off the extra with surpluses, with some strategic selling-off of 
some assets, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ve had a remarkable record, and we introduced our first 



March 29, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 311 

balanced budget, 1995 . . . ’94-’95. And we have delivered this 
our sixth straight surplus budget. If they’re concerned about 
surplus budgets, they should be less concerned about passing 
some new Act, and more concerned about just vacating this 
place. 
 
Why do I say that, Mr. Speaker? New Democrats are the ones 
that not only talk the talk, we walk the walk; we deliver 
balanced surplus budgets, six for six. 
 
What was the Blakeney record in the ’70s? — 11 for 11. What 
was the Tory record in the ’80s? Eight deficit budgets — eight 
deficit budgets . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Now the member 
for Saltcoats wants to re-fight the 1982 election. Why would 
you want to re-fight ’82? You won — you won. Why would 
you want to re-fight 1982. 
 
I know you think those were great days, Mr. Speaker, the 
member for Saltcoats thinks those were great days. And they 
were the beginning of great problems that unfortunately, Mr. 
Speaker, my children may be going to see the end of it, maybe 
not. It might wind up being my grandchildren that finally get us 
completely rid of the debt that those Tories left us from starting 
in 1982, ending in 1991, where they were unceremoniously 
booted from office, Mr. Speaker. But richly deserved, I might 
say, very richly deserved. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Tories don’t want to talk about this budget 
because they don’t want to talk about our record in government, 
about not just our record in government, about the record of 
Saskatchewan people. And what’s the record say? It says from 
1992 to 1997, little Saskatchewan led the nation in economic 
growth. Little Saskatchewan led the nation in that five-year 
period, in economic growth. 
 
Retail sales — retail sales, Mr. Speaker, were up in 
Saskatchewan at a faster rate year after year after year after year 
after year, at a higher rate than Alberta, which the members 
opposite are son fond of, or Tory Manitoba. Mr. Speaker, job 
growth has been very strong here. We’ve got a record number 
of people working. I wish it was better — I wish it was better, I 
really do. And it will be better, because this budget helps 
continue to allow people to have the confidence to spend the 
money they have. It continues to give businesses the confidence 
knowing that they’re not going to be in a province that is so 
deep in a pit that they can never get out. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we met our job growth target of 30,000 jobs, 
creating 30,000 jobs and the job growth is — let me just catch 
this — job growth of 3,000 in 1999. That’s what we’re 
projecting for this year. And an average of 5,200 per year to 
2003. Mr. Speaker, I know members opposite are guffawing at 
that but I just want to hold up . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
scoffing, scoffing. 
 
I want to hold up the council of Canada economic forecast. In 
it, Mr. Speaker, it confirms Saskatchewan’s growth is on a good 
target. These targets will be met. I know that the member for 
Saltcoats hasn’t read it, Mr. Speaker, but I wish he would. I’d 
invite him to in fact have a look at what the good folks in the 
economic conference of Canada have to say about little old 
Saskatchewan. 
 

We have a million people here that work tirelessly, that work 
diligently, that love their province. A million people — most of 
us love our province. Most of us choose to stay here. Many of 
us frankly wouldn’t stay here even, even . . . Many of us would 
stay here even if there was a fraction of truth, Mr. Speaker, to 
the doom and gloom that the Tories are spreading daily. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m going to talk about economic growth., just 
one area that’s very close to my heart, that really kind of nails it 
home for me. In 1986 when I first ran, there was lots of office 
space available in Regina. We had already four and a half years 
of Grant Devine Tory government. Things were heading south 
on us, so to speak. Lots of space to choose from in my 
constituency, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In 1991 there was even more. We had had nine years, nine sorry 
Tory years. There was lots of office space that we could rent 
either for a constituency office or . . . This may come as a 
surprise to you in the Saskatchewan Party but June this year is 
four years since the last election, okay. 
 
Now just keep in your chair. We’re looking for campaign rooms 
in Regina Coronation Park and we’re looking for it in June. 
Why? Because June’s four years. The election may not be in 
June, it may be in October, or it may be June next year, or 
maybe June next year, but I wouldn’t hold my breath on that, 
member for Saltcoats. I wouldn’t hold my breath on that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1995 . . . in 1991 there was lots of space, but in 
1995 election it was starting to dwindle a little bit. Well I spoke 
with my campaign manager three hours and 15 minutes ago; my 
campaign manager tells me there’s one space, and do you know 
what? Not even in my constituency; it’s across the street, one 
space, close to suitable. One space just across the street on the 
east side of Albert. I shouldn’t get so specific because you 
never know, Mr. Speaker, the Liberals or the Sask-a-Tories 
might actually have enough money to rent a space. They might 
rent it out from under me and there we’d be. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the point is you look at the economy. You look at 
the office space situation in Regina. It is tightening each year 
now and it’s getting to the point to where very soon I expect 
we’re going to see some significant new office space being 
constructed out of necessity. I know we’ve certainly seen a lot 
of office space upgraded, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am, as I’ve said, very, very proud of our budget. 
We’ve balanced the budget, we’ve paid down debt, and we’ve 
introduced tax relief. Contrast that with the sorry Tory record, 
or the sorry Tory hollow promises. Contrast it, Mr. Speaker, 
and I can tell you every one who does that, this is, as the 
member for Melfort-Tisdale said, Mr. Speaker, this is a 
good-bye budget. It’s good-bye Sask-a-Tories. 
 
Another way I’ve hear it, another way I’ve heard it said, 
somebody was telling me over the weekend, they said, gee . . . I 
can’t even use my name I don’t think. Anyway, Mr. Speaker, 
this person said to the member for Regina Coronation Park, gee, 
this looks like an election budget. You know what, Mr. 
Speaker, I said, you’re right, it is an election budget. We 
reduced the PST by 1 cent this year. We increased the Health 
budget by $195 million this year. We increased the Education 
budget. We increased the Highways budget. 



312 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 1999 

But you know what? Last year’s was an election budget too. 
Last year we reduced income tax by 4 per cent — 2 points — 4 
per cent. Last year we increased our Health budget. Last year 
we increased our Education budget. Last year we increased the 
Highways budget. Last year we increased the Child Benefit 
Program as we did this year. That was an election budget last 
year. 
 
And you know what? What about the year before? The year 
before was an election budget — 2 cents reduction in the PST 
the year before, 2 cents, Mr. Speaker. And what did we do that 
year? We backfilled every penny that the federal Liberals 
withdrew in funding from health care and social programs. 
Every penny they withdrew, we ponied up that penny and more 
— and more. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s been a wondrous time in Saskatchewan. It’s a 
great time to be in the government benches. It’s a great time to 
be a New Democrat in Saskatchewan. We are seeing the results 
of a million people working together and it’s fabulous. We’ve 
got economic growth. We’ve got debt being bought down. 
We’ve got the most balanced budgets in a row of any province 
in all of Canada — six, the most anywhere. 
 
We have got responsible government that listens to the people, 
that asks for not just a report on what’s the problem — in the 
case of health I mentioned earlier, Mr. Speaker, the problem 
being long waiting lists or waiting lists that are longer than we 
would like. We didn’t just say tell us how bad the problem is — 
no. The Minster of Health says tell me how bad the problem is 
and tell me how we can fix it. And that’s what we’re doing with 
this budget, Mr. Speaker —$195 million, 11.4 per cent increase 
to Health, 11.4 per cent. 
 
I say it so many times partly because it sounds so wonderful, 
Mr. Speaker. It’s such a significant investment in the well-being 
of the people of our province. Add to that the children’s benefit 
program — $14 million new money this year over last takes the 
money up to $67 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I couldn’t be prouder of this budget. I don’t know 
how better to say it. And I think there’s a significant number of 
people that are starting to come to the view that maybe the best 
way for me to say it is to take my place here and go out and 
knock on some doors in my constituency, as I have been doing 
for some time now. But I know that people would like to see me 
at their doorstep and I look forward to meeting many of my 
constituents in the coming weeks and months. And I very much 
look forward to letting people know what’s in this election 
budget, same as I let people know what was in last year’s 
election budget and the year before’s election budget. 
 
(1545) 
 
Before I do take my place, Mr. Speaker, I want to say: they are 
all election budgets for us, but for the simple reason that as New 
Democrats, we care. There’s a reason that every one of my 
colleagues decided to run, decided to seek office. It’s because of 
a profound commitment to their constituents and to their 
province. Because of that profound commitment, Mr. Speaker, 
we care; we don’t try and save up for an election year so we can 
do a real zinger of a budget. Every single year we try and 
identify what are the areas that are the most concern to the 

people, recognize that we have to have a balanced budget — it’s 
not a bottomless pit of money; it has to be balanced — but 
within the confines of a balanced surplus budget, what can we 
do to make life better for our neighbours, our friends, our 
constituents, our families, our province, our future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am very proud that this budget passes every 
single test. It is a huge pleasure and an honour for me to have 
led the government side — after the minister of Finance — but 
to have led the government side in talking about this, the 
budget. 
 
I will be supporting it, Mr. Speaker, very, very proudly. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
I’m very pleased to have this opportunity to make a few points 
with respect to new budget initiatives of the Department of 
Municipal Affairs, Culture and Housing. 
 
Over the last number of years municipal governments, housing 
authorities, and the cultural sector have supported the provincial 
government with the difficult task of improving the fiscal status 
of our province. And they’ve done that, Mr. Speaker — as my 
colleague from Regina Coronation Park has just said in his 
remarks — they’ve done it because they love this province and 
they have confidence in the long-term future of this province 
and the quality of life that we work together to make here. 
 
Our communities, our housing authorities, and our cultural 
organizations have made those sacrifices to allow us to convert 
the deficit into a small annual surplus, Mr. Speaker. Our 
communities and associations know that we are wrestling with 
the legacy of debt. Everyone knows that we make annual 
interest payments of $725 million a year. That’s $725 million or 
$2 million a day that we could be spending in this province on 
our health care system, on our roads, on infrastructure, on social 
housing, and on cultural development. 
 
But wrestling with debt cannot be our only focus and I’m 
extremely pleased that this government has responded in this 
budget to demonstrated needs in the sectors served by my 
department. We have responded to the need for a municipal 
infrastructure support, for social housing assistance, and for 
support to our developing cultural sector. These are priorities 
that have suffered some pressure while government repaired our 
fiscal house. 
 
But we announced last week in the budget, $10 million in new 
money annually — not just one time, but annually — to support 
the development and renewal of infrastructure for our 
municipalities. This represents an 18 per cent increase over last 
year’s amount. The $10 million will represent the province’s 
portion for a provincial-municipal infrastructure program to be 
cost shared on a 50/50 basis by the province and municipalities. 
 
The program will result in $20 million of new municipal 
infrastructure spending annually which will create 
approximately 400 seasonal construction jobs. The investment 
builds on the $3 million increase in the rural revenue sharing 
pool last year. 



March 29, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 313 

The $10 million will be allocated in proportion to the relative 
sizes of the provincial population represented by each type of 
municipality. Urban municipalities will receive about 7.5 
million, rural municipalities will receive 2 million, and northern 
municipalities will receive $500,000. 
 
My officials will consult with SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association), SARM, and the New North, on 
details about project eligibility criteria and the establishment of 
joint review committees. And I understand that these 
discussions have already begun. 
 
The opposition will say it’s not enough, and they are right. We 
are challenging the federal government to ante up with this 
program. We need this to be a tri-level program. A one-third 
portion from the federal government would turn this program 
into a $30 million annual investment in Saskatchewan’s 
infrastructure. That would be $30 million to develop our roads 
and bridges, to renew and extend water and sewer systems, to 
support waste disposal sites, transfer the disabled, and other 
municipal and transportation services. 
 
What we have asked for from the federal government, Mr. 
Speaker, is a continuation or a third phase of the two phases of 
the infrastructure program that are now just winding down, 
where it was a tripartite situation with each level of 
government, including the federal, putting in one-third of the 
amount. But in the federal budget a few weeks ago a renewal of 
that program was absent. So we decided to go ahead at this time 
without them, but hopefully that they would see fit to take part. 
 
In fact when you think about the portion of the country’s farm 
aid program that we are footing and the damage that the federal 
government has done to our rail and road systems with the 
changes to the transportation system, it is the least the federal 
government could do. 
 
We, in this budget, have built on programs previously put in 
place to strengthen our communities. We will take another step 
forward with the grants in lieu of taxes program with a budget 
of $6.25 million in 1999-2000. That’s twice the amount 
budgeted last year. 
 
By the end of the four-year phase-in, the provincial government 
will be paying $12.5 million annually to municipalities and 
school boards on the property that they own and manage 
through the Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation 
anywhere where it’s located in the province. These funds will 
indeed strengthen our communities, enhance local economies, 
and support our school and library systems. 
 
Our budget for the RCMP police program has also increased to 
reflect a full year of funding. This year’s budget includes more 
than $4 million to support rural and small urban municipalities 
in adjusting to a new RCMP cost-distribution formula. 
 
For northern Saskatchewan, the budget announced $1 million to 
strengthen water and sewer infrastructure in northern 
communities. When one adds the $500,000 from the conditional 
revenue sharing program, the total amount of provincial funds 
available for northern water and sewer infrastructure increases 
to $1.5 million, Mr. Speaker. And since the $500,000 available 
from the infrastructure program will be matched by the 

Northern Revenue Sharing Trust Account, a total of $2 million 
will be available for northern sewer and water projects. 
 
While initiatives for social housing were not announced in the 
budget, a number of initiatives will move forward this year due 
to good fiscal management in the Saskatchewan Housing 
Corporation. We previously announced a total of 60 housing . . . 
these are brand new, single detached, family housing units, Mr. 
Speaker, for the North which will be constructed this spring — 
60 new houses. 
 
The rental market assistance program and the remote housing 
program will result in another 50 units being developed in the 
North in 1999. And partnerships with co-operatives will 
continue to provide home ownership opportunities to inner city 
families in major cities. 
 
The department also expects that the Saskatchewan assisted 
living initiative will be introduced to more communities in 
1991. And this is something, Mr. Speaker, that the 
Saskatchewan Housing Corporation undertook on a pilot project 
basis two years ago. And it’s designed to help seniors be 
independent in their own homes — which is where they want to 
be — longer. It involves just enhancing the services that are 
available in some of our existing seniors housing complexes, 
extended to, for instance on an optional basis, the availability of 
one hot meal a day cooked by someone else because older 
seniors who live alone sometimes tend to not make very 
nutritious meals for themselves. 
 
It includes, in some cases, where we’ve actually made physical 
alterations and brought a number of duplexes that used to be so 
popular in rural towns in Saskatchewan — but they’re single 
detached and they’re not suitable once a person can’t shovel 
their own snow and so on — moved them together physically; 
built onto them a common hallway and a common social area, a 
common bathroom for instance where people who use walkers 
and wheelchairs, who can do everything else independently but 
they maybe quite can’t handle the bathtub, we put in a tub 
room, a common one with supervision to give them a little hand 
up. And it’s been very well received, and it has enabled. 
 
Yes, it’s a common-sense approach to just giving seniors that 
little tiny bit of assistance that will help them to remain 
independent in their own homes longer. And we’ve expanded 
that program each and every year with the . . . And it saves a lot 
of money, Mr. Speaker, in the health system because we’re 
keeping people who would formerly have been clients of the 
health system in nursing homes, keeping them not only out of 
the health system but feeling good about themselves and where 
they want to be — in their own homes. 
 
The average age, Mr. Speaker, in our social housing seniors’ 
portfolio right now — and of course we don’t have the statistics 
on people who live in their own homes — but in our rental 
housing portfolio the average age of seniors is 86. And it used 
to be very big-time news when somebody reached their 100th 
birthday. Now we have — literally — we have dozens of 
people living independently in our social housing portfolio, 
with the small little aids that I have mentioned, that are over 
100 years old, over a century old and still independent. 
 
The quality of life in Saskatchewan communities will further be 



314 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 1999 

improved in other ways, Mr. Speaker. We have in this year’s 
budget a further $100,000 investment to ensure that public 
libraries are connected to the Internet. The federal and 
provincial governments and the Saskatchewan Library 
Association — this is a tripartite partnership, Mr. Speaker — 
recently entered into a cost-shared agreement which will result 
in 300 new Internet sites at public libraries. We have a large 
number of our libraries, including the regional libraries which 
serve rural areas, that now offer access to the Internet and 
access to computers even though people might not have such 
access in their own home. But they can receive that service free 
now with assistance from their local library. 
 
The additional $100,000 brings the provincial commitment over 
a two-year period to $800,000 and allows the province to obtain 
matching federal dollars. The program results in a $1.6 million 
investment in our community library services. This program 
supports public access to today’s technology. By placing 
Internet services in our public libraries we ensure that everyone 
has the opportunity to use the incredible communications and 
research tools available on the Internet. 
 
The personnel in my department in the Provincial Library, Mr. 
Speaker, work very hard with the library system in 
Saskatchewan, and with the federal government to make this 
program happen. And I’m extremely proud of their 
accomplishment. 
 
And it is our . . . this is our commitment, Mr. Speaker, as a 
progressive government, to the access to the information in the 
information age to everybody in the province. Not must people 
who live in cities, not just people who have the money to 
purchase their own computers, but a way to make these tools 
available to everyone. 
 
I’m also extremely proud of our announcement for a new 
cultural industries development fund. This year we will invest 
$200,000 in this exciting sector. Cultural industries include 
sound recording, book publishing, film and video, and 
commercial visual arts and crafts. These industries make a huge 
contribution to the cultural and economic development of our 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1600) 
 
Last year the province established annual funding of $1 million 
for SaskFILM, (Saskatchewan Film and Video Development 
Corporation) and introduced an employment tax credit for the 
film and video industry. The industry responded to these 
initiatives with spectacular growth in total production volume, 
from approximately $22 million in 1997 to over $50 million in 
1998, and they’re projecting between 70 and $80 million in this 
fiscal year upcoming, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And these are very high quality jobs. And we also have a 
component in the tax credit to encourage this activity to take 
place in rural areas by having the tax credit be 5 per cent higher 
if the activity takes place out of an urban area. And that has 
resulted in some considerable activity in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
The $200,000 cultural industries fund is primarily intended to 
address financial priorities in other segments of the cultural 
industry sector. The funding is intended to support projects 

designed to increase production capacity and promote 
self-reliance for sound recording, book publishing, and 
commercial visual arts and crafts. 
 
The people in these industries have already had a number of 
interesting advances. And one is, Mr. Speaker, that the 
members might find of interest, is using the Internet as a sales 
tool. For example a recording artist traditionally making a CD 
(compact disc) or an album would need to have an agent to 
have a marketing force. So out of a $20 CD the artist might end 
up getting a dollar. Now with CD-ROM they are able to market 
their product directly on the Internet. Potential clients can 
actually listen to a sampling of, if it’s music for example, and 
the artist ends up getting $15 out of the $20 CD instead of $1. 
So he can actually make a living. It doesn’t have to go platinum 
any more because he doesn’t have to sell a million to make a 
million dollars. He can make a good living selling much less 
because he gets to keep more of the proceeds. The artists get to 
keep more of the proceeds for themselves. 
 
So we have . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — But of course being a Saskatchewan 
artist they would sell more anyway. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Well yes, my colleague says being 
Saskatchewan artists they’ll sell more anyway. But we do have 
so much creative talent in this province and we do have access 
through SaskTel to the finest communications network in the 
world, and we are providing more and more opportunities for 
the citizens of this province and the creative artists of this 
province to use these tools to their economic advantage. It’s 
working very well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In the months to come, my department officials will work with 
representatives of the cultural industries’ associations to 
determine the most effective method of distributing these funds. 
This is a case where this is not a cost, Mr. Speaker, this is an 
investment in the time and talent of people in Saskatchewan. In 
the months to come the province will also be responding to a 
report on the cultural industry’s development strategy which 
they themselves, in the industry, have developed and made 
recommendations to us on how to develop the sector most 
productively. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that the people of Saskatchewan have 
much to look forward to as we approach the new millennium. I 
want to take a moment to thank the many communities, cultural 
organizations, and housing authorities that have waited 
patiently and supported the government as we work together to 
repair our province’s financial situation. 
 
I just want to expand on the role of the housing authorities a 
little bit, Mr. Speaker, because there’s so many things in this 
province that the examples of us working together and doing 
. . . approaching our challenges in absolutely unique ways that 
we don’t understand sometimes that — and appreciate — that 
in other provinces, other parts of the country and the world that 
people are not even aware of this approach. And one is our 
system of housing authorities where the Saskatchewan Housing 
Corporation while they own the portfolio — and incidentally 
also took responsibility for the federal portion of the housing 
portfolio when the feds decided in 1993 to get out of housing — 



March 29, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 315 

the housing portfolio consists of approximately 35,000 housing 
units, province-wide, in communities of every size including 
family housing, northern housing, seniors’ housing, and 
housing in places where there’s no real housing market but 
there’s still a need. 
 
And it’s managed not from the top down but by community 
volunteers who take sole responsibility on a volunteer basis for 
making the decisions for the management, the rentals, the 
maintenance, the renovation of the housing portfolio that’s in 
their community, and they do a wonderful job. Just recently 
within the last couple of weeks they had a provincial conference 
here where they come together once a year — this year it 
happened to be in Regina — and they exchange ideas with each 
other about how better to manage the portfolio. And there is no 
other province in Canada that has this kind of a system where 
local volunteers take the responsibility. And we are the envy of 
the public housing bodies in the rest of this country and all over 
North America, in the sensitive way that our housing portfolio 
is managed by people taking responsibility in their own 
community. And they do a wonderful job and we’re very 
grateful to them. 
 
Another example of something that’s entirely unique in our 
province that touches on my portfolio, Mr. Speaker, is the way 
the proceeds from the Western Canada Lottery Corporation are 
distributed to over 12,000 volunteer organizations in the 
province in the field of sport, recreation, and culture including 
multicultural activities. An example of this, Mr. Speaker, is a 
couple of years ago we had the national Canada seniors’ games 
here in Saskatchewan, in Regina. And one of the Maritime 
provinces — could have been any province actually — had sent 
a representative to the games to find out how we organized 
them and so forth because they were thinking of making a bid 
for a future event. 
 
And when they saw the sport . . . the system that we have in 
place funded by the lottery since 1971 for training coaches, for 
putting together facilities, for assisting community 
organizations in developing young people in these kind of 
activities, they were just astonished. They said they had 
absolutely nothing like that. 
 
And recently I was privileged to attend, along with 
Saskatchewan’s team of 300 young athletes, at the Canada 
Games in Corner Brook, Newfoundland. And I want to share 
with you, Mr. Speaker, that the people of Saskatchewan would 
have been very impressed with our young people. 
 
We have in our Department of Municipal Affairs, Culture and 
Housing a small core that we call the rec branch. They’re the 
people who coordinate the bids for games, the training of 
coaches, the putting together of the teams that go to these 
events in the province, in western Canada, and so on. 
 
And it’s a difficult thing, coaching young people in that age 
group. They’re exuberant and eager and so on. But I noticed at 
the opening ceremonies at Corner Brook, as the teams from the 
different provinces come in, you could just tell that some of the 
coaches had kind of said to their teams — there’s mostly about 
groups of 300 young people; some of them looked . . . were 
kind of just sitting there and waving little flags and looking kind 
of glum — and their coach had probably told them, now you 

just behave, you know, or else. You know how it is with . . . 
there are different ways of handling young people. 
 
And some of the groups from some of the provinces were 
almost over-exuberant: you know, they were doing cartwheels 
. . . (inaudible) . . . and almost out of control. And the 
Saskatchewan people — not just at the opening ceremonies, Mr. 
Speaker — they were so wholesome and so enthusiastic, but 
just the right amount of enthusiasm. 
 
And when they were out in the community . . . you know, I 
went for walks and into the stores and shops and so on and you 
could always pick out our athletes. Each province had different 
colour uniforms and so on. Ours were wearing apple green this 
year. And I saw them all over in the town, in the different 
venues in the town, in the athletes’ village, in the shopping 
malls, and everywhere. And the people . . . they did the people 
of Saskatchewan proud, Mr. Speaker. They did us all proud 
with their very good behaviour. They were wonderful 
ambassadors for the people of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — That’s one of the things that I wanted 
to share with you. When you hear, you know, negative things 
about young people, I think we have to focus on the positive 
and remember that we have very well-developed, very good and 
positive young people. And I couldn’t help, Mr. Speaker, 
looking at that group of 300 young ambassadors from this 
province, many miles away from home, many miles away from 
their relatives and supervisors and so forth, that still did us 
proud by their behaviour. And I couldn’t help but think that our 
future is in very good hands, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have all worked together to forge a path for growth and 
prosperity in our communities that will serve our children and 
grandchildren. That will be our legacy. And I think it will be a 
proud one. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I am proud of our government’s financial 
record and the agenda that we have developed which will 
strengthen our communities in the decade ahead. And for all 
these reasons and others that there’s not enough time to 
expound upon today, I will be very pleased and proud to stand 
in my place and support the budget. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I’m glad to have the opportunity to counter 
some of the comments that have been made today to do with the 
budget. But I did find a couple of bright spots and I should start 
by saying that here today. 
 
When the PST is lowered by 1 per cent I think we can only 
commend that. That’s the direction that we should be taking in 
this province, I think the problem being that it didn’t go near far 
enough. One per cent is great in the PST but I would have 
certainly liked to see some relief when it comes to income tax. 
 
We have many blue-collar workers out there that carry lunch 



316 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 1999 

pails to work that could have used the break. We have every 
person in this province that pays income tax, could have used 
that break. The 1 per cent PST will help but it certainly won’t 
start this economy rolling like we need it to roll as it is in 
Manitoba and Alberta, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I just might take a minute, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as we’ve heard 
a little rhetoric here this afternoon about how wonderful this 
budget is, what it’s going to do for our province is probably 
minimal compared to this. 
 
And it’s the write-up, and I believe it’s in the Leader-Post, 
Monday, March 29, and the headline is, “Manitoba economy 
appears to be on a roll.” And I’m sorry to say that’s not the 
same as in Saskatchewan, but I’d just like to make a couple of 
quotes out of here, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And they’re talking 
about Manitoba. 
 

The province has the lowest unemployment rate in the 
country and Winnipeg has among the lowest of the major 
cities, despite its poor ranking in the recent Globe and Mail 
story on the best places to work in Canada. 
 

So there’s a good and a bad with the city of Winnipeg, but the 
good is that it’s the lowest unemployment rate in the country in 
Manitoba. 
 
It goes on to say that: 
 

“There’s certainly truth to the unemployment numbers; the 
ranking things are inevitably partial,” says (Mr.) Cameron, 
a University of Manitoba professor. 
 

Goes on to say: 
 

“For three years in a row Manitoba’s economy has 
outperformed the national average . . .” 

 
This same province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we compare 
Saskatchewan to, who has less of everything than Saskatchewan 
does, and yet the headline says, “Manitoba economy appears to 
be on a roll.” 
 
It also goes on to say that: 
 

“The diversification of Manitoba’s economy will help to 
stave off the negative effects of resource sector weakness,” 
predicts Tim O’Neill, chief economist of the Bank of 
Montreal. 

 
(1615) 
 
Then I find that amazing, Mr. Speaker. What we hear the 
excuses across is that, well we blame the past government, we 
blame the federal government, and now we blame our own 
economy and agriculture for drawing us down. And yet 
Manitoba’s got that same farm economy. They don’t have 
potash, they don’t have near the oil, they don’t have near the 
resources we do in Saskatchewan; somehow they’re on a roll. 
 
And guess what? Number one, they’re trying to lower their 
taxes in Manitoba. In Alberta that roll is steamrolling because 
they’re really lowering their taxes. They’re outdoing 

Saskatchewan by leaps and bounds. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we don’t seem to be able to learn in 
this province that lower taxes will get the economy of this 
province rolling. Not high taxes, not the second highest in the 
country, but lowering the taxes, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That’s the 
only thing that’s going to help this economy get out of the 
doldrums in Saskatchewan and try and somewhat compete with 
our neighbours to the east and to the west. 
 
It goes on to say here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and this is I believe 
from the Premier of Manitoba: 
 

Things are so good that Premier Gary Filmon recently 
praised Ottawa for essentially giving Manitoba less money. 

 
Now isn’t that a contradiction, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for what 
the Minister of Economic Development made a couple of years 
ago when she said, we don’t want to get off . . . do any better in 
this province because we’ve have to go off the dole; we’d get 
less assistance from Ottawa. 
 
It’s an amazing comment for a minister to make of a 
government, that we want to stay on the welfare roll so we 
don’t want to do any better in this province. Amazing. When 
our neighbouring Premier said, wouldn’t it be great to get off 
the dole? 
 
He goes on to say: 
 

“Our strong revenue growth has resulted in reduced 
equalization payments from the federal government and I 
think that’s a good thing.” 

 
Well I do too. I wish the Minister of Economic Development 
shared our concerns. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to talk about this budget and 
agriculture and it probably won’t take long. Because in this 
budget there was absolutely nothing for agriculture. Nothing for 
our farmers in Saskatchewan. 
 
And for some strange reason, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the hundred 
and forty million dollars of farm aid was taken out of the ’98-99 
budget. Now I don’t know if that was to play games come 
election year now, so we could add a little more to the goody 
pot for those special interest groups and once again neglect 
agriculture. That’s probably what it must be. But it definitely 
didn’t put anything in this for agriculture. Absolutely nothing. 
 
We go to the farm aid package which we all know, the member 
for Indian Head over there who is a farmer and knows as well 
as I do that the farm aid package is inadequate; it’s 
conglomerated with details. Even now we hear, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that accountants are saying, the same accountants that 
may have to charge 800 to a thousand dollars to administer this 
program for the farmer, figure it out for him, are saying, we 
don’t even want to touch it because it’s so detailed that even we 
can’t understand the program. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when it comes to this budget, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and we talk about crop insurance, I notice in the 
budget for this year, $5 million less for crop insurance. Now 



March 29, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 317 

isn’t that funny. The Minister of Agriculture has said we’re 
reducing the premiums. What he neglected to say is at the same 
time they’re reducing the coverage. And at the same time 
you’re going to reduce the number of people in crop insurance, 
because it was close to a useless program before, if you reduce 
the coverage, it becomes a neutral program that will do 
absolutely nothing for the farming community. 
 
Administration costs, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a pet peeve of mine 
— one of the few things that was raised in the agriculture 
budget. Administration costs have gone up. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you might have seen this, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, Western Producer, March 25, ’99, part of the 
AIDA (Agricultural Insurance Disaster Assistance) program. 
And this is federal government, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but I 
thought you might find it interesting. 
 
It’s an ad for claims officers. I think they’re asking for 30 
claims officers to come out and deal with the farmers who 
naturally don’t understand the program because it’s about 25 
pages of bureaucratic nightmare. They also go on here, after the 
30 claims officers they want a manager of claims services. 
 
And the wages, I thought, Mr. Deputy Speaker, would be 
interesting to the farming community out there. For the claims 
officers they’re offering $38,809 to $41,949. Now that may not 
sound like a big wage to many in the province. But to every one 
of our farmers out there that are struggling to survive, they 
would gladly take that wage at the end of the year, gladly pay 
taxes on it, and the part they take home would look very good 
compared to what they’re taking home now, especially the ones 
that are worried about going under. 
 
The wage offered for the manager of claims services is $64,457 
to $69,765 per annum — another wage, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that probably four or five farm families could live on. And 
we’re wasting that money on a bureaucracy, on an already 
watered-down program that is bureaucratically driven, made up 
by bureaucrats in Ottawa who’ve probably never seen the east 
or the west end of a cow, have never been on a farm, and have 
no idea what kind of a program would be good for farmers. And 
this is what we see happening here, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Another thing that I think is lacking, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 
agriculture in this budget is once again, do we see a long-term 
strategy and a long-term program for agriculture in 
Saskatchewan? Since the GRIP (gross revenue insurance 
program) program was cancelled in 1992 I believe, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, when the provinces of Manitoba and Alberta had it for 
another couple of years, we’ve been promised by this 
government that we will see a long-term plan, a long-term aid 
plan in case of emergencies. And we have saw nothing yet. 
 
Once again there’s absolutely nothing for agriculture. And you 
know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what scares me the most is that this 
year has the potential to be far worse than last year. And are we 
going to be caught, or our farmers out there that are already in 
trouble, going to be caught under an AIDA program that is 
definitely insufficient to provide the funding help they may 
need this year? 
 
Now remember, we took money out of crop insurance, so we’re 

not prepared there. There’s going to be less money there. And 
you know, I guess what we could say if there’s a big problem in 
crop insurance, well the government will bail them out. But I 
don’t know how they plan on doing that when they only have 
an $8 million surplus. That doesn’t do much bailing out. And 
crop insurance is only one area that may need help, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
The Finance minister said in his comments when he was 
presenting the budget, and I found this really noticeable, that we 
are standing behind our farmers. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 
would think he’d be glad to be behind them because if he was in 
front of most of them right now he’d probably be ran over, 
because he’s not a very popular camper out there in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to go on to talk about municipal 
government. And the Minister of Municipal Affairs just spoke 
and made some interesting comments, but I notice the one thing 
here I think municipal governments would kind of get a little 
chuckle out of because what we see is smoke and mirrors 
coming out of the minister once again. 
 
She had made the statement that this year we’re going to put 
$4.1 million into policing costs. And I commend her for that. 
That’s good. I think we were all happy to see that last year. But 
she’s announced it as if this is new money compared to last 
year. Well last year was a million for three months. Now if my 
mathematics works right, four times that would be $4 million. 
So we announced absolutely nothing new. We announced the 
same program over again that we had last year. 
 
So I don’t think that’s going to impress too many municipalities 
out there that already knew what they were getting. 
 
What we did see in the budget for this year, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is $10 million for municipal government. Now let’s 
see how that’s watered down because I think we’re seeing a 
little smoke and mirrors here again. And the minister today said 
seven and a half million for urban government, 2 million for 
rural municipalities, and a half a million — if I heard her right 
— for northern Saskatchewan. Well that’s all well and good, 
but now that’s cost shared, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Now I am a farmer and I’m a past reeve, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and a number of farmers on that side are MLAs. Think about 
that. We’re going to put money into rural municipal 
government — $2 million, which is a drop in the bucket, isn’t 
going to build many roads — but we won’t do that unless they 
cost share. 
 
Now how do they cost share? They cost share by raising their 
tax load because that government has cut municipal government 
to the bone since 1991. They have nowhere else. They have no 
extra money sitting there. They have one choice. To raise their 
share of the 2 million that’s going to rural Saskatchewan for 
roads, they’ve got to put their mill rate up. The last thing that 
farmers in trouble out there in Saskatchewan need is their 
municipal taxes raised. 
 
Now we can go on about that forever, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 
see all the problems that’s going to cause. But that’s not the end 
of the it. What we saw . . . And one of the members here today 



318 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 1999 

was bragging about all the money they put into education this 
year. 
 
Well I believe if I’m reading the numbers right, they put about 
$13 million more into education. That works out to about half 
of what the SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees Association) 
was asking for just to run the status quo. Just to stay exactly 
where they were, I believe they needed about $22 million. 
 
What does that tell us, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for our farmers out 
there in Saskatchewan. It tells me one thing. Another . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Another tax hike. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — The member from Moosomin’s right — 
another tax hike. Because the school divisions have no choice 
but to pass it on. How do they pass it on? They raise their mill 
rate; pass it on to the local farmer out there who’s struggling to 
make ends meet. 
 
Now he’s not only already in trouble; now he’s got more taxes 
to pay. And I don’t think 1 per cent PST is going to anywhere 
counteract what the local taxes are going to jump out there 
when they have to do their budgets right away and wait for this 
budget to come through and see what it’s really going to do for 
them. I think they’re going to be totally, totally disappointed. 
 
In fact, I think a comment made the other day by Sinclair 
Harrison, the president of SARM, who said it’s a dark day for 
rural Saskatchewan. I think he would get a lot of support out in 
rural Saskatchewan for that comment. What also adds — and 
I’m sure the Minister of Municipal Government would agree 
with me — is that reassessment has already shifted the 
education tax, a good degree of it, from small communities to 
farmland. And that is also working through the system to jump 
our taxes out in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
So it’s just another one of those things, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that’s costing thousands of dollars for our farmers out there, 
picking up a bigger part of the load. And the funny part, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, when you think about it, is that out in my area, 
and I think many areas in this province, we have less kids out 
there that are going to school, because the population’s 
dropping; we have less people to pick up the tab. And yet we’re 
asking them to pay a bigger share of our education tax. 
Somewhere we’ve gone wrong, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s no 
wonder that SARM continually lobbies to get education tax off 
the property. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to just talk for a minute on 
balanced budget. Because I talked about smoke and mirrors 
here before and I think, man, this is the winner of them all. 
Let’s go back to last year’s budget. 
 
Now I’m not a mathematician but I don’t think you have to be 
to take a look at these numbers and figure this out. Last year, if 
I read the numbers right, actually the government was short 
about $350 million, if they count just what they took in in 
general revenue to what they spent. It looked to me like they’d 
spent about 350 million more than they took in. 
 
They sold the upgrader. The balance of that money came in to 
cover them. There’s a number of things — Liquor and Gaming 

money, extra money they pulled out of there that wasn’t 
budgeted. So really when you think about that, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that’s a deficit budget. That’s not a balanced budget. 
It’s smoke and mirrors to tell the public . . . well, what? — this 
is the sixth budget we’ve balanced? Well you didn’t balance 
last year’s. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, let’s take a look at this year’s. Unless I’m 
not reading it right, we have another deficit budget, because 
we’re taking about 200 million more out of Liquor and Gaming 
that will come in this year. Well, now how does that work? If 
you’re spending more than you have coming in in general 
revenue at the end of it, you’re not balancing your books. I 
mean, you can tell the public as many times as you want you’re 
balancing the books. When it comes right down to it, you’re not 
being honest with the public. 
 
Tell them the way it is. We’re running a deficit of at least a 
couple of hundred million dollars. What you’re telling them is, 
we have a big surplus of $8 million. Well that’s going to go a 
long way if you go over budget again this year like you did last 
year — $350 million. That would mean to me you’d be about 
another 342 million short. 
 
So you can brag all you want around this province, but it’s not 
going to fly. People are not going to believe you. 
 
We had a rainy day fund in this province, liquor and gaming 
money. After this budget, what’s going to be left in that? I 
believe $89 million. Where did that money go from, disappear 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well the Minister of Municipal 
Government says you don’t need a rainy day fund. What do you 
need that for, we just spent that . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
You did. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, they spent pretty well all the rainy day 
fund. Now they’re admitting it. It was 400-and-some million 
and now it’s pretty well gone. Now where did it go if you’ve 
been balancing the books? You haven’t been balancing the 
books. 
 
And Mr. Deputy Speaker, this hasn’t just happened this year. 
Go back about three years when we had the Cameco shares. 
And we used that to kind of bail . . . they used that to bail 
themselves out. Then I believe it was Wascana Energy. Now 
this year we’re using the upgrader money. 
 
And then we go on and in every speech over there we hear 
about this fantastic debt that was built up. Well let’s talk about 
that. And I agree with them. There is a tremendous debt built up 
in the 80s in this province. Didn’t start just then, though. There 
happened to be a little bit in the Blakeney era after we’d gone 
through the best times that this province had ever seen. There 
was a large, possibly —what? — 5 billion, 8 billion? We don’t 
know. It’s somewhere in there. 
 
(1630) 
 
Let’s talk about the debt when you people came to power. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, when this government came to power — and 
I’m not talking about the debt they like to talk about now; I like 
to talk about the combined debt: unfunded pensions, every part 
of the debt, the Crowns, the revenue — everything added 



March 29, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 319 

together, when that government came to power, was $17.5 
billion. Do you know what it is today? Today it’s $18.5 billion. 
That’s a billion dollars more than it was seven years ago when 
you people came to power. 
 
What you do is you use the numbers that are convenient for the 
cause. And what you should do, what you should do is actually 
tell the public the truth. Smoke and mirrors doesn’t do it. The 
people of Saskatchewan have paid the second highest taxes in 
this country, and I think they deserve to be told the exact truth 
out there of what is really going on with our economy, with the 
funds in this province, and smoke and mirrors doesn’t do it. 
 
Another myth that I think we heard in the budget the other day 
was the same one that we’ve been hearing thrown around quite 
a bit lately — it must be an election coming — 30,000 jobs. 
Now I believe if I remember right that was a promise made a 
number of years ago by that government over there. We’re 
going to create 30,000 jobs, and it’s an election year. So I guess 
the feeling over there was, we better tell the public once again 
we created them jobs. It doesn’t matter whether we did it, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, just tell them. They’ll believe us. That same 
old myth. Trust me. Well I don’t think that one’s going to fly. 
 
January of last year to January of this year Saskatchewan lost 
4,900 jobs. Now if you’ve created all these jobs how many did 
you lose then? Because if my figuring works out right you’ve 
might have created — I’ll give you the benefit of the doubt — 
about 20, 21,000 jobs over that period. That looks to me to be 9 
or 10,000 short. Once again, we have a little bit of problem with 
numbers over there. 
 
It’s very familiar to the problem they have in BC (British 
Columbia) and that happens to be also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, an 
NDP government. They have a lot of problems out there. Every 
time they go to talk about their balanced budget it seems to get 
away on them. 
 
See out in BC, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they also don’t have a 
balanced budget. Except out there it sneaks out on them. I think 
they were going to have, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a deficit of — 
what? — $95 million? And then Mr. Clark now has finally 
come out with that it’s closer to 500 million. There’re some 
similarities between BC and Saskatchewan. In fact there’s more 
and more all the time. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to touch on just briefly on health 
care because I know my counterpart from Cannington and 
others will be talking on it. But I just wonder. We talk about 
we’re putting in, I believe it was 1.72 billion, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, last year. This year we’re putting in $1.9 billion. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, what’s neglected . . . And I compliment the 
government for doing this. If we see it end up in health care, 
that’s fine. But what they’re neglecting to tell the public in 
Saskatchewan is — and I think a lot of the public already 
realize this — is that a good part of that is federal money. 
That’s not all out of the government revenues of Saskatchewan. 
 
I think we can thank Mr. Chrétien and the federal government. I 
think we can thank they very much for this because it’s money 
badly needed in health care, but it’s helping bail this 
government out of their mismanagement. 
 

I hope, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we see some of this money get 
out there. We’re told that it’s going to go for front-line workers, 
for nurses, other front-line workers, LPNs, (licensed practical 
nurse) and people like that. 
 
But you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, out in my area I think the 
biggest problem is there’s just not nurses here. We closed all 
these hospitals. The government closed — what? — 53 
hospitals. You know, it was like the member said across there; 
he was talking about Saskatchewan Party today and saying, 
zap! Well, I would say zap over there to 53 hospitals. 
 
Now what we see, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the Associate 
Minister of Health saying, well she said, the Saskatchewan 
Party really is deceiving the public because it’s not 36 hospitals 
that are going to close, it’s more like 13 to 15. Well it might be 
around 14. 
 
Well I would suggest, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 14 even is far 
too many hospitals to lose in rural Saskatchewan. I honestly 
believe . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — We won’t have any left. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Yes, we won’t have any left. Pretty soon 
we won’t have to worry about you closing any more — you’ll 
have closed them all. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I honestly believe that 36 hospitals that 
they’re talking about closing that’s going around, I don’t think 
that was supposed to leak out before the election. Because I 
remember in ’91, I can never remember hearing one word about 
a hospital going to close after the election. Not one word out of 
those people’s lips on the other side was about we’ll close any 
hospital. So when I hear rumours about 36 more hospitals 
closing, it really scares me, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Because with 
this government, it always seems to come true when it’s to 
losing things in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to speak for a moment — and I 
haven’t seen anything and I hope some of the health care 
funding will end up for this — but the renal dialysis unit in 
Yorkton, Mr. Deputy Speaker, where we have a unit, but 
because of lack of funding it isn’t up and running full speed; it’s 
only running part time. The people are there, they’re trained to 
run it, but guess what? Through lack of funding they can only 
work part-time on the renal dialysis unit. 
 
So in my area, the member for Canora’s area, the member from 
Moosomin’s area, all around that — Melville, the member for 
Melville’s area, Mr. Deputy Speaker — we all have people who 
would go to Yorkton, use the Yorkton renal dialysis unit. But 
because of our two-tier health system in Saskatchewan, 20 out 
of the 28 right now have to drive to Regina. 
 
Now something’s wrong with this picture, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
If we can afford to run the unit in Regina, why can’t we transfer 
this money to Yorkton to the East Central Health District and 
run it out there? But no, because this government wants 
everything in the city of Regina and Saskatoon, that isn’t even 
being considered. Well I hope when this new money for health 
care comes into being, that we see something addressing the 
issue with the renal dialysis in the East Central Health District. 



320 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 1999 

I would also like to see too . . . and by the way, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, speaking of the East Central Health District, I think 
they would like to see some of the money address the $13 
million debt they have out there — $3 million deficit again this 
year built up because of the funding of this government and the 
cutbacks to the health districts. And then at the same time, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, we turn around and blame the health boards 
for the decisions that are made out there. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, another area that we keep getting 
complaints about, and the cost is rising, is ambulance costs. I 
think the member for Canora brought an issue the other day that 
. . . about transferring people from the city hospitals back out to 
our areas, which there’s nothing wrong with; but when you’re 
from rural Saskatchewan it’s a cost that you pay that people in 
the cities don’t have to pay. They have the luxury of not picking 
that up, and once again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re talking 
two-tier health — whether you live in rural Saskatchewan or 
urban Saskatchewan. 
 
So it’s an example, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I hope we can 
address. Some of the bills for ambulance costs, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker — and I’m sure it’s been brought to your attention, 
you’re an rural MLA — up to 1,000, $1,100, I’ve had in my 
area. Ambulance rides into the city here, and that’s just an 
example of some of the things we have to pay for that are taken 
for granted in the city of Regina. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, you know, one of the members across in 
his speech earlier said that he’s just amazed. This is just a 
fantastic budget, he’s impressed. Well I looked around in the 
last couple of days in the paper, and everywhere else, checked 
in my constituency and I tried to find somebody out there that’s 
really happy with this budget. 
 
And I read, the chamber of commerce— are they happy with 
this budget? No. Taxpayers’ association, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
are they impressed with this budget? No. The Canadian 
Federation of Independent Business, are they happy? No. 
SARM — “black day for rural Saskatchewan” — Sinclair 
Harrison, are they happy? No. The nurses even, all over 
Saskatchewan, are they happy what they saw in the budget? No. 
Farmers, farmers a good example, are the farmers happy? 
Absolutely not. 
 
And then this morning, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I read a poll done 
by Leader-Star Services in the city here. And it’s a poll where 
you phone in and actually it represents taxpayers of this 
province saying, are we happy, are we not with this budget? 
And the funny part was — and this was in the city of Regina, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, but you could phone in from outside — 48 
per cent said they liked the budget, but 52 per cent didn’t. 
That’s right here, heartland of NDP country, and you still don’t 
like the budget. 
 
Now I looked hard to find somebody that liked the budget. Well 
the members opposite are told they will like it or else, so I could 
understand that. But the Leader of the Third Party, it’s amazing, 
Jim Melenchuk says this is a pretty good budget except we 
should sell some of the Crowns. 
 
Now that’s amazing coming out of the Leader of the Third 
Party. I mean you can’t have it both ways. He’s going to bring 

in lots of legislation pertaining to the unions and now he’s 
turned around and he selling the Crowns out from under them. I 
wonder how he’s going to explain that to those people when 
he’s looking for their vote in this election. 
 
I also find it’s really interesting, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when it 
comes to the Associate Minister of Health’s son. And he’s 
speaking on behalf of university students, and he’s not happy 
with the budget. And if that wasn’t enough, the Minister of 
Economic Development’s husband, president of the U of S 
(University of Saskatchewan) said he is not happy with the 
budget. 
 
So you know what? There’s about 40 members over there that 
seem to be happy with the budget, and Mr. Melenchuk is happy 
with the budget. That’s less than 50 out of a million people that 
are impressed with this budget. I don’t think I’d be going to the 
polls with that one, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, another area that’s really important out in 
the Saltcoats constituency and many other rural constituencies 
is highways. And the member from Moosomin, our highways 
critic, is going to talk in-depth on this. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we heard the minister for Carrot 
River when he was Highways minister make the big 
announcement, we’re going to put 250 million a year into 
highways. And I find that an amazing comment, considering 
you put 208 million in — the government did — 218 million 
last year, I believe, and now this year we’re putting in, what, 
235. 
 
Well once again, if I use my calculator, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
I’d say, in the first three years that government is about $80 
million short of its commitment to highways. Now the minister, 
the Minister, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of Finance said, well — I 
think I heard him right — he said, well we’re catch her up in the 
last year. We’ll fix her up in the tenth year. 
 
Well once again, if my numbers work out right, he’s going to 
need about $600 million in the last year. I guess the thing that’s 
going to save him, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that government will 
be over here in opposition, if they survive the election at all, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. We will have to honour their commitment, 
and we’ll honour it with a lot more than they had promised to 
put in originally because we know how bad highways are in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know the members opposite would 
like me to go on — they’re totally impressed with my speech — 
but because other members would like to speak, I’ll leave it like 
that. But as you can see, I’m not impressed with the budget, and 
I know all my constituents are not impressed with the budget. 
Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Now, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I want this to be a quiet, calm, measured 
response to the budget. I am not in a particularly pugilistic 
mood today. So I am going to attempt as much as possible to 
ignore the cackling and jeering from the members opposite. 
 
I am very pleased though that there is a full House here today 
and I hope that they will listen spellbound to my every word. 



March 29, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 321 

But I’m not really expecting it, Mr. Deputy Speaker. If they 
choose to remain silent or even to leave, that’s quite fine by me. 
But what I want to do is just give a very calm, measured, quiet 
response to the budget. And I will probably be speaking until 
well past the hour of 5 o’clock. So I look forward to having all 
the members coming back at 7 o’clock so that we can continue 
this very thrilling debate. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what I wish to do for the next 15 
minutes or so, and then probably for half an hour or longer after 
7 o’clock, when I’m sure all the members opposite will be back 
to listen and to engage in the debate that this House is so 
famous for, what I want to do is first of all start out my speech 
by reflecting back a bit on the last eight years. Because, Mr. 
Speaker, we have had two, almost two full terms as a 
government under the Premier, the member from Riversdale. 
And I believe that we have done many things of which we can 
be justly proud, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we were elected in 1991, none of us 
really I think realized the true awesomeness nor awfulness of 
the situation. We knew that the previous government had been 
busy selling off or giving away the assets of the people of 
Saskatchewan. We knew that they had been on a spending spree 
and mortgaging our children’s future. What we did not realize, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, was the extent of that mortgage of the 
future. We thought perhaps it was our children’s future they’d 
mortgaged. What we discovered, was that they had mortgaged 
not only our children’s future but our grandchildren’s future. 
 
(1645) 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I decided to run for the New 
Democrats, having spent 12 years on city council. And as I said 
to people as I went door-to-door in ’91 knowing that it would 
be a difficult situation, people said to me well what are you 
promising us? What will you do for us? 
 
And I said it’s fairly simple, Mr. Deputy Speaker. If there’s one 
thing I’ve learned from 12 years on Saskatoon city council it’s 
the ability to say no, and that is what is needed now. We need to 
know how to say no to the unrealistic expectations that the 
former government, the Devine government, had created in the 
electorate. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when we took office we discovered a 
horrendous debt, almost $15 billion. 
 
An Hon. Member: — How much? 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Fifteen billion dollars. That is on the government 
side and the Crown side — $15 billion debt in a province of one 
million people. One million people who are good, responsible, 
accountable citizens; people who pride themselves on their 
willingness to pay their bills, on their ability not to be in debt. 
 
Instead what did we have? Profligate governments that had 
basically spent us into the poor house, mortgaged our children’s 
future and our grandchildren’s future. The government was 
running deficits — $1.2 billion deficit when we took office. 
And what were we going to do, Mr. Deputy Speaker? We were 
dealing with debt, deficits, and disappointments. Because by 
that point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan 

were thoroughly fed up, thoroughly tired of the way 
government was being run. 
 
So we knew that we had to take firm and hard action. We did. 
And I have to say that the reason we were able to take that firm 
and hard action was because of the firm resolve, the moral 
purpose, of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Lorje: — The people of Saskatchewan knew that 
something firm had to be done. They knew that things had to 
change. They knew that drastic measures were called for. 
 
In our caucus in November and December of ’91, 
January-February ’92, the debate never was should we do 
anything about the deficit. The debate was always how quickly 
should we tackle the deficit because we were looking at a $1.2 
billion deficit, and we knew that that could cause major 
problems to the Saskatchewan economy if we reversed it like 
that — overnight. 
 
So we had several spirited arguments and debates about how 
quickly we should bring down the deficit. And I believe in our 
first year we chose that we would bring it down to $600 million. 
And then we further decreased it the next year, and the next 
year, until we were finally able to bring in a balanced budget. 
 
And I am very pleased and proud of the Finance minister of the 
day when she was able to stand in this House and announce that 
Saskatchewan would be the first, the very first provincial 
government in the whole Dominion of Canada to bring in a 
balanced budget. That was a red-letter day, a banner day, for the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
We had all pulled together — the million souls that make up 
this province — with a sense of common purpose. We pulled 
together the Saskatchewan way so that we would have a future 
for our children and our grandchildren. 
 
The budget was balanced five years ago, and I am very proud 
that the member for Saskatoon Idylwyld, the current Finance 
minister, just on Friday in this House was able to bring in the 
sixth consecutive balanced budget in this province. 
 
What we find is that we can be very proud of this budget. We 
can be proud of the modest tax cuts. We can be proud of the 
increased spending on health care, education, and highways. 
And we can have pride most of all, Mr. Speaker, in the fact that 
we are continuing in debt repayment so that our children and 
our grandchildren will be able to live without the burden of the 
debt from the ‘80s. 
 
Now the budget that we’re dealing with and debating here today 
in this House, Mr. Speaker, is a good one. But the opposition is 
trying to convince people to jump back into that individualistic, 
it’s-all-me, I’m-all-right-Jack, 
now-the-rest-of-you-shove-off-the-lifeboat mentality; trying to 
convince people that they should pit farmers against city 
people, university people against business people, and the list 
goes on. 
 
They’re playing divisive politics so that people will slide into 



322 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 1999 

what we see in most of the rest of the jurisdictions in North 
America, this individualistic mentality. That all that counts is 
what’s in it for me, and we don’t care about a sense of 
collective purpose, a sense of commonality, a sense of 
co-operation, or collegiality. 
 
They’d like everyone to ignore the very real and positive 
measures that are in this budget, measures like a 1 per cent drop 
in the sales tax. Now I suppose, if you look at it greedily and 
only on the basis of a few small individual purchases, you 
might say, well what’s 1 per cent anyway? It doesn’t matter — 
you know, I buy something for a hundred bucks, I’m not going 
to save very much. What do I care about a small drop in the 
sales tax? 
 
But what we have to bear in mind is that that is a 33 per cent 
drop in sales tax since 1996. We are very significantly on the 
sales tax measures, Mr. Speaker, going in the right direction. 
 
We also see a modest drop in income tax. And I . . . You know, 
the members opposite gloss over the income tax drop. They 
would have the people of Saskatchewan believe that the devil 
made us do it — a.k.a. (also known as) the federal government. 
But quite frankly we had choices, Mr. Speaker. We had choices, 
and we chose to bring in both a drop in sales tax, and a drop in 
income tax and I think that we should be proud of that. We 
don’t have to run and hide and pretend that there aren’t tax cut 
measures in this budget because there are significant tax cut 
measures. As well there is continued debt repayment. 
 
And I have to say, Mr. Speaker, that I feel very passionately 
about this. We do have to pay off that debt. It is not acceptable 
from my point of view that we should simply let nature take its 
course and wait and continue with a modest debt repayment 
year by year so that maybe in 60, 70, or 80 years the province is 
debt-free. No, Mr. Speaker, I firmly believe that what we need 
to do is continue as we have been doing for these last five or six 
years, paying off debt as quickly as we can. 
 
I would remind the members opposite — and I’m sure that they 
would like to forget this but here’s another of those little 
inconvenient facts brought to you by a New Democrat 
government — this little inconvenient fact is that we have taken 
the $15 billion debt . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. The Chair welcomes the 
enthusiasm of hon. members for the subject of the debate, but 
also encourages all hon. members to put their remarks on the 
record at the appropriate time. And in the meantime, if you’ll 
allow the hon. member from Saskatoon Southeast to continue in 
an unabated kind of way. 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I do appreciate your 
intervention. The chirping from the members opposite was 
becoming . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Now, the hon. member 
recognizes of course, that it’s just not appropriate to be 
commenting on the Chair’s rulings and I’m sure that she’ll just 
want to proceed with her debate. 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Thank you again, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
before you stood to your feet I was talking about an 

inconvenient fact that the members opposite would like the 
people of Saskatchewan to ignore. And what is that 
inconvenient fact? That inconvenient fact is that this New 
Democratic government has reduced our debt from the $15 
billion that they handed us after they said, we’ve had our little 
circus parade and now somebody else can clean up after the 
circus animals; we have reduced it down to $11.6 billion. We 
have made major strides in debt repayment. 
 
We will continue that debt repayment, Mr. Speaker, because as 
we said when we went to the polls in 1995, what we plan to do, 
and what we sought endorsement from the people of 
Saskatchewan for, was a balanced approach to government. 
That balanced approach being, that when we have surpluses, 
one-third will go to debt repayment, one-third to tax reductions, 
and one-third to program enhancements. 
 
And those program enhancements, Mr. Speaker, are the third 
part of this very fine budget. I already mentioned the tax 
decreases — the 1 per cent sales tax and the income tax together 
with various measures to stimulate jobs and the economy. I’ve 
mentioned very briefly the debt repayment. 
 
We also, Mr. Speaker, are seeing increased spending for the 
things that matter to the people of Saskatchewan. Increased 
spending in health care, particularly to reduce waiting lists, to 
allow us to be prepared for the Year 2000 — that’s next year, 
ooh, we have to get busy and get those computers programmed 
real quick. Money for improved cancer treatment for women’s 
health care, and most particularly, money for the front line 
workers, the people who day to day see patients whether it’s in 
hospitals or home care, see them at their worst and deal with 
them in the best possible manner. 
 
Our health care workers in this province, Mr. Speaker, are to be 
commended. They do very, very difficult jobs and we all, I’m 
sure, on all side of the House, value the very fine work that they 
do. So I am particularly pleased that this budget does have 
increased money in it to recognize in a very tangible way the 
work that they do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as well as increased spending on health, we see 
increased spending on education and increased spending on 
highways. Now what are the things, if any of the members 
opposite do bother going out door to door, which I somehow 
doubt because I didn’t sense a great deal of consultation on their 
part before they decided to jump ship and deep six the old Tory 
Party and jettison the Liberal Party. I don’t know that they went 
out and did a lot of door to door consultation on this, this little 
manoeuvre. 
 
But if they did bother to consult with their constituents, what do 
you think, Mr. Speaker, are the things that they would be 
saying? They would be saying — as we all full well know — 
please, we want increased spending in health care, increased 
spending in education, and increased spending on highways. 
Those three priorities are the priorities of the people of 
Saskatchewan, and they are the priorities in this very fine 
budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Lorje: — But what do the members do? Instead they’re 



March 29, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 323 

going out and they’re saying, oh ignore all that good stuff — 
ignore it all; it doesn’t make a bit of difference. What we really 
want you to say is, ask your NDP MLA — that’s fine. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. It now being 5 o’clock, this 
House stands recessed until 7 o’clock p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 

 


