





























































Hansard: May 06, 1999


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1097 
 May 6, 1999 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have petitions 
today to present on behalf of many, many rural residents in 
Saskatchewan and city ones. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately start work on the rebuilding of our secondary 
highway system to provide for safe driving on what are 
becoming known as pothole roads, to enter into 
negotiations with SARM and SUMA for a longer term plan 
of rural road restitution reflecting future needs, and to 
provide safety for all drivers as the new trucking 
regulations change safety factors on those roads. 
 

The communities involved, Mr. Speaker, of all these petitions 
are many: Kinistino, Birch Hills, Meskanaw, Crystal Springs, 
Yellow Creek, Wakaw, Prince Albert, Balgonie, Edenwold, 
Abbey, Lancer, Meath Park, Albertville, Christopher Lake, 
Paddockwood, Canwood, Northside, Fillmore, Osage, Forget, 
Landis, Earl Grey, Bulyea, Craven, Silton, Southey, Consul, 
Robsart, Nokomis, Raymore, Saskatoon, Watrous, Imperial, 
Govan, Simpson, Coleville, Kindersley, Stewart Valley, 
Success, Swift Current, Eastend, Shaunavon, Dollard, Golden 
Prairie, Maple Creek, Ogema, Punnichy, Quinton, Wynyard, 
Grayson, Broadview, Dubuc, Melville, Richmound, Conquest, 
Outlook, Glenside, Okla, Lintlaw, Rockford, Invermay, 
Preeceville, Frontier, Weyburn, Yellow Grass, Cupar, 
Markinch, Regina, Sedley, Gravelbourg, Bateman, Stoughton, 
Lake Alma, Gladmar, McTaggart, Beaubier, Lucky Lake, 
Elrose, Limerick, Mankota, Aneroid, Glenbain, Hodgeville, 
Vanguard, Marengo, Alsask, Carlyle, Manor, Luseland, Major, 
Kerrobert, Lafleche, Woodrow, Leader, Prelate, Tisdale, 
Gainsborough, Carievale, Carnduff, Alida, Redvers, Storthoaks, 
Govan, Duval, Hudson Bay, and Lampman, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As well to present 
petitions in regards to the Crown Construction Tendering 
Agreement. Reading the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to end 
its unfair tendering policies and immediately cancel the 
Crown Construction Tendering Agreement. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petitions I present today are signed by 
individuals from the communities of Regina, Saskatoon, 
Lumsden, Warman, and many other communities in the 
province of Saskatchewan. I so present. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise on 
behalf of rural citizens of this province. And the prayer reads: 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call upon provincial and 
federal governments to immediately take steps to end 
unfair world subsidies and provide farmers with prompt 
relief from declining incomes and act as watchdogs against 
rising input costs which are harming the rural economy. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petitioners, a lot of them, although not on this 
signature, come from those communities that the member from 
Saltcoats had mentioned, and also Killaly, Melville, and 
Fenwood. I so present. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again this afternoon 
I have petitions from residents of the Northwest asking that the 
congested and unsafe entrance to the city of North Battleford be 
changed to make for safer driving conditions on the entrance of 
Highways 40 and 16 to the entrance of North Battleford. 
 
Requesting that this: 
 

Hon. Assembly may be pleased to relocate Highway 40 in 
order to alleviate the congestion at the entrance to the city. 

 
The petitioners are from the Battlefords, Mayfair, and Cochin. I 
so present. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
bring forward petitions from the good people in the southwest 
part of the province. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call upon the provincial 
government and SaskTel being wholly accountable to the 
people of Saskatchewan to immediately take steps to 
provide cellular coverage to this area so that residents can 
travel in winter with some assurance of safety. 

 
As in duty bound your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, all of the people that have signed these petitions 
are from Coronach. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 
petitions on behalf of citizens that are concerned about the state 
of our highway system in the province. The prayer reads as 
follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call on federal and provincial 
governments to dedicate a significantly greater portion of 
fuel tax revenues towards road maintenance and 
construction so Saskatchewan residents may have a safe 
highway system that meets their needs. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Those who’ve signed these petitions come from communities 
across southern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, such as Gull Lake, 



1098 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1999 

Shaunavon, Maple Creek, Tompkins, Eastend, Cabri, just to 
name a few. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the petitions received at the last 
sitting have been reviewed and found to be in order. Pursuant to 
rule 12(7) these petitions are hereby received. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you and to all members in the 
House two individuals. First of all a gentleman seated in the 
east gallery, a gentleman from Regina here; his name Terry 
Wall. Terry is the recently nominated candidate for the 
Saskatchewan Party in the constituency of Regina Victoria. Not 
only do we soon . . . seated not only in the gallery but soon to 
be seated on the floor on that side of the House as well. 
 
I’d also like to introduce a gentleman that I recognize in the 
front row of your gallery, Mr. Speaker, a gentleman from my 
constituency, Mr. Orest Mysak. 
 
I’d like everyone to recognize these two gentlemen. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
to introduce one of my constituents who is here from Regina 
Lakeview, Mr. Bill Dowhaniuk who is sitting up in the first row 
of the Speaker’s gallery. 
 
I’ve made a special point of introducing him because many of 
you who travel on Regina Avenue between the legislature and 
the airport will notice a yard with the best and most beautiful 
flowers in Regina. And those are Bill Dowhaniuk’s work. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce 
to you and to members of the House that good looking group of 
42 young students from Vicker’s School in Prince Albert — not 
only good looking, Mr. Speaker, but intelligent as well. 
 
I will meeting with them this afternoon, and we’ll have drinks. 
And I want to mention that they are here with the 
accompaniment of three teachers from Prince Albert from 
Vicker’s School, Mr. Dave Monette, Mr. Kirk Baird, Ms. Linda 
Franc. 
 
And I would ask all members to give them a warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I 
would also like to extend a welcome to a long-lost but 
shirt-sleeve relative of mine who has already been introduced, 
Mr. Orest Mysak. Good to see you here, Orest. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour 
today to stand and introduce to the Assembly here some 28 
students from the grade 4 and 5 class, sitting in the east gallery. 
They’re from Fox Valley School. And they are with their 
teacher, Nicole Stein. And I’d welcome them here today and 
hope they enjoy the proceedings in watching this. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
on behalf of the member from Rosetown-Biggar to introduce a 
group of 34 grade 8 students sitting in your gallery from 
Rosetown Central High School, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I think most members of the Chamber have been to 
Rosetown Central High School because we’ve held some 
caucus meetings there. And I must say it is a very beautiful 
school — it really is a nice school, Mr. Speaker — with a nice 
group of students. And we welcome them to the legislature here 
today. 
 
And they are accompanied by teachers, Richard Barezowski 
and Melody Newman, as well as my cousin, Mr. Speaker, 
Norman Cline, who I believe is acting as the principal of 
Rosetown school at the moment and is normally the 
vice-principal. And also the bus driver, Lawrence Klemmer, is 
here too, and if I may be permitted to say so, Norman’s son, 
who’s my second cousin, Elliott Cline, is here too. 
 
And these students and teachers will be having a tour of the 
building, Mr. Speaker, as well as a meeting with the member 
from Regina Qu’Appelle. I would like to meet with them but 
I’ll be in Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And if I may be permitted to say just one more thing. You 
know, I just want to say that my cousin Norman became a 
teacher whereas I became a lawyer and politician, Mr. Speaker, 
and our family is very proud of Norman, and we welcome him 
here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you, Mr. Speaker, 
and to the Assembly, I’d like to introduce a member of our staff 
from the official opposition. And it’s little wonder why the 
official opposition does as well as it does in the House when we 
have staff like the member sitting up in the gallery, Ms. 
Adrienne Batra. She’s a very accomplished young lady, speaks 
a number of languages, and she had a very distinguished career 
with the armed services here in Canada, Mr. Speaker. So I 
would caution people to be careful — she knows how to drive a 
tank. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all members to welcome Adrienne to the 
Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Public Health Care System 
 

Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, it would be a sad legacy to witness 



May 6, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 1099 

the demise of the public health care system in a province where 
it was first given birth. Those are the words of Dr. Peter 
Kapusta, president of the college of family physicians, a body 
which represents over 400 Saskatchewan doctors. 
 
Dr. Kapusta goes on to say that the government’s treatment of 
our nurses is, and I quote: 
 

But a symptom of the failing health of Saskatchewan’s 
health system. As with many health care issues, there has 
been little pro-active management for problems that have 
existed for sometime, and little action is taken until a crisis 
eventually emerges. 

 
Mr. Speaker, Dr. Kapusta says that Saskatchewan people are 
suffering the NDP’s (New Democratic Party), and I quote 
again: 
 

Short-sighted health care policies and the increasing 
surgical lists, restriction of access to diagnostic and 
therapeutic services, and chronic deficiencies in home care. 

 
Worse yet, he predicts a physician shortage that will soon 
become critical. 
 
There it is, Mr. Speaker — the NDP record on health care from 
those on the front line. It’s time the Premier admitted he not 
only made mistakes, but big mistakes. Get your priorities right 
and start fixing the health system you’re destroying. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Heavy Oil Interpretative Centre in Lloydminster 
 
Ms. Stanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A new initiative 
involving Saskatchewan’s oil industry was launched Tuesday 
under the Canada-Saskatchewan Western Economic Partnership 
Agreement. The Minister of Energy and Mines and myself were 
in Lloydminster on behalf of the Minister of Economic 
Development to celebrate. 
 
In my constituency of Lloydminster, $25,000 of funding has 
been designated for a heavy oil interpretative centre. This 
facility will be used to showcase Saskatchewan’s heavy oil 
technologies, enhance tourism, and provide a resource for 
Lakeland College to use in training. 
 
The volunteers in the Lloydminster heavy oil visitors’ 
community centre committee are renovating part of the Barr 
colony museum to house a new heavy oil science centre. 
There’ll be interactive displays, multimedia presentations, 
Internet database, and an outdoor display. It’s nice to see the 
promotion of the industry since a large portion of our future 
heavy oil reserves are found in west-central and northwestern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The Oil Field Technology Society heavy oil science centre 
plans to open on July 1 and I plan to be there. The centre has 
been in the works for six years and has been planned with much 
support and enthusiasm from the oil industry. 
 
With the help of $25,000 and Vic Juba and his committee, I 
want to say thank you from all of us for making this project a 

huge success, one of its kind in North America. 
 

Emergency Preparedness 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is my 
pleasure to rise on behalf of the Saskatchewan Party in 
recognition of Emergency Preparedness Week. 
 
Over the past couple of weeks there have been news reports 
indicating to the people of Saskatchewan the importance of 
being prepared in any type of emergency situation. I would like 
to commend all those involved in emergency preparations and 
the Saskatchewan media on getting the message out there. 
 
But in addition today, Mr. Speaker, I would like to issue 
another alert to all of the people of Saskatchewan. For the past 
eight years the killer NDP plough winds have wreaked havoc 
and untold destruction to our province. 
 
But there is time yet to rebuild with the Saskatchewan Party — 
an industrious, talented, visionary group of architects, 
engineers, and construction workers. Mr. Speaker, these are the 
citizens of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, now is the time to prepare. We can change the 
direction of these destructive winds before they turn into a 
full-blown tornado by forming a Saskatchewan Party 
government in the next election. Thank you. 
 

SecurTek Launched in Yorkton 
 

Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Yesterday in my 
constituency of Yorkton an important announcement was made 
— important not only to the people of Yorkton and area but to 
all of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Deputy Premier was in attendance to announce a new 
diversification strategy by SaskTel. SecurTek was launched as a 
Yorkton-based subsidiary of SaskTel to offer remote 
monitoring services and province-wide security. 
 
SecurTek will be able to provide services like real time event 
detection, monitoring, and dispatch by using SaskTel’s leading 
edge technology. Up until now, most security services for 
Saskatchewan people have been based outside the province. 
 
Now SecurTek will operate a call handling centre out of 
Yorkton, initially employing 20 people, and the number 
expecting to grow to 50 people in the future. The province-wide 
leading network will bring security products to customers 
across Saskatchewan. 
 
I’d like to congratulate both SecurTek and SaskTel on the new 
project that will certainly benefit my constituency, the area of 
Saskatchewan in which I come from, the province, and 
demonstrates our government’s commitment to jobs in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan’s National Geography Challenge Winner 
 

Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to bring to 



1100 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1999 

the attention of the Assembly the efforts of one of my 
constituents — Cody Redekop. Earlier this spring, Cody, a 
13-year-old student at Herbert School, competed at the 
provincial competition for the National Geography Challenge in 
Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Cody competed with school students from around 
the province. His exemplary performance and knowledge of 
geography gained him first place in the competition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on May 22, Cody will travel to Ottawa where he 
and another Saskatchewan student will represent our province 
among 24 others at the National Geography Challenge finals. 
 
I know that his family, teachers, and friends are proud of his 
accomplishments and well behind him in his efforts in Ottawa. 
 
I’d like to take the opportunity, Mr. Speaker, and I hope that all 
hon. members will join with me to wish Cody good luck, good 
memories, and good travels. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Retail Sales Up in Saskatchewan 
 

Ms. Murrell: — Here I am, Mr. Speaker, doing my best 
imitation of the member from Swift Current. I have some good 
news myself about how things are hopping in Saskatchewan, or 
as Mr. Devine used to say: how things are hoppin’. You could 
always tell when an election was coming when he started 
dropping his g’s. “We’re buildin’ and growin’,” he would say 
— building and growing the deficit. 
 
But that’s not what I want to talk about. 
 
Department store sales, Mr. Speaker, department store sales are 
up again in Saskatchewan. People are buying — that’s buying 
with a g — at a higher rate than last year. This information too 
from our friends at Statistics Canada. 
 
Here are the facts. March this year over March of last year, 
sales are up 3.7 per cent. That does not sound to me like an 
economy in decline. 
 
One more number. For the first three months of this year, 
compared to the same period last year, sales are up in 
Saskatchewan by 7.1 per cent. By comparison, the natural 
average . . . national average was 4.9 per cent. Our good 
neighbours to the east averaged 5.3 per cent. To the west where 
there is no sales tax, but they do have that pesky health 
premium, 5.9 per cent. 
 
We win again, Mr. Speaker. I hope the members opposite are 
finally gettin’ the point. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Brewing Company Awarded Gold Medal 
 

Ms. Lorje: — Mr. Speaker, I will not drop any g’s as I make 
my member’s statement. I do, though, want to tell you a nice 
little story about Saskatchewan know-how, creativity and 
innovation. Not a surprising story, but one worth a moment’s 

notice. 
 
As you know, when Molson’s Brewery pulled out of Saskatoon 
in 1989, a group of employees did not want to see the brewery 
and their jobs disappear. So they bought the site and equipment 
and established Saskatoon’s Great West Brewing Company. 
 
They have done very well in the ensuing decade, Mr. Speaker. 
In fact, just recently Great West was awarded a gold medal at 
the Midwest Brewers’ Festival. Now, unlike some members in 
the House, I am not an expert on beer, Mr. Speaker. But this 
award sounds pretty fantastic to me. 
 
Great West premium light beer beat out over 30 other entries. 
At the festival, western premium light was compared with 
national, international and regional products, and evaluated by a 
team of brewmaster judges. They said that, “the new brew 
clearly meets and exceeds the expectations of classic North 
American light beer.” 
 
In other words, Mr. Speaker, the local team did very well 
against the big boys — not a surprise, as I said. 
 
I would like to, Mr. Speaker, in closing congratulate 
brewmaster Jim Fitzpatrick and Ron Waldman, president of 
Great Western Brewing Company, and the entire brewing team 
and employees. 
 
Thank you. 
 

Health Care System 
 

Mr. Renaud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This doesn’t happen 
to me too often, Mr. Speaker, but I had an interesting thought 
yesterday when I heard a story on the radio. 
 
The story said that a South Dakota health care centre that put 
ads in our papers a year ago had not one customer from 
Saskatchewan — not one call. 
 
They did have a couple of calls from the Tories and the 
Liberals. Why I wonder? Were they calling for information on 
American health care? 
 
And then I remembered, Mr. Speaker, that not long before the 
session began our good friend from Swift Current had a bypass 
operation. Now day after day he is our legislative poster boy for 
joy and optimism. 
 
I remember the member from Melville sharing his joy with us at 
the birth of his granddaughter, which reminded all of us of the 
birth of our own children and maybe grandchildren. 
 
I thought of my own friends and family who have used our 
health care system in the last while. And, Mr. Speaker, it 
occurred to me, our health care system is doing not a bad job of 
putting people back on the street. 
 
So they can — the Liberals and Tories that is — tell the world 
how that same system is crumbling before our eyes. Something 
doesn’t make sense. It just doesn’t add up. 
 
This thinking stuff, Mr. Speaker, is hard for me I guess. 



May 6, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 1101 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Provincial Taxes 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Finance. 
 
Mr. Minister, after eight years you finally decided that you want 
to know what Saskatchewan people think about income tax. 
Well here’s a news flash, Mr. Minister — it’s too high. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, at least we agree on one thing. There should 
be a province-wide consultation process on taxes — it’s called 
an election. If you really want to know what people of 
Saskatchewan think about taxes, let’s just call the election and 
voters can choose between the NDP plan for high taxes, the 
Liberal’s plan for even higher taxes, or the Saskatchewan 
Party’s plan to cut taxes right now in a balanced way. 
 
Mr. Minister, why don’t you admit you have no plan to cut 
taxes? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member from 
Melfort is calling for an election, and a provincial election there 
shall be. And he does it on the question of taxes. And I want to 
say, Mr. Speaker, for the record, that since 1994-95, provincial 
taxes have only gone in one direction in Saskatchewan — 
down. Debt reduction surtax, where? Down. Sales tax? Down. 
Personal income tax? Down. Sales tax? Down again this year. 
 
By the way, I have something here issued by the . . . Oh and 
talk about the platform — NDP, down. Here’s your platform — 
you’re promising mailing out everywhere, in their platform, a 
reduction in the sales tax from 7 to 5 per cent, if they get 
elected. It’s already at 6 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Globe and Mail —no less an authority — The Globe and 
Mail says that basic provincial income tax rates for all 
provinces, you know where Saskatchewan is? Third lowest 
behind Ontario and Alberta — third lowest. That’s our record. 
Tax reduction in a responsible way while tackling the debt, 
while maintaining health care and education. That’s a plan that 
works. Their plan just does not add up. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And it’s nice to 
see the Premier rise to defend a record that’s almost 
indefendable. 
 
Mr. Premier, you should look at the budget. The average family 
of four earning $50,000, in BC (British Columbia) they pay 
$2,600 income tax; in Alberta, 25; in Manitoba, 31; in Ontario, 
under 2,000. And what about Saskatchewan — $3,540. That’s 
nearly 80 per cent higher than Ontario, nearly 40 per cent higher 
than Alberta; and both of these governments have a plan to cut 
taxes even further in the future. 
 
Mr. Premier, the Saskatchewan Party has a responsible plan to 
cut income tax by 20 per cent over four years. Where’s your 
plan? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, our plan is already being 
implemented. I can repeat again the plan of tax reduction. 
 
Where in the world . . . What planet do you guys come from? 
Where do you come from? You’ve got in your election platform 
material, your leader’s going around the province of 
Saskatchewan and he’s going to increase the sales tax from 6 to 
7 per cent and then cut it back to 5 per cent. That’s what your 
platform says. Where do you live in this regard? 
 
And you talk to us about taxes, there isn’t a tax, as the Minister 
of Finance said, that the Tories don’t like. Since you were in 
office, you know, you had a flat tax; you had a tax on gaming; 
you had a 12 per cent high income tax . . . surtax. You had 
everything from used car taxes, everything announced — new 
tax. It moved — you people taxed it. That’s your record. 
 
You know where your plan so-called is going to lead you? It’s 
going to lead the province of Saskatchewan to a $1.8 billion 
deficit, or added to the debt in four years, just like the Devine 
government did. It didn’t work then. It doesn’t work now. It 
doesn’t add up. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I can see why the Premier 
doesn’t want to defend his record and would much rather fight 
an election that was 20 years ago. We’re here to fight the 
election now on your record, Mr. Premier. Mr. Premier . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order, order. Order. Order. 
Order. Now all hon. members will recognize the Chair is having 
some — order — is having some difficulty already being able 
to hear the questions being put and the answers being provided. 
And this is because of shouting from the other side of the floor 
plus assistance from the hon. members’ own colleagues while 
on their feet. And the Chair asks for co-operation of all 
members to allow the questions to be heard and the answers to 
be provided. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Premier’s Finance minister at least had the good sense to copy 
our program and reduce the sales tax by 1 per cent in this year 
already. And if you had the good sense you’d say you’d do it 
again next year. If you can’t . . . if you don’t have the ability to 
lead, at least follow our good advice and cut taxes now because 
that’s what the people of Saskatchewan are demanding. 
 
Mr. Premier, will you call the election? And will you listen to 
the people of Saskatchewan who are saying that your taxes are 
too high? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — You can be assured, the hon. member 
from Melfort, and you Tories — Sask-a-Tories or whatever you 
call yourselves — I tell you, you can be rest assured there’ll be 
an election. And you can be rest assured that your so-called 
fiscal plan will be compared and watched very carefully. 
 
Here this question comes from a political party that has us 



1102 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1999 

paying $750 million a year in interest payments because of their 
debt for which we get absolutely zero. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if we did not have that Tory debt we could do 
away with every penny on the sales tax. We could lower the 
income tax significantly. And even in spite of this albatross, this 
millstone that they’ve tied around the people of Saskatchewan, 
we’ve got the third lowest income tax rate according to The 
Globe and Mail. The PST (provincial sales tax) is going down, 
other tax rates are going down on a balanced, responsible way. 
 
They’ll never go back to the old Tory days of burn and slash 
and destroy, where you nearly bankrupted the province. It 
didn’t work then and it will not work now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Potato Industry 
 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the minister responsible for Sask Water. Mr. 
Minister, Leader-Post columnist Ron Petrie is asking in this 
morning’s paper what everyone else in Saskatchewan has been 
asking the NDP for months: “who voted for these guys in the 
first place?” 
 
Mr. Minister, Ron’s observations are so profound, so insightful, 
that I find myself behooved to share them with you. Ron writes: 
 

Most families, in fact, would be hard-pressed, over the 
course of a few potato patches, to chalk up losses of $6 
million. To achieve those results requires government 
intervention. 

 
Mr. Minister, yesterday we found out the NDP stands to lose as 
much as $23 million in the potato business. Mr. Minister, would 
you explain for the benefit of Mr. Petrie and every other potato 
growing Saskatchewan family how it is possible for the NDP to 
lose $23 million growing potatoes? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First of all, I 
want to remind the member that one of the first investments, the 
first investment of money was by that government in the 1980s 
— some $65 million by way of irrigation infrastructure. 
 
Now the fact that that infrastructure is there, Sask Water and the 
growers in that area believe that we should use the 
infrastructure that did exist. We believe that some 
diversification, with wheat prices and canola prices and other 
crops down, it only makes sense that you do something else. 
 
We are continuing to work with the growers. We have a 
substantial investment by way of the infrastructure, irrigation 
equipment, and the storage facilities. And we’ll work with the 
producers to ensure that we get through this downturn. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Minister, you’re also stuck back in the ’70s and ’80s. These 
potatoes were planted in the ’90s by your government. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Minister, is it possible that the same 
business geniuses who forgot to read the Channel Lake contract 
also put together the NDP’s plan to build North American’s 
most expensive potato storage facilities? 
 
Mr. Minister, the 23 million you’ve already lost on your 
intervention into the potato storage business may not be the last 
of the taxpayers’ losses. Sask Water also signed a $10 million 
deal with a South American company, INIA (Instituto De 
Investigaciones Agropecuarias) to buy, sell, and trade in potato 
products. 
 
Mr. Minister, is that investment also going down the tubes? 
What is the status of the INIA deal? How much money has the 
NDP sunk into this deal and what has been the return on that 
investment so far? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, our intent is to continue 
working with, through the federal government, the Farm Credit 
Corporation and the private lenders, the Royal Bank, and 
certainly with the growers, to try and work ourselves through 
this downturn. 
 
There is substantial investment out there. As I’ve said, some 
$120 million by way of irrigation infrastructure — 65 million 
invested by their government — and we think that we need to 
work through this. This is simply a downturn, and we need to 
work with the growers out there and try and build the industry 
back up again. And that’s our intention. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, if 
you’d have kept your government’s paws off the potato 
industry, there wouldn’t have been a downturn. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question this time is for the Premier. Clearly, 
Mr. Premier, what we have here is a minister that doesn’t 
understand what’s going on in his portfolio. We have Sask 
Water investing heavily into the potato industry without the 
foggiest idea what they’re doing. As a result, the loss is $23 
million of taxpayers’ money. 
 
Hundreds of families in the Lake Diefenbaker area have lost 
their life savings. Hundreds of people have lost their jobs and 
the NDP has lost $23 million. How did this happen, Mr. 
Premier? Potato growers are angry because the NDP set their 
industry back years. The investors are angry because they think 
the NDP misled them; and taxpayers are asking where did our 
money go? 
 
Mr. Premier, will you come clean with the potato growers and 
taxpayers? Will you order an independent inquiry into Sask 
Water’s disastrous $23 million loss? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve said this before, but 
with the Royal Bank and the Farm Credit Corporation, and 
ourselves, we’ve agreed that we will try and sell this or get this 
back going as an operating unit. All of the facilities are out 
there. It’s not going to be disposed of piecemeal. And our intent 
is to certainly work with the growers in the area because we 



May 6, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 1103 

believe there’s a very viable industry out in the Lucky 
Lake/Outlook area. We want to get through the cycle, but we 
will work with all of the growers and the producers in that area 
to get us through this downturn. 
 

Rural Grain Elevators 
 

Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, last week the Liberal caucus 
introduced a Bill to save rural elevators from the bulldozer. 
Liberals want to give communities a chance to buy them at a 
fair price. We recently spoke with members of the 
Gravelbourg/Hodgeville rail-line committee in my 
constituency. They’re worried Gravelbourg may lose its 
elevator in the future, and neither the railway nor the elevator 
company will commit to keep the elevator. 
 
Gravelbourg residents know elevators like this one are 
threatened and they want a chance to buy them. It’s the same 
story in Vanguard and Aneroid. They fear they’ll lose their 
elevators and they want a chance to buy them as well. Saving 
elevators is a priority and people believe it should be the 
Premier’s priority. 
 
Mr. Premier, why don’t you join the Liberals in giving these 
communities a chance to save their elevators from the 
bulldozer? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s very 
interesting as a provincial government in our jurisdiction, and 
we are the government that doesn’t have jurisdiction on here. 
But I want to tell the member opposite actually what we are 
doing in spite of that. First of all you need to have branch lines 
to also have elevators. And so we have a short-line advisory 
unit that is working on saving branch lines, working on 
short-line options, and working on options for elevators in those 
communities. And they work with those communities in that 
area. 
 
As I said previously, we had just been in the southwest area 
meeting with the area planning committee. And they were 
wishing that the government that actually has jurisdiction, that 
has the big “L” at the beginning of it — the Liberals — would 
do some of the things that we have asked for through Estey, 
through . . . We need a branch line moratorium. 
 
But another aspect to all of this is, is that we have recently had 
SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities), 
SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association), and 
interlocutor Harold MacKay sitting down with the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool on looking at what kind of options 
there can be there for communities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, I just wish that we could get an 
earnest response out of this government on this very simple 
issue — one of saving elevators. But I guess if I was being 
completely earnest, I’d have to admit that the Premier has been 
active in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
In fact he’s been proactive. He’s been proactive on closing rural 
hospitals. He’s been proactive on closing rural schools. He’s 
been proactive in allowing our highways to crumble to a point 

that they’re no longer worthy of being called highways. And as 
if that’s not enough, he’s been proactive in allowing the result 
— the decimation of our rural population. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Premier, can we count on you one more 
time to be proactive, but this time in support of rural 
communities? Will you help them save their elevators? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I think anybody who 
would take with an ounce of gravity . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Credibility. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Or credibility is the better word, the 
question of the member involved in, from the Liberal Party, I 
will have one of two or three bridges I could sell him in 
Saskatoon — cheap — just like that. 
 
This comes, this question comes from a member of a party in 
Canada which over the last several years has gone on a 
deliberate campaign to shut down branch lines, railroad branch 
lines. A campaign where there’s been $500 million reduced 
from the rural Saskatchewan people. They shut down the 
branch lines at which there is a country elevator. You can’t use 
the branch lines to get the wheat to the country elevator. 
 
And now they say that the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool and all the 
farmers involved in the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, because of 
what we’ve done by shutting down the branch lines, you’ve got 
to keep those country elevators open. 
 
And then he blames us. Why don’t you blame the people who 
are at fault — Liberals in Saskatchewan and in Ottawa for not 
having stood up with us in support of rural Saskatchewan when 
the fight was on. 
 

Ambulance Service 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Basic ambulance 
rates in the Battlefords have recently risen from $145 per trip to 
$225 a trip. That’s a 55 per cent increase, Mr. Speaker. This 
will hit our senior citizens very hard. 
 
One woman in North Battleford had a fall. She had to call 911, 
the ambulance came, they helped her up, they put her back to 
bed, the call cost her $225. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Battlefords ambulance company needs to 
upgrade equipment, it needs to compete for qualified staff. 
However, 55 per cent increases hit our most vulnerable citizens. 
 
Mr. Speaker, has the minister contacted the Battlefords Health 
District about this huge increase? Is the minister concerned 
about this latest health crisis that I alerted her to over a month 
ago? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As the 
member will know, in the province of Saskatchewan there are a 
number of services that are in fact insured through the medicare 
system in Saskatchewan. For decades, since medicare came into 
existence, ambulance fees have not been an insured service 



1104 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1999 

under medicare. 
 
What I can tell the member is that we have significantly 
increased funding to our health districts for emergency services. 
And in fact, Mr. Speaker, we do have a cap on the amount of 
money that can be charged by private ambulance companies 
and others to senior citizens, and that cap is $250 per trip. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have increased funding to health districts for 
emergency services from $9 million to $13 million. Mr. 
Speaker, we think that we are making our way towards an 
emergency system in the province that is publicly funded but 
we are not there yet. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, this is two-tier health care. The 
basic cost of an ambulance call in Saskatoon is $175, in Regina 
it’s $135, in the Battlefords it’s $225. Why should people be 
penalized for choosing to live out their remaining years in some 
of our smaller centres? Why is the cost of ambulance service 
dependent on the community you live in? 
 
Mr. Speaker, if there does have to be deterrent fees in 
ambulance service, surely they should at least be consistent 
throughout the province and there shouldn’t be a war on certain 
communities, favouring certain communities over others. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, what I have indicated to 
the member is that ambulance trips that, for the most part in the 
province are provided by private ambulance companies, are not 
an insured service under medicare. What I can tell the member 
is that we have increased, significantly, funding going to the 
districts to support emergency services in their particular 
district. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, we have air ambulance in this 
province that provides a tremendous service to those people 
living in rural and northern Saskatchewan, and that service is 
heavily subsidized by the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 
 
What I can tell the Liberal Party is that we are making 
tremendous gains in publicly funded health care, and in fact, I 
note from a newspaper article from Newfoundland that three 
doctors left Buena Vista this past Monday to work in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I just wanted to tell the members that Saskatchewan is making 
progress in spite of Liberals. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Y2K Concerns in Pharmacies 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
for the Minster of Health. 
 
Madam Minister, Saskatchewan pharmacies are growing 
increasingly concerned about the Y2K (year 2000) problem. We 
have been contacted by a number of pharmacists who say their 
computer systems need to be replaced in order to remain 

compatible and to meet the needs of the Saskatchewan drug 
plan system. 
 
The problem is it will cost thousands of dollars and the province 
is not willing to pick up any part of this cost. In fact, 
pharmacists have been without any kind of a contract with the 
provincial drug plan for two and a half years now. 
 
Madam Minister, why are you doing nothing to help 
pharmacists get ready for the Y2K problem when it’s your 
computer system that is causing the problems? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, what I can tell the 
member is that the Saskatchewan pharmacists are presently 
involved in negotiations with the Department of Health to come 
to a new contractual arrangement with Saskatchewan 
pharmacists. I understand that talks are proceeding and I 
understand that we are making our way towards a fair 
agreement for pharmacists in our province, their clients, and the 
taxpayers. 
 
What I can also say is that there is some funding available for 
pharmacists so that they can have software upgrades to meet 
some of the issues associated with Y2K. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
they’ve been in negotiations for two and a half years. They’re 
not settled yet. We only have 240 days more to go, Madam 
Minister. 
 
When a patient arrives at a pharmacy 72 per cent of new 
prescriptions and 27 per cent per cent of repeat sales need 
additional administrative services. These services are provided 
by the network connection between the central computer and 
the druggist’s computers. Without these computers to determine 
cost-sharing, drug plan coverage under the formularies, and the 
coordination of benefits, patients will have to pay directly for 
the full cost of drugs. 
 
People will need, Madam Minister, to have pockets full of 
money to meet their drug costs on January 1. When are you 
going to provide support to pay for the computers needed to 
operate, run and maintain administration of your Saskatchewan 
drug plan? Why will Saskatchewan patients have to pay for 
your incompetence? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, in this year’s budget the 
Government of Saskatchewan has increased our funding to 
health care in this province by $195 million, or 11.3 per cent, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
In addition, I’m pleased to report to the public that we have 
increased funding for the Saskatchewan drug plan from 64 
million to approximately 78 million or a 21.5 per cent increase. 
 
Now why is that, Mr. Speaker? The reason why funding has 
been significantly increased to the drug plan is that we are now 
covering low-income families and their children’s drug 
benefits. In addition, we have significantly increased costs 



May 6, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 1105 

associated with new drugs that are coming on to the market as a 
result of drug patent legislation that was introduced and passed 
by a Progressive Conservative government in Ottawa called the 
Mulroney government. 
 
What I can say is that we are negotiating with the Saskatchewan 
pharmacists association in order to conclude a fair agreement — 
fair to pharmacists, fair to clients and fair to taxpayers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 
Emergency Services in Health Districts 

 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. minister seems more 
concerned about health care in Buena Vista than The 
Battlefords. 
 
Why is it, Madam Minister, that funding arrangements for 
emergency transportation vary from district to district? Why is 
there not standard funding? Why do health services vary from 
district to district? 
 
Will the government commit to one-tier, comprehensive health 
care, including ambulance service, consistent through the 
province of Saskatchewan and quit worrying about Buena 
Vista? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, what I can share with the 
member is that there is some districts that have publicly funded 
emergency services. They do not have private ambulance 
companies. There are other districts that have continued with 
their arrangements with private ambulance companies which 
are represented by the Saskatchewan Ambulance Association. 
 
As I said to the member previously, we have in this province 
. . . we have not had, as an insured service, ambulance services. 
And the reason why costs vary from district to district is 
because some districts have publicly funded ambulance services 
— they don’t contract with a private insurer, like Regina — and 
then we have other districts that do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 225  The Farm-input Costs Monitoring Act 
 

Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move first reading 
of Bill No. 225, The Farm-input Costs Monitoring Act. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 226 — The Health Waiting List 
Elimination and Accountability Act 

 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move first reading 
of Bill No. 226, The Health Waiting List Elimination and 
Accountability Act. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 251 — The Romanow Road Act (No. 7) 
 
Mr. Hillson: — In order to accommodate the Hon. Premier, I 
move first reading of Bill No. 251, The Romanow Road Act 
(No. 7). 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 252 — The Romanow Road Act (No. 8) 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move first reading 
of Bill No. 252, The Romanow Act (No. 8). 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 253 — The Romanow Road Act (No. 9) 
 
Mr. McPherson: — I move first reading of Bill 253, The 
Romanow Road Act, An Act to rename provincial Highway No. 
4. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 254 — The Romanow Road Act (No. 10) 
 
Mr. McPherson: — I move first reading of Bill No. 254, The 
Romanow Road Act, An Act to rename provincial Highway No. 
13. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 255 — The Romanow Road Act (No. 11) 
 
Mr. McPherson: — I move first reading of Bill No. 255, The 
Romanow Road Act, An Act to rename provincial Highway No. 
37. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 256 — The Romanow Road Act (No. 12) 
 

Mr. McPherson: — I move first reading of a Bill, No. 256, 
The Romanow Road Act, An Act to rename provincial 
Highway No. 36. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 257 — The Romanow Road Act (No. 13) 
 

Mr. McPherson: — I move first reading of Bill No. 257, The 
Romanow Road Act (No. 13), an Act to rename provincial 
Highway No. 18. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
 



1106 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1999 

Bill No. 258 — The Romanow Road Act (No. 14) 
 
Mr. McPherson: — I move first reading of Bill No. 258, The 
Romanow Road Act (No. 14), an Act to rename provincial 
Highway No. 19. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 259 — The Romanow Road Act (No. 15) 
 
Mr. McPherson: — I move first reading of Bill No. 259, The 
Romanow Road Act (No. 15), an Act to rename provincial 
Highway No. 2. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 263 — The Romanow Road Act (No. 19) 
 

Mr. Osika: — I move first reading of Bill No. 263, The 
Romanow Road Act (No. 19), an Act to rename Highway No. 
22. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and, by leave of the 
Assembly, ordered to be read a second time later this day. 
 

Bill No. 264 — The Romanow Road Act (No. 20) 
 
Mr. Osika: — I move first reading of Bill No. 264, The 
Romanow Road Act (No. 20), an Act to rename Highway No. 
56. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 265 — The Romanow Road Act (No. 21) 
 
Mr. Osika: — I move first reading of Bill No. 265, The 
Romanow Road Act (No. 21), an Act to rename Highway No. 
52. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 266 — The Romanow Road Act (No. 22) 
 
Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of Bill No. 
266, The Romanow Road Act, an Act to rename Highway No. 
310. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
request leave to make a personal statement. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 

Farewell Remarks 
 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Now 
I may be accused of making these farewell remarks 
prematurely. But in anticipation of this being the last session in 
which I am a sitting member, it is very important for me to take 
a moment to speak. 
 
Now I’m hoping that in spite of the hectic lives of everyone 
who work in this beautiful building as elected representatives 
and employees, that most of you will have had the opportunity 
to see the film Life is Beautiful. This Italian movie received an 
Academy Award for best foreign film, and it exemplifies the 
power of courage, the indomitable human spirit, and the lengths 
to which one will go to protect, nurture, and support loved ones. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, my life has been very beautiful, and it is 
because of people I have been blessed with knowing, and it’s 
also because of people I’ve never met. On a broader scale, I am 
so fortunate just to have been born in Canada, in Saskatchewan, 
and in Swift Current to my parents, Tom and Nita Hamm. They 
were very decent people with very special gifts. 
 
My father taught me — and I’ve said this in this House before 
— that it is more important to be trusted than to be loved. My 
very gracious mother, who was grateful for every second of her 
life, willed me to learn that one must love people for what they 
are and forgive them for what they are not. 
 
(1430) 
 
She provided me many lessons, and it really resulted in my 
having true appreciation, I think, for all that matters. When I 
couldn’t walk, Mr. Speaker, her first action, when I got home 
from the hospital when she came to visit me in Saskatoon and I 
was in a wheelchair, was to hand me a broom in order for me to 
sweep the kitchen floor. That puts things in perspective. Her 
second lesson on that very same day, was to tell her embittered 
daughter how blessed I was that my arms were fine because, 
“you can hold the ones you love”. 
 
My family — I’m going to be emotional — always really 
believed in me even when I embarrassed them with my teen 
pregnancy. In fact, the same teacher who inspired Dr. Lillian 
Dyck who we honoured in this legislature this last week — he 
fought alongside my parents so that I could remain in high 
school and finish grade 10. That teacher is Mr. John Dyer and I 
want to thank him for his courage 35 years ago. 
 
Two other teachers deserve special recognition for getting me to 
this place: Don Whiteman for whom I could still quote 
Tennyson, if he wished, and Verda Towne, posthumously, my 
music teacher who gave me jobs when I was a very young 
mother and in great need of someone who believed that I really 
did have something capable of contributing. 
 
Now there are so many, many people to acknowledge in this 
building as well as in my constituency office, Mr. Speaker. And 
this is leaping over decades, of course, of people that I really 
should thank as well. But at the risk of forgetting someone in 
the moment, I still want to let my friends know what they meant 
to me by at least mentioning some of them: Elaine Hughston, 
Vonda Croissant, Linda Denis, Susan Veenhoven, Jonathan 
Denis, and Jon Jonnson for their decency, integrity, and loyalty 
in helping me with my job as politician. 



May 6, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 1107 

My thanks, my great thanks to the Sergeant-at-Arms of course, 
Patrick Shaw, who I want on public record for people to know 
is a true feminist; and all of my great coffee cohorts who shall 
have to remain unnamed because they are guilty of having 
coffee with me at 3 o’clock every day; the very friendly, 
friendly people we have who represent us so well to the public 
in Visitor Services. 
 
To our very competent Hansard staff who go so unrecognized. 
To Steve Bata, whose conversations with me are discussions 
that I’ll miss very, very much and his industrious friendly crew. 
To our capable, capable people in library staff and the 
extraordinary Allison and Kathy and Garnet in the Law Clerk’s 
office. To everyone in the cafeteria —and I don’t know if this 
will mean much to anyone else — but especially to Pam who I 
see so very often and she’s just great to me. 
 
To my mailroom folks. Oddly enough my brother, who was a 
member of this Legislative Assembly many years ago, said that 
the people who ended up being the most kind to him were the 
people who really go unheralded, and I know that Betty Lou 
and the others from the mailroom staff have certainly have 
made my life less lonely. 
 
To our unforgettable Clerks and those on your staff; the many, 
many pages, and those included here today, who have been here 
the last eight years when I have been here; to our extremely 
professional people in administrative services and in financial 
services who do such an exemplary job and keep such a high 
standard, I most certainly am appreciative of them. 
 
And I do want to mention that I’ve met media personnel from 
one end of our province to the other, and they play such an 
important role in our democracy, and I want them to know that 
not just the people who are representing the media in this 
legislature, but to those with whom I’ve dealt with over the last 
ten years of my political life, I do appreciate what they do and 
it’s not an easy task. 
 
I’m going to be really, really embarrassed if I’ve missed 
anyone. Oh, gosh darn, Gary. I don’t want to forget Gary and 
all of our great guys, our technical television folks with whom 
I’ve also had some great conversations over the years. And 
there are many others in this Legislative Building who have 
been exceptionally kind to me and I thank them all. 
 
I can’t express my gratitude, really, to so many people who 
have supported me throughout Saskatchewan in my political 
efforts. And in particular those in Saskatoon Greystone. I’m 
really proud to . . . I’ve really been honoured, truly, to have 
represented them. And I’m also proud to have represented the 
Liberal Party of Saskatchewan from 1989 to 1995. 
 
Most of all of course, I have a beautiful life because of my dear 
husband, Harley Olsen, and my family. Now they have hurt 
very much when I’ve hurt, and they’ve rejoiced every time I’ve 
rejoiced, and I love them deeply. 
 
The first political speech I ever gave, which was to become 
Leader of the Liberal Party, you know, when you reflect back. 
What I did was I quoted Tom Stoppard. He’s my favourite 
playwright, living playwright, I might add. Tom Stoppard has a 
play in which he actually quotes Christopher Logue who in turn 

quotes Appollinaire. 
 
And I remember as clearly this moment as I did then what I said 
to this group of people. I said that quote of Appollinaire and it 
is this: 
 

Come to the edge! We are afraid. Come to the edge! But 
we might fall. Come to the edge! And they came. And he 
pushed them. And they flew. 

 
Well I shall not have the opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to I guess 
try under my tenure to have the province soar, but a friend said 
to me at lunch time, man’s reach should exceed his grasp, or 
what’s a heaven for! 
 
Mr. Speaker, to you, to my hon. colleagues and friends in this 
the people’s Assembly, to everyone that I’ve mentioned 
previously and to all I have mistakenly forgotten, I will miss 
you and I pray that continued blessings are bestowed on each of 
your beautiful lives. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, with leave 
from the Assembly to respond to the statement from the 
member from Saskatoon Greystone. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is with 
grateful appreciation and admiration that I stand today to pay 
tribute to the member from Saskatoon Greystone for her sincere 
and meaningful contribution to the people of Saskatchewan 
during the time that she served as the Leader of the Liberal 
Party of Saskatchewan and as a MLA. 
 
I am intensely proud to have served and worked alongside this 
dynamic woman. This leader, this woman of vision and hope, 
who has been for me a mentor, a guide, and a valued friend. 
And for the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, she has 
ushered in a new and refreshing approach to governing. An 
approach hinged on the belief that we can achieve politics with 
principle, commerce with compassion, and service with 
integrity. 
 
Her fundamental belief that one must value and stand on 
principles above all else, has been exemplified by her decisions 
and subsequent actions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the focus of my friend from Saskatoon Greystone 
has always been on good governing rather than politicking, 
although she does realize that good governing on occasion 
necessitates a little politicking. Her philosophy in life and in 
governing, centres on the empowerment of people. She has 
chosen to believe in people, to affirm people, encouraging them 
towards self-reliance and towards believing in themselves and 
using their talents and abilities to achieve their full potential. As 
a politician and as a professional, her first priority has always 
been the well-being of our people. 
 
The member from Saskatoon Greystone prefers to say, let me 



1108 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1999 

help you to help yourself, rather than, let me do it for you. And, 
Mr. Speaker, her commitment to this Assembly to increase the 
accountability and responsibility of all members to the people 
of Saskatchewan, is indeed commendable. 
 
She has raised the level of civility and decorum in this Chamber 
with her thoughtful and principled participation, and has 
rightfully earned the respect of all members that have served 
with her. She is a woman of exceptional integrity, honesty, 
compassion, and courage. And she has graced this Assembly 
with her intelligence in a dignified manner. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Saskatoon Greystone has 
brought a breath of fresh air to Saskatchewan politics, and her 
departure to private life is indeed a loss to this legislature and 
the people of Saskatchewan for whom she has been an eloquent 
advocate. Foremost in my mind is the truth that she is an 
exemplary model for all women. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am sure all members join me in wishing the 
member from Saskatoon Greystone every success in her new 
endeavours. Thank you, Lynda. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Yes, I ask for leave to respond. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First of all it is an 
extreme pleasure to speak on behalf of my caucus to, you know, 
to respond to the many words today in reference to the member 
from Saskatoon Greystone. 
 
I want to point out that throughout my tenure as the MLA 
(Member of the Legislative Assembly) the first few years, that I 
wanted to mention, Mr. Speaker, that this fine lady has been a 
great friend, a gracious leader at one point, and certainly 
conducted herself in a dignified and noble manner. 
 
I think it’s important that throughout life as we travel in the 
many paths and the many directions that life affords us, that we 
make as many friends along the way. 
 
And often we speak about the fact that there is no time in this 
world — no time for pity, no time for self-doubt, no time for 
racism; that there isn’t enough time in this world for anything 
else except to bring about happiness, prosperity, peace, and 
friendship. 
 
And I want to say on behalf of the people of Athabasca, the 
people of northern Saskatchewan, to our friend, and my friend, 
what no other words are able to say. I want to say thank you 
very, very much for your decency, for your kindness, and for 
your compassion. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — If I may, by leave, I would also wish to 
respond briefly. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I think all that needs to be said 
has been said, but I do want to simply add that as always, but 
especially on this day, I’m proud to call you a colleague, I’m 
proud to call you a friend, I’m especially proud to call you a 
cousin. 
 
You inspired a generation of our province. And you quoted a 
playwright. May I also quote a famous playwright, William 
Shakespeare, who said, “When comes such another.” 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I would ask leave of the 
Assembly to introduce a motion of condolence. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
(1445) 

CONDOLENCES 
 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll move the 
motion this time at the end of my remarks. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s my sad duty to inform the members of the 
House that in putting this motion, seconded by the Leader of the 
Official Opposition, that yesterday we saw the passing of Mr. 
Eiling Kramer, a long-time, long-standing serving member of 
this Legislative Assembly. 
 
Eiling Kramer passed away last night about 5:30, 6 p.m. 
Mercifully he was not ill too long, coming down with his 
affliction within 24 hours before his passing. And in a way this 
is kind of fitting for a man who lived a life in many ways as big 
as he was physically, if not bigger. Robust, an active mind, 
committed to principles, and committed to politics. 
 
But nonetheless it is for me in any event, a very sad occasion to 
see this man who most of us met, I think, Wednesday — not 
last but a week Wednesday last — at the Commonwealth 
Parliamentary Association banquet and dinner and annual 
meeting, which you hosted, sir. There he was, standing erect as 
he always does, all 6-foot-some of him, with his wife, still 
showing his commitment to the democratic system and to the 
parliamentary system. 
 
Eiling was born in 1914 in North Battleford. He attended school 
in Highworth and then became a rancher and an auctioneer; a 
pretty good rancher, a pretty good auctioneer — probably even 
a better auctioneer. 
 
And from there he developed a stronger sense of the importance 
of getting involved in public life and public policy. He 
contributed at the grassroots level, as we politicians like to say, 
to the principles of the co-operative movement; to the principles 
of the Saskatchewan Farmers Union, now the National Farmers 
Union; and to the principles of the Co-operative 
Commonwealth Federation, the CCF, the forerunner of the New 
Democratic Party. 
 
And I say contributed at all levels, whether it’s financial 
contribution or door-to-door canvassing or pursuit of 
memberships, explanation of policy — not only party but farm 
union policy, co-op movement policy, and the like. 



May 6, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 1109 

In fact it is such, I think I can say without fear of contradiction 
from my colleague, the present member from North Battleford, 
that at every election campaign and in between election 
campaigns, Eiling Kramer’s strong suggestion to the 
campaigner visiting the constituency — I speak for myself; 
when Eiling makes a strong suggestion or made a strong 
suggestion, you took the advice to heart always — you would 
campaign in the Co-op Centre in North Battleford. And what a 
magnificent facility it has grown to be. 
 
Eventually a person of this drive and high intelligence was 
persuaded, I think fairly easily, to seek elected public office, 
which he did for the CCF in 1952 when Tommy Douglas was 
the leader of the movement and the leader of the government. 
 
Eiling Kramer was sometimes affectionately recalled . . . 
referred to as Tiny Kramer in complete contradistinction of his 
actual physical being. I want to assure you, Mr. Speaker, that I 
never can recall having called Eiling Kramer, Tiny. There might 
have been an occasion of which I do not have specific 
remembrance of that, but he was just too intimidating. 
 
And when I entered the legislature in 1967 with a crop of seven 
or eight new MLAs, there was Eiling Kramer already the MLA 
for The Battlefords. We were in opposition. And an MLA who, 
as the record shows, served in this Assembly of which we have 
spoken all so glowingly a few moments ago in tribute to the 
former leader of the Saskatchewan Liberal Party in this great 
Assembly of the people, he served here for 28 years, 4 months, 
and 9 days. I think that’s eight general elections. 
 
Eiling Kramer was as proud of this province and this country 
and as proud of this province and our people as any person I 
have ever spoken to or have met. Many are very proud of our 
province. I’m not saying Eiling was the best in the sense of his 
pride. We all share that pride, but boy, he was never second. He 
was right there with all of us who believed in this province and 
this country. 
 
And with his election as an MLA, it was inevitable through his 
long career that he would serve with distinction as the MLA, 
which is a first and foremost duty of all of us; and then to go on 
to serve as minister of Natural Resources; minister of 
Co-operation and Co-operative Development when it was a 
free-standing department; and minister of Highways and 
Transportation where he in fact was very active and extremely 
innovative in the nature of road construction, the changing 
patterns and designs, and extremely passionate in the need to 
maintain an infrastructure for the economy and for the rural way 
of life and for the Saskatchewan way of life. 
 
Serving for the 28 years, 4 months, and 9 days, Eiling retired 
from the House in 1980. As I say, I was elected in 1967. By that 
time Eiling had had a number of years under his belt as a 
member of the House, and there were several of us who came in 
together. 
 
One other memorable and notable contributor was a friend of 
mine by the name of John R. Messer. Jack Messer, myself, John 
Kowalchuk, Miro Kwasnica, just a few of the names that come 
to mind of the class of ’67 if I can refer ourselves to that, Ted 
Bowerman. We came in with drive — at least I like to think we 
did — determination, vision, and ideal, and with a high degree 

of ignorance as to how the House worked and how the real 
practical politics of Saskatchewan worked. 
 
There was Eiling Kramer as a mentor and as a teacher, the 
embodiment of what I would say is the ideal Saskatchewan 
legislator. Commitment and passion, intelligence, loyalty, 
friendship, hard fighter for his constituency and constituents, 
Eiling was rewarded — perhaps reward is the wrong way to 
describe it — was given the trust by the voters of the 
Battlefords eight times, eight times to come back to this House 
to speak for them. 
 
Only one other such Saskatchewan politician can cite such 
unqualified support from his constituents in my judgment, and 
that was Allan Blakeney, in whose cabinet Eiling served with 
such distinction. 
 
I want to return back to reminisce about my period in 1967 to 
’71 in opposition. I told this little story in caucus today when 
we discussed for a moment and paid our little tribute to Eiling’s 
passing. A member sitting on the opposition side, I was in the 
seat next to where the official leader of the opposition was. One 
of our members is where the current member from the 
Battlefords is located, a man by the name of Bill Berezowsky. 
 
Bill Berezowsky was an extremely passionate man and he was a 
fantastic orator. And in those days we had live radio broadcasts, 
and the two whips negotiated the radio times that you’d have. 
You’d have 20 minutes — no more, no less. If you were less, 
the opposition would get up and get more time. If you were 
over, then the opposition would take their extra time back. So it 
was a pretty good system of honour, and we followed it. 
 
Bill Berezowsky was so emotional, in one speech he got so 
wound up — this wasn’t one speech; this would be a frequent 
occurrence — he’d actually get a nose bleed. A very, very 
significant, notable nose bleed live on the radio, to which all of 
us are handing him handkerchiefs to try to stop the — how 
should I describe it? — rather unpleasant sight that was about. 
He wanted to sit down because he couldn’t continue, but we 
wouldn’t let him sit down because he had to finish his 20 
minutes. Otherwise the opposition would take the seat. Eiling 
had to go up to the Chair to provide him with an Eiling Kramer 
style handkerchief in order for Bill to finish. 
 
Well in any event, the point of this story is a little bit of a 
diversion. On a night which might or might not be like tonight 
— we’ll see what happens in the House — we were winding up 
and proroguing. And John Messer, myself, Eiling Kramer, Gord 
Snyder — related now to the Kramer family — and Bill 
Berezowsky, all of us were in a car coming home from a very 
important meeting which we had in a part of Regina, talking 
about political life. 
 
Bill Berezowsky said, he said, boys, I want you to know, 
meeting you young fellows with your idealism and your drive, 
he said, you make me feel like such a young man. Eiling 
Kramer said, no, not a young man; he said, you made us feel 25 
years younger. To which I thought I got off my best repartee 
line. I said, no, Eiling, we didn’t make you feel 25 years 
younger; trying to keep up to you made us 25 years older. They 
were always on the go; they were always working hard. 
 



1110 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1999 

Eiling lobbied very hard for his riding and for the big issues of 
Saskatchewan and Canada. He took his concerns right to 
government members at the highest level, provincially and 
federally. He set a standard of work which I’ve always tried to 
follow. And I think Al Blakeney said it best once, of Eiling, 
when he said the following. He said, Eiling has never been one 
to skirt an issue; you knew where he stood and what he was 
going to do. Believe me, Mr. Speaker, no truer words were said 
than those words by Allan Blakeney. 
 
I recall one occasion when in this House I was the Government 
House Leader, and a past leader of the Progressive 
Conservative Party of Saskatchewan at that time was 
advocating the idea that Saskatchewan should join the United 
States of America. Some members may not know, but we had a 
Unionist Party in this House at one point. 
 
And in advocating the idea that Saskatchewan should join the 
United States, Eiling got so doggone nationalistic and so 
doggone angry, he slipped outside the House, came back in and 
put Canadian flags on all the members’ desks, contrary to the 
rules of the House. He took matters in his own hands, even 
though he had to withdraw the flags. 
 
I think the most famous example of taking things in his own 
hands was when he was in a great debate with the Liberal 
minister of Highways, the MLA from Rosthern constituency at 
that time, Dave Boldt. Eiling wanted a stop sign at a particular 
intersection in North Battleford — the member from North 
Battleford apparently remembers this. And he couldn’t get it. 
And they argued in the House, and they debated. 
 
Well one night — I don’t know how it happened — but after 
the sun rose there it was — not quite an official, but full stop 
sign at this particular intersection, I think against the law. Eiling 
fessed up to it and at the end of the day after the appropriate 
apologies were made, the minister of Highways put up the stop 
sign. I think it’s still there. 
 
Over the next few days, I’m going to be asking myself when 
people ask me: what do you remember best about Eiling 
Kramer —I could stand for hours in my place, and I’m not 
going to do that — but I think what stands out for me the most 
about Eiling Kramer was his commitment to the principles — 
and I don’t mean this to be any partisan sense, but it’s true, he 
was this way — the principles of the movement of my party, 
our party, the NDP, the New Democratic Party, and the CCF. 
 
Those principles were as important to Eiling as, I believe, 
principles of religion, values, of home. He was a husband and 
the father of eight children, grandchildren. A wonderful friend 
and colleague. And loyal. And loyal to you as an individual, but 
loyal to you because he knew that even if you and he disagreed 
on an issue, on the fundamental principles which kept you 
together, he was there. 
 
I said at the beginning of my remarks about how he was a 
mentor to me when I was first beginning in politics in ’67. I tell 
you, he was a mentor to me from 1991 to the current time as 
Premier. We went through some very difficult times in this 
House from 1991 — all of us — making tough decisions. We 
agreed, we disagreed — members of my political party. Some 
of them would not agree with the decisions which we had to 

take — Eiling Kramer on occasion was one of those. But I tell 
you there wasn’t a meeting in and around the Battlefords area 
that I attended in which one would always see present to, Eiling 
Kramer, coming up to me, saying to me, hang in there, you’re 
doing the right thing. Or hang in there but make a little change. 
Or hang in there and tell those so-and-so’s— in more colourful 
language than that, referring to the opposition or whatever — 
what the story is. He was always there. 
 
(1500) 
 
And if I had to pass on any lesson, which I am not going to do, 
to anybody in this House of all or any political stripes, I would 
say the blessing that I’ve had in political life is to have had 
people like Al Blakeney and Eiling Kramer to whom I could 
turn in moments of extreme crisis, and know that the advice and 
the conversation would be carried in confidence and the advice 
would be the very best because of the principles of community, 
caring, and sharing that those two men fought for and lived for 
and stand for, all their living days. 
 
You have a blessing indeed if you have that kind of a 
relationship with a leader or leaders. You have continuity, you 
have evolution, you have progression, you have support, 
morally, and physically, and emotionally. And we all need that. 
We all need that. 
 
Eiling Kramer gave me that; gave our movement that; gave our 
province that. 
 
And no final words can be made without a word of sorrow and 
support to Dorothy and the family. Mrs. Kramer was the ever 
present, ever supporting partner for Eiling Kramer to this day. 
When I spoke to her on the night that he took ill, she was calm 
as she could be under the circumstances, in control. I asked her 
if there was anything I could to do to assist, at that point the 
illness had developed too rapidly, and she said no. 
 
I came away from that conversation marvelling at how the 
human spirit can summon up the strength required in moments 
of crisis like that when all around us people are in a state of 
emotional upset. Sometimes anger, sometimes sorrow, 
sometimes it’s the emotional tiredness. How it is that something 
in the human spirit is summonsed up to be able to have that 
strength that Dorothy Kramer exhibited in that telephone 
conversation 24 hours ago with me. That’s the kind of strength 
that she had with Eiling through the tough times and the good 
times of his political life. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, friends on this side and friends on the other 
side of the House, we saw the passing of a good man — we 
marked that yesterday. Today, the passing of another good 
person: intelligent, dedicated, loyal, hard-working, 
uncompromising, honest, dedicated to Saskatchewan, dedicated 
to Canada. It doesn’t get any better than that. What a great life 
he’s led, what a great contribution he’s made. And I’m going to 
miss a wonderful, wonderful friend and colleague, but at least 
I’ll have the memories to carry with me forever. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by my colleague, the 
member from Canora-Pelly, the Leader of the Official 
Opposition: 
 



May 6, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 1111 

That this Assembly record with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of this Assembly and 
expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 
made to his community, his constituency, and to the 
province. 

 
Eiling Kramer, who passed away last night, was a 
member of this Legislative Assembly from 1952 until 
1980, representing the constituency of The Battlefords for 
the New Democratic Party. 
 
Mr. Kramer was born on the family homestead in the 
North Battleford district on July 14, 1914. He received his 
schooling at local elementary and secondary schools in 
Highworth. Mr. Kramer and his wife, Dorothy Johnston, 
married on December 15, 1944. He had a family which 
grew to include six boys and two girls. 

 
Mr. Kramer’s first forays into the employment world 
combined farming during the summer and working as a 
lumberjack during the winter. He also worked part-time as 
a constable with the North Battleford police force. Later he 
purchased a cattle ranch and trained as an auctioneer. A 
very successful auctioneer, I might add. 

 
Eiling Kramer was noted for his interest in the well-being 
of his community and served as a member, organizer, and 
director of a number of local and provincial organizations. 
These included the Saskatchewan Forest Products, Saskair, 
the Sherwood Co-op Association, the Saskatchewan Wheat 
Pool, the Battlefords Co-op Association, the Saskatchewan 
Farmers Union, International Odd Fellows, and the Lions 
and the Cosmopolitan clubs. 
 
Mr. Kramer was active in the CCF since its inception; and 
was involved as an organizer and campaign manager prior 
to entering public life himself. 
 
Eiling Kramer was one of the longest serving members in 
this Assembly. His tenure extended over 28 years before he 
announced his retirement from public life in October 1980. 
He was first elected in 1952, and successfully contested the 
seat for the following eight general elections. 
 
Mr. Kramer was responsible for several cabinet portfolios 
including Natural Resources, Co-operation and 
Co-operative Development, and Highways and 
Transportation. 
 
In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 
this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy to the 
members of the bereaved family. 

 
I so move, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it is indeed a sad day for members in the House — the 
colleagues that we have here today — to have to rise a second 
consecutive day to honour a former member who has passed 
away. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, when I take a look at the tremendous 
amount of accomplishments of individuals like Mr. Kramer, 

one has to, one has to look at one’s own life and take a look at 
the accomplishments of an individual that it can be compared 
to. 
 
You know the first thing that caught my attention, Mr. Speaker, 
is the fact that Mr. Kramer was elected to this House in 1952 — 
at a time when I was one year old — and served for 28 years. 
And when we take a look at ourselves — and many members in 
this House, Mr. Speaker, were elected for the first time, and as 
myself, in 1995 — and if you look at that and you take a look at 
28 years, you know, we could be sitting here till the year 2023. 
That’s almost unbelievable, Mr. Speaker, to think that that kind 
of period of time is what Mr. Kramer served. 
 
We take a look at the fact, as the Premier mentioned that, you 
know, eight successive general elections — to fight an election 
campaign, to go through it, and to be successful — a 
tremendous accomplishment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the information about Mr. Kramer says that we 
have a gentleman here, I think, who was a leader in his own 
community. A farmer, a lumberjack, a police officer, a cattle 
rancher, an auctioneer, and a politician. All took parts of Mr. 
Kramer’s time and he devoted his attention to those kinds of 
occupations at one time or another. 
 
He also, as indicated, was a tremendous leader in his own 
community; a volunteer. And I think for a successful individual 
in Saskatchewan, someone who has a reputation that Mr. 
Kramer had, one knows that that person is a tremendous 
volunteer in the province of Saskatchewan, and is willing to 
become active, is willing to take on responsibilities beyond 
what is the normal routine of individuals. 
 
So when you start to look at the tremendous contributions of 
Eiling Kramer, on behalf of the official opposition, the 
Saskatchewan Party and all my colleagues on this side of the 
House, I’d like to extend to his wife Dorothy, to his eight 
children and numerous grandchildren, our sincerest condolences 
and sympathies at this time. 
 
When we also take a look at the fact of the tremendous 
accomplishments of Mr. Kramer, it will not be difficult for the 
family, after a period of time of grieving, to look back at all of 
the tremendous accomplishments and remember all the positive 
things that happened in this individual’s lifetime, because there 
are many. 
 
So on behalf of the official opposition, we extend our sincere 
sympathies to the Kramer family. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Husband, father, 
grandfather, rancher, auctioneer, and politician. Having served 
The Battlefords for over 28 years as MLA from 1952 to 1980 
consecutively, including several years as minister of Highways, 
one of his major goals was the twinning of the Yellowhead. 
And while he wasn’t able to see that goal through to 
completion, he certainly had a major hand in getting it started. 
 
The big man in the big boots with the big heart. He was held in 
high esteem, not only for his physical size, but also for the 
quality of his character and for the manner in which he treated 
people. 



1112 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1999 

I am in a good position to personally vouch that he is the 
standard against which all other elected representatives of the 
Battlefords have been judged and will continue to be judged for 
many years. 
 
He always knew your name, he always called a spade a spade, 
and he never backed away from a good fight. His place on earth 
will be a big space to fill. We are thankful for his time and we 
will not soon forget the big man from the Battlefords. 
 
May I offer my personal condolences to wife, Dorothy, 
children, grandchildren, and the entire family. Thank you for 
sharing him with us. And thank you, Mr. Kramer. 
 
Mr. Jess: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was saddened to hear 
of the death of Mr. Kramer. He was an example to us all. He 
has earned his place in this province’s history, but more 
importantly he has earned his place in our hearts. I want to 
extend my sympathy to his wife and family on their loss. He 
was an example to us all. 
 
He excelled at whatever he did, and I believe that was directly 
due to his ability to surround himself with the right people. His 
choice of a lifetime partner certainly exemplifies that. All those 
years in business and politics, Dorothy, his partner, was wife, 
mother, housekeeper, secretary, answering service, and soul 
mate for well over half a century. 
 
Eiling’s sense of humour stood him in good stead in not only 
politics and business. He was just plain nice to be around. And 
one of his attributes that is often overlooked was his natural 
ability to teach. On the lighter side, you always learned from his 
combination of quick wit, hilarious stories, and, oh yes, his 
ability to recite poetry. 
 
Most of you will never have heard that poetry. Having heard 
some of it, I certainly hope that not everyone has heard those 
poems. Great poems. You would have enjoyed them, Mr. 
Speaker, and then quickly called them out of order. 
 
In the early years, Eiling was a farmer, a rancher, and a 
construction worker having worked on the original construction 
of Highway 40 east of North Battleford. Little did he know that 
he would one day be the Minister of Highways. 
 
As the years went by, Kramer brothers ranch established a fine 
herd of polled Herefords on the Round Hill Ranch. His brother 
Herman used to haul a truck load of bulls southwest into the 
ranching country once a year and sell off the truck until it was 
empty. 
 
One year Herman couldn’t go, so Eiling went instead. I 
remember Herman telling me that he never went again. Eiling 
was a natural born salesman and he just plain brought home 
more money. So he became the Round Hill Ranch’s leading 
bull shipper. 
 
(1515) 
 
Eiling was a loyal friend, however, in the case of politics he 
was a formidable foe and loved nothing better than his 
exchanges with Davey Steuart. When I think of Eiling, I not 
only think of the politics — yes, he was a politician — but he 

was also so much more. 
 
I think of the ranch, I think of Kramer creek. I think of the 
fisherman, the hunter, the auctioneer, and the Kramer Auction 
Service of 50 years of service. I think of his choice of names for 
the building, the Big Bid Barn. I remember his early political 
activity in the Saskatchewan Farmers’ Union. 
 
Back in the ’40s, he was an organizer for the CCF during a 
federal election when the guest speaker became ill so Eiling 
gave the speech. He gave his first political speech in Mirror 
Lake School southeast of Spiritwood. Later he was a town cop 
in North Battleford and North Battleford’s first official Santa 
Claus. 
 
Often times he would travel to various events in those years and 
his mother would sometimes accompany him. She was a major 
influence on his life and his lifetime values as she was alert and 
active until well past her 100th birthday. 
 
I must mention that he was very partisan. He loved people, but 
if you were a Liberal or a Tory he had just a little trouble 
accepting you in just the same light. However, he did have the 
highest regard for the democratic . . . for democracy and its 
institutions. In fact the last time many of us saw him was at the 
Commonwealth Parliamentary Association annual meeting last 
week. 
 
Wherever Eiling went he was noticed. He had the ability or 
rather the gift of presence, which made it possible for him to 
walk into a room and to be the centre of attention. 
 
I would like to thank his wife, Dorothy, and his family for 
sharing him with us for all those years. He was a great 
campaigner for the good of Saskatchewan people, and he never 
quit. He was retired for nearly 20 years but his efforts to help 
people never stopped. I will miss the phone calls and visits, 
both at home and at work, as I know many of my colleagues 
will. 
 
The Minister of Highways informs me that Eiling’s still in the 
office, in spirit at least, as they have some casework in the mix 
for him right now. 
 
He was one of a kind, and I feel fortunate to have known and 
shared a portion of his life. He had the ability to make you feel 
like you were important to him because you were. He loved his 
fellow-man, and they returned that love and respect. He will be 
missed. 
 
The big Dutchman is gone — gone but certainly not forgotten. 
He was a man who was truly larger than life. The Kramer hat, 
the huge, friendly handshake, the fantastic memory, all part and 
parcel of the most complete politician that you could ever hope 
to meet. 
 
He was truly a person . . . someone who was always interested 
in everyone he met. And once he met you he almost never 
forgot. I’ve been with him when he called people by name that 
he had met only once 30 years before. 
 
A very gifted man who served his constituents from June 11, 
1952 faithfully for the next 28 years, four months and nine 



May 6, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 1113 

days; eight consecutive elections. And he was never defeated. 
 
I first met him in 1952 and he has been an influence on me ever 
since. My dad has been a close friend of Eiling ever since he 
attended his first nomination early that spring. Mr. Kramer, his 
wife Dorothy and their eight children — that’s two boys and 
eight daughters — were often visitors at our home for many 
years to follow. 
 
My first political activity was biking around the farming district 
where we lived, with Kramer posters in the basket. Not the 
ordinary posters like the rest of us might use, but posters with a 
picture of Eiling Kramer wearing his ever present big hat 
saying: Wanted on June 20 — Vote Eiling Kramer. And vote 
Kramer they did. How often have I heard people openly 
criticize the government of the day, but then say, but I vote 
Kramer. Well on June 8, 1960 I voted for the first time, and I 
too am proud say I voted Kramer. 
 
The thousands of miles of dust-free highways, the stop signs 
placed at a dangerous crossing while in opposition, and of 
course the seat belt legislation — these are his legacy. Yes, his 
community which was the whole province of Saskatchewan, is 
a better place because he lived here. 
 
I can honestly say about Eiling Kramer what I once heard him 
say about Woodrow Lloyd, he was the finest man I ever met. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to at 
this time express my condolences on behalf of myself and my 
many family members who lived in the North Battleford 
district, to Dorothy, Eiling’s family, and his children and his 
grandchildren. And I’d like to do so by acknowledging his 
influence on my life, particularly in my formative years. 
 
The name Eiling Kramer was held in great respect in my 
parents’ household. In fact every Christmas we would get a card 
from Eiling. Quite often there would be a photo and it would be 
displayed very prominently. 
 
One thing I remember, Mr. Speaker, was that every year the 
picture showed another child. And if I recall correctly one of the 
. . . if we look at Eiling’s speeches in Hansard, one of the 
remarks he would often make was that he would announce to 
the people in the legislature that there was an addition to his 
family through the year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s a couple of things that I learned from 
Eiling Kramer. First of all was a respect for this institution. It 
was Eiling who . . . through Eiling’s efforts that I first got to 
visit this institution when I was 14 years old. And it must have 
been something that happened there, Mr. Speaker, because the 
concept of having visited this grand building stayed with me 
until I revisited it again after I got elected. And I want to 
acknowledge the influence that he had on me in that respect. 
 
The second thing that I learned from Mr. Kramer was that 
everyone counts. I recall very well one time when in North 
Battleford, he brought Tommy Douglas into the community . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — I was there. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — The Premier says he was there at the same 

time. We were to meet at the Savoy Café, there was a group of 
youngsters here that we were going to meet with. And what 
happened was there was a lady who came to . . . and she asked 
to speak to Mr. Kramer and to Mr. Douglas because she had 
some concerns about a pasture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this lady was — I knew, I know of her — she was 
a very ordinary, down-to-earth, hard-working Ukrainian farmer. 
She was a widow. And, Mr. Speaker, before Mr. Douglas and 
Mr. Kramer came to take their place at the table, they took time 
to speak to this lady and to hear her concerns. And I learned 
from that, Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned, that in politics, as in 
life, everyone counts. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, that in Eiling’s memory, what I would like 
to rededicate myself is to something that he gave me. And as a 
youngster, it was people like Tommy Douglas and Eiling 
Kramer and — I can say it in the same breath — Pearson and 
Diefenbaker, who we looked up to because they were leaders 
and they were honourable. And the entire society looked at 
politics and politicians as something honourable to do and 
somebody honourable to be. 
 
And it was people like Eiling that gave me the belief that people 
can do great things together. And the way to do it . . . one of the 
ways to do it is through our political system and that therefore 
going into politics is honourable. And I would like that to be 
passed on to other generations as well. 
 
Mr. Johnson: — Mr. Speaker, this afternoon I’d like to tell 
about three little stories that involve myself and Eiling Kramer. 
 
I remember Eiling from, first of all, his auctions, where as a 
young individual of about 10 or 12 along with some of my 
friends we purchased some mirrors — as the household goods 
were being sold first — and took these mirrors out and broke 
them so that we had a nice-sized chunk of mirror about, oh, six 
by six. And then we would find a location where we were a fair 
distance away from Eiling, who was doing the auctioneering, 
and flash the sun in his eyes. And the reason for doing this was 
that if you could distract him enough from the sale that he was 
doing, he would tell another story in order to get the crowd back 
and start over again. And so we had successfully done this a 
number of times before he got someone to straighten us out a 
bit on just what was going on at the sale. 
 
A little later on, as a MLA — because I sat with him in the 
house and was in the neighbouring constituency of Turtleford 
— I can remember being part of the organized meeting where I 
was to introduce Eiling as the speaker. And I looked at it and I 
looked at all the people and I knew a few of them, and I knew 
that the individual that I was introducing could have named 
everyone that sat in the room, or at least from my opinion he 
could have; there may have been people that he didn’t know but 
he would have known most of them. 
 
So in that introduction, I introduced him this way — that some 
of the people in the room may have found Eiling not hollering 
out their name a half a block away lately, but I wanted to assure 
them that the individual that I was introducing still remembered 
them and still knew their name. It was just that he was in need 
of wearing glasses and he didn’t like wearing glasses and so it 
was that he couldn’t recognize them until they got a little closer. 



1114 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1999 

Eiling then gave a speech and he took his glasses off and on 
about 20 times during the speech, and everybody in the crowd 
roared when I introduced him. And afterwards Eiling was very 
mad at me for the introduction, but I don’t think there was a 
soul there that thought it was a bad introduction. 
 
And then I can remember a trip in a vehicle where he was 
talking about the farming that he did as a rancher and the kind 
of money that he made when he bought and sold broomtails or 
grassers, and what was really bothering him in that particular 
day was that one of his daughters was raising little dogs in the 
city of Regina and selling them and making more money on 
each of her transactions than he had ever made on any of the 
larger animals that he had raised and sold. And he told this to a 
number of different people. 
 
And so I’d like to place my name with everyone else in my 
condolences to the family; and I thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Renaud: — I’m going to be very short, Mr. Speaker. 
Firstly I want to offer my condolences to Dorothy Kramer — 
Mrs. Kramer — and the Kramer family. I just want to relate a 
story, and I know Dorothy would appreciate it. 
 
When I was Minister of Highways and Transportation, of 
course Eiling would phone quite often to advise me. And I 
appreciated his wisdom and all his wonderful ideas. 
 
But of course Eiling was a politician as well. And during the 
1980s when the Conservatives were in power, along the 
highways they put up these garbage stands — they were blue 
elevators. And I guess the reason they were blue was because 
that was the Progressive Conservative colours at the time and so 
the elevators were blue. And that bothered Eiling very much. 
And he wanted these blue elevators to disappear. And he had 
this idea that we should make gophers out of plastic and insert 
the gopher over the elevator. 
 
(1530) 
 
And we never did get that done, Mr. Speaker. And I really 
believe that Mr. Premier actually changed the Minister of 
Highways often so we could keep one step ahead of Eiling 
Kramer. 
 
So it was a wonderful experience to know Mr. Kramer. And I 
know that I will miss him; I will grieve, but the good memories 
I know will lessen the sorrow. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the 
Assembly, I move seconded by the House Leader of the Official 
Opposition, the member from Souris Cannington: 
 

That the resolution just passed, together with the 
transcripts of oral tributes in the memory of the deceased, 
be communicated to the bereaved families on behalf of this 
Assembly by Mr. Speaker. 
 

Leave granted. 
 
Motion agreed to. 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to move a 
motion with respect to the hours of the Assembly. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Hours of Sitting 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Moved, seconded by the member 
from Cannington: 
 

That not withstanding rule 3 and rule 55, on this sitting day 
the Assembly shall not adjourn until the completion of all 
business under Government Orders, including Royal 
Assent, and further that there shall be a recess from 5 to 6. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — I ask leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you and to members of the Assembly, the grade 5 
students from Hugh Cairns V.C. School. They’re here with their 
teacher, Susan Katzman, and chaperones, Mr. Zakreski, Mrs. 
Dolynny, Mrs. Singh, Mrs. Prokopchuk, Mr. Boswick, and Mr. 
Finney. Hi. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Highways and Transportation 

Vote 16 
 
The Chair: — Department of Highways and Transportation 
were here yesterday. I leave it up to the minister to introduce 
her officials or not. Okay, I’d ask her to introduce her officials, 
please. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To my immediate 
right is our deputy minister, Brian King. To my left is Barry 
Martin, the assistant deputy minister. Just behind me to the 
right, Bernie Churko, senior executive director of grain, rail, 
and area planning. And seated beside him is George Stamatinos, 
director of business services branch. And over to my left is 
Terry Blomme, executive director of southern region. 
 
That’s my officials. Thank you. 
 
Subvote (HI01) 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister. 
And a warm welcome to your officials this afternoon. 



May 6, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 1115 

As mentioned earlier, there were a number of Bills proposed 
dealing directly with those specific highways throughout the 
province which desperately need some immediate attention, 
perhaps more than just a little bit of attention. 
 
And, Madam Minister, you will recall on probably every spring 
about this time of the year or sooner, the notification to your 
department about the seriously deteriorating conditions of 
specific highways in my area. And I know you probably get 
some from other areas as well. 
 
As a result of that severe and serious deterioration, highways 
like Highway 310 and Highway 22, Highway 56, and Highway 
52, those roads that get patched up and in the spring of the year 
completely break up again. 
 
And I have here a list of responses under freedom of 
information with respect to the costs that your department has 
paid to individuals who have sustained damages, serious 
damages, to their vehicles as a result of the deterioration of 
some of the highways I mentioned, and others in other parts of 
the province. 
 
My first question in that respect, Madam Minister — Mr. 
Chairman, to the minister — is there a specific type of a form or 
a document that your department has prepared for those 
individuals who have come to myself, to my colleagues, to 
other constituencies, to other MLAs perhaps, to say, hey look, I 
was travelling down this highway and I unavoidably ruined my 
rim, had my wheel fall off and it needs to be replaced, and these 
are the damages that I’ve incurred? 
 
I was wondering if there was that type of a form or document 
that we could now or they could now request to detail the 
circumstances, location, times, and so on. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Well thank you for that question on this, 
but we don’t have a specific form for those types of damages. 
But we do have a pamphlet which we could make sure that you 
have a copy of and could be certainly within every constituency 
office, a public claims process that explains just the process that 
a person would go through if wanting to claim for damages to a 
vehicle. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Yes, I’m aware of the pamphlet. It’s just that 
there on occasion needs to be more specific detail that’s 
requested. I know that some of the folks that have called me 
after the fact have indicated that they had reported their 
damages to SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) and on 
many occasions were told that, well that’s tough. SGI would not 
necessarily cover the extent of those damages. And if in fact the 
damages were less than $700, there was no point them reporting 
it anyway because they would have to pay for it themselves. 
 
Is that correct? Or does your department in fact pay over and 
above what SGI may be responsible for? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — I think to be clear here, our process is 
separate from SGI. And if Highways and Transportation is 
totally . . . is responsible, there would be the type of claim that 
we would be at fault, then we would be legally liable for that. 
 
There would also be the time when clearly we’re not at fault 

and things were clearly marked, and we would say there would 
be no fault on that type of a claim, and probably no 
compensation. 
 
There are times again when the Highways department would 
not be at fault, but in which the circumstances of the damage 
that has happened, there might be some discretionary 
settlement. And that is what we have put through this kind of a 
claim process, is on that third type of a claim in which our 
department would be responsible. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I believe that my 
colleague perhaps made this point earlier. But under the 
circumstances, the question that I’m asking is because of the 
deductible. I believe that your department only sees the very tip 
of the iceberg as far as some of the damages that do occur to 
vehicles that travel under conditions that perhaps . . . The 
highways may be marked, but not every — not every crevice 
can be marked, not every pothole can be marked. 
 
And I’ll cite the example that I brought to your attention earlier 
about the home care nurse travelling on Highway 22, who very 
diligently slowed down to avoid the marked pothole, and 
having to move over into the oncoming lane, hit a piece of 
pavement, broken pavement, that damaged her vehicle to the 
extent of about 5 to $600 for a rim replacement. She needed a 
tow truck to bring her to the city of Melville for about 20 miles. 
Her commitments to her patients, and other commitments were 
delayed. She had to wait to obtain a replacement vehicle 
because that rim had to be ordered from the US (United States) 
and would take about a week or longer to obtain. 
 
Those are the kinds of situations that concern me, that occur. 
And in some cases, they are not reported because people give 
up their hands; they feel the only place they can go is to SGI. 
And SGI immediately tells them, hey, listen, unless you’ve got 
a pretty comprehensive package, it’s going to cost you 700 
bucks right off the bat for your deductible. 
 
So do you offset the costs of that deductible in the event of 
those types of accidents or mishaps to vehicles? 
 
(1545) 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — In answer to that, I think that’s what our 
whole process is about, is addressing those kinds of concerns. 
And there are times when, if the claim comes to us, that the 
deductible would be paid if the circumstance warranted. There 
would be times that it may not be paid. But that’s where it 
would be . . . clearly it would go through the process and 
there’d be an evaluation done on that, and we would try to do a 
reasonable settlement. 
 
I think on the whole piece on all of the highways, and when we 
talk about the claims that have come in and so on, I think what 
we are trying to do is be responsible for those circumstances 
when a road doesn’t get repaired as quickly as possible or, like 
you say, the type of a circumstance that you’ve just given us — 
that that kind of a claim would be looked at very seriously, and 
try to come to an agreement on some compensation for that. 
 
Mr. Osika: — And that claim is submitted directly to your 
department and in the event of a denial, is there an appeal 



1116 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1999 

process that an individual can go through? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Yes, there is an appeal process. If the 
claim is denied, there is an appeal process that comes back 
through to the deputy minister. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Just as an 
example, I’ve received a call from again another individual 
travelling on Highway 22 hitting a loose, rather large boulder 
on the highway, unable to avoid it, unmarked, to the tune of . . . 
replacement of a tire, wheel alignment, and parts and labour to 
the tune of $261.68. Those kinds of estimates and bills and 
circumstances surrounding the mishap, written out and reported 
to you for consideration, would that be appropriate? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Those types of claims again, I mean if 
some damage like that would happen, they would go to their 
area manager in that area. Or if you’ve got the pamphlet, there’s 
also phone numbers that would be directed through the different 
regions in the province and a person then would . . . again they 
would examine the claim, see what the circumstances were, and 
if it appeared that there needed to be a settlement that that 
would be done for that person. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you again for that. We’re dealing with 
Highway 22, 56, and 310. And I note in response to a freedom 
of information request that from April 1, ’98 to December 31, 
’98 there was one claim at a cost of $50. And perhaps, as I say, 
this seems like a minimal claim. So it encourages me but again 
suggests to me that perhaps there are many others of that nature 
that may not have been reported because of the concern about a 
deductible or not having sufficient coverage. It’s only an 
assumption on my part. That’s my concern. I’m happy to see 
that. 
 
Highway No. 56 — two claims at a cost of $604 in that same 
year. And Highway 310 at a cost of $627. 
 
And those are what . . . Highway No. 22 and Highway 310 in 
my area are the ones that particularly this spring have been a 
horrendous number of calls indicating that . . . almost as if those 
highways have deteriorated more than ever before and have not 
been receiving the immediate attention that they should. 
 
I was wondering if you had an update from January 1 to this 
point or to the end of April as to what additional claims. It may 
give me some comfort that people are aware of the pamphlet 
and have been submitting them directly to you without coming 
to me. I hope that’s happening. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — To the member from Melville. On that 
particular question, we don’t have any of the data here with us 
right now. What we’ve got is up to February 15. 
 
And some of the difficulty in knowing yet this spring the . . . 
First of all we don’t usually keep it by highway; I mean just, 
you know, by highway numbers as the claims are coming in. 
But they would likely, a lot of those claims then, if there are 
more, would still be in process. It takes time to get those settled. 
And so we don’t have the numbers with us at this time to know 
exactly what’s happened in March and April. 
 
But I would be able to say is that every spring this is the most 

difficult time on the highway system in the province, as it has 
been before. Like the one highway that you speak of, on 
Highway No. 56, there is going to be significant work done on 
that highway this year. And we certainly are putting more 
dollars in, in which to upgrade and to maintain the highway 
network in this province. 
 
Mr. Osika: — I thank you, Madam Minister. I see in the news 
release for the 1999 area highway projects for east central 
Saskatchewan . . . you may have a more comprehensive list of 
those specific highways in my constituency. 
 
I’ll refer first of all to Highway 22 which is one that I’ve just 
recently raised — or just raised, as a matter of fact. It indicates 
spot improvements, Killaly to Lemberg. Good heavens, Madam 
Minister — spot improvements, Killaly to Lemberg. Has 
anybody been on that stretch between No. 10 Highway and No. 
47 Highway; between No. 47 Highway and No. 9 Highway? 
Between that Highway 47 and Grayson is where that terrible 
incident occurred, taking that home care nurse out of business 
for a day and a half or so. 
 
I mean, how can you just do those little spotty little things? It 
goes beyond that. That’s the concern. What happens to the rest 
of these areas that are so badly deteriorated? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Okay. To the member opposite, when 
we talk about spot improvements, that’s above and beyond the 
regular type of maintenance and improvements that would be 
on the highway surface. 
 
And so on a highway like you’ve just suggested, on Highway 
No. 22, we would be spending about 2 to $3,000 per kilometre 
just on regular maintenance preservation on small 
improvements when they were needed on that highway. 
 
But when we talk about spot improvements, that’s significant 
dollars going in to do major work on certain areas of that 
highway, but not maybe a total stretch, but certain specific areas 
that need major work. 
 
And on the one that you’re talking about, on Killaly west, we’re 
going to be doing significant work on over 29 kilometres of it. 
It’s over $413,000 on that specific improvement. 
 
But I’d also like to bring to your attention is that right in that 
area some of the impact that passes on that road is due to some 
rail-line abandonment in that area. And so you’re getting 
heavier truck traffic, which again is one of the concerns in 
which we’re seeing an off-load from rail onto road due to a lot 
of federal policy that’s affecting our province. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Madam Minister, I don’t know what you want 
me to say. To apologize on behalf of somebody? I’m not going 
to apologize on anybody that you’re trying to lay the blame at, 
the blame at the feet of. I’m just going to tell you that we’ve got 
a problem in this province and you’re the one that’s responsible 
for looking after that department and fixing things. 
 
You know, we can get up here and what am I going to tell the 
folks that are saying, hey listen, I just broke an axle. Well, gee, 
the minister says it’s the federal government’s fault. They don’t 
want to hear that. 



May 6, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 1117 

They’re having a tough enough time in rural Saskatchewan with 
their transportation, with their farming, with the farm economy. 
And when they suffer even at what might seem to be minor — 
thousand dollars? Some people would say that’s much; that’s 
big dollars for those people now, that have other financial 
difficulties that they’re facing. 
 
To replace strings on a grain truck, that’s a horrendous cost to 
them. But yet they need that grain truck to haul the very 
precious little grain that they do have, in return for the little 
precious bit of money that does come back to them from that 
grain. So that’s not the issue here, who’s fault it is. The fact is, 
how are we going to fix this for the people in our province and 
this great province of Saskatchewan, so they don’t have to 
consistently and constantly go through the horrors of trying to 
avoid potholes, wreck their vehicles, wear and tear. 
 
We’re talking about folks that report to us damages to their 
vehicles. The day in and day out, the pounding that the people 
who have to travel those roads take. The depreciation on a 
particular vehicle would increase rapidly because of that as 
opposed to being able to travel on roads that don’t shake the 
living daylights out of the doors, and loosen the motor and the 
hinges, and what have you. 
 
So I guess just to focus on how can we fix this problem without 
trying to avoid or lay the blame somewhere else; what can we 
do to go beyond just to these spot improvements and these short 
stretches, but to address the whole issue of No. 22 Highway 
right from No. 47 to No. 9? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Well thank you for that question again. 
And I want to be really clear, is we do have a concern about the 
condition of the highways and roads in this province. 
 
And that’s why we’ve increased dollars into our budget. Every 
time since we’ve had a balanced budget, we’ve been targeting 
more dollars to highways and roads in this province. And so we 
do recognize that. 
 
And one of the ways in which we can have a better 
transportation system in the province is to do these strategic 
types of spot improvements, because those are some of the 
worst sections on some of the highways. And that’s a good way 
of spending our money very wisely in trying to get the best, I 
guess, the dollars spent for the most improvement that we 
possibly can on the road system. 
 
And it still comes down to, when you talk about are you trying 
to seek the answers — yes we are. I think you have to look at 
where the problems come from, try to seek the solutions. 
 
And at the municipal and the provincial level, I do believe in 
this province we’re trying to tackle that — with increased 
dollars and trying to target how we spend those monies in the 
very best possible way, in the types of partnerships that we’ve 
proposed this year in our budget with municipalities, both at the 
provincial Highways budget but also under the municipal 
governments’ budget. 
 
So I think we are trying to do the very best we can with the 
partners. But the one partner that is missing is at the federal 
level. And they certainly could be part of the solution, not just 

part of the problem. They’ve helped create the problem. 
 
I suggest that they should be part of the solution, either in cost 
sharing on highways and roads in this province, whether it’s at 
a national level or because of the shift in grain transportation 
which everybody agreed to right across this province. Even on 
Estey’s recommendation, I never heard one person say that the 
province shouldn’t be putting more money in, but that the 
federal government should also be putting more money into that 
infrastructure. 
 
So I think that’s not just me saying some blame; I think that’s 
got to be part of the solution. 
 
(1600) 
 
And I think that you’d want to be part of that solution also. 
Because I believe some of the changes we’ve seen in rail line, 
and we need to have some changes in the kind of regulations 
that will allow more branch lines. 
 
I know that the opposition has been saying, we want to keep 
more elevators. Well if we’re going to keep more elevators, we 
got to have more branch lines. So keeping more branch lines is 
going to take some changes at the federal level in the rules and 
regulations there, and we need to have some cost sharing at the 
federal level. So I believe provincially we’ve got to do our part, 
and it is a huge responsibility, and I believe we’ve got to fix 
more roads. 
 
We’ve got to do as best as we can with the dollars that are 
allocated. Each year we’ve added dollars to our budget. We will 
continue to do that. We’d just like to have some federal 
partnership because they should be part of the solution, not just 
part of the problem. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Madam Minister, how serious an effort is being 
made by your government to pressure the federal government 
on these issues? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — To the member opposite, and I will 
speak on behalf of myself on what we’ve been doing through 
Department of Highways and Transportation, but there’s also 
certainly been an effort made by our Premier and also through 
our Agriculture minister. 
 
But first of all, four western provinces certainly have done an 
effort to stay united in a lot of our meetings with the federal 
government. We were there in March to meet with the federal 
government with transportation on next steps with Estey, again 
saying that the provinces need to be involved, that producers 
need to be involved, and that if you’re going to move to a 
system that is more efficient, more accountable, all of those 
things, that’s admirable — but those efficiencies have to get 
back to producers. And that’s where we see some of the 
difficulties in the direction that we’ve seen in the federal level. 
 
We were also down at a stakeholders’ meeting that I also 
participated in and which both governments across this country 
were at, road builders were at, municipal governments were at, 
again meeting with the minister of transportation at the federal 
level. 
 



1118 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1999 

Also the Minister of Finance again saying the absolute necessity 
for a national highways and infrastructure program with cost 
sharing, because we cannot possibly compete in this country 
with all of the other countries but especially to our neighbours 
to the south, that are putting huge amounts of federal dollars 
into transportation. So we have been there for that. 
 
Later this month, around the middle of the month, I will be 
attending another meeting with the federal minister and 
provincial ministers right across, a federal-provincial meeting, 
again in which we will be stressing the needs for national 
dollars coming into highways system. But also some of the 
needs that we need in changes in grain transportation, the types 
of rules that need to be in place in which you truly can allow 
short lines to be viable, and a lot of other pieces that need to be 
in place. 
 
So we’ve been doing a lot of lobbying on that. I’ve got calls in. 
Actually, probably, maybe, possibly tomorrow I’ve been 
wanting to meet with the Hon. Ralph Goodale in the province 
here about a number of these issues, but also again to talk to 
David Collenette. 
 
We’ve got some issues around P.A. (Prince Albert) to Birch 
Hills right now on abandonment. We have asked the federal 
government to participate there with 40 per cent of their 
funding, ours matching 40 per cent, municipalities coming with 
20 per cent — an absolutely vital, strategic line for the port of 
. . . for Churchill and for the Hudson Bay route. We need to 
have the federal government who has jurisdiction to come 
onside on these issues. 
 
And certainly we’re doing what we can. We just participated in 
a short-line conference also where the federal government 
attended. I wasn’t there but the deputy minister was there. 
 
We are doing everything we can to get the attention of the 
federal government along with area planning committees, along 
with the Western Rail Coalition, along with the road builders, 
along with the people of this province that need to have the 
federal government’s participation. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you. You indicated that in the near future 
you would be meeting with the . . . was it the federal 
government, with the minister of transportation and highways, 
the federal minister, or . . . and other ministers? I’m sorry. I 
must have missed in your response when you were going to 
meet, when you were going to continue the meetings to discuss 
the need for this funding. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — There will be a federal-provincial 
meeting. It’s May 14, I think is the meeting date, with the 
federal minister, with all the provincial ministers across Canada 
and Territories . . . of transportation, sorry — of transportation. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Will that be taking place here or will that be 
taking place elsewhere? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — This meeting that’s coming up will be in 
Ottawa. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Will there be an opportunity for you to share an 
agenda with us and perhaps subsequently the results of the 

meeting? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — On that meeting, we don’t have a final 
agenda. It’s a bit fluid still yet, but we know the two major 
topics will be of course on: grain transportation, Estey review; 
and on national highways and infrastructure. 
 
Mr. Osika: — I take it that your priorities will be what you just 
responded: the transportation issues, the railway and 
abandonment . . . rail-line abandonment. Or will there be 
specific projects for this province that you would also have on 
your agenda? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — I think — to the member, again, from 
Melville — that the two main areas certainly will be on . . . the 
grain transportation and handling will be one. And some 
specific things that we will be again emphasizing is the 
importance of your moving to a more efficient, accountable 
system that you get those returns back to producers; and that 
you also have to take into consideration all of the costs, right 
from that farm to the port, which includes a road system in 
there. 
 
And so those would be areas that . . . when I get specific into 
some of the things in grain transportation that are important, to 
say that how the branch-line abandonment process is going, is 
not working as Estey identified — and we have some 
difficulties with that — and we would say again that that should 
be then halted until we know what the new rules are that are 
going to be in place, that the viability of short lines, that we 
need to have some . . . What they say are the difficulties, we 
would say that there needs to be a lot of changes there; those 
would be efforts that we would work on. And freight rates 
would be certainly a concern of our provincial government. 
That would all be wrapped into, of course, the review around 
the grain transportation and handling. 
 
And also the next step which again provinces need, the western 
provinces need, to be involved in that. But the producers also 
need to be involved in that because we do not want to see a 
system that becomes that all of the efficiencies just go to 
railways and grain companies. 
 
So those are the areas in which we would have major issues on. 
But the secondary again, is on the cost sharing with national 
highways and the kind of a proposal that could be put forward. 
The province is adamant that we get those kind of cost sharings. 
 
All of the provinces have done a study. We know what dollars 
need to come into the national highway system. We also know 
even from Estey, we did a . . . had an independent review study 
done on the impact to our roads. And so we’ve got the 
information ready. What we need is the federal partnership to 
come in on dollars and good policy that will help us build that 
transportation system that we need in this province. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Can you tell me who will be chairing that 
meeting, Madam Minister? And whether or not you will be 
leading any of the particular workshop groups or focus groups? 
 
The Chair: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Johnson: — Mr. Speaker, leave to introduce guests. 



May 6, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 1119 

Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Johnson: — Mr. Speaker . . . or Mr. Chairman, in the 
Speaker’s gallery today we have 11 students from grade 7 and 
8, from the One Arrow First Nation. They’re accompanied by 
two chaperones, Fabian Paul and Darlene Thomas, and their 
teacher, Roger Petrisor. And they are here observing the events 
of the Assembly. And they’re just across the river from part of 
the constituency that I represent. 
 
And I’d ask all members to welcome them here to the 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Highways and Transportation 

Vote 16 
 
Subvote (H101) 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Okay, on the type of role that we’ll play. 
Actually there was . . . like the New Brunswick minister will be 
the Co-Chair. I was able to be that last year. But it will be 
co-chaired by New Brunswick with the federal minister. 
 
But on the grain transportation side, certainly Saskatchewan has 
been taking a leading role with the western provinces on 
bringing that forward to the federal government. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Okay, thank you, Madam Minister. Just to end 
on that particular aspect, I want it on the record, and I want you 
to know that we have, my colleague, the critic for 
Transportation, has been corresponding with the federal 
minister and we have been getting probably similar responses to 
what you have. Just to let you know and assure you that our 
efforts are as well along the lines of having our federal 
government participate in this very, very essential and these 
needed programs. 
 
Just getting back to our local, provincial highway problems and 
again going back to the deteriorated ones like 22 and 310, 52, 
56. The markings on those highways are fine and they’re not 
bad in the daytime. But the problems are compounded, I’m sure 
you will appreciate, when travelling on those roadways at night. 
 
And I know you only have so many highway crews to get at 
these things and get them fixed, but there is a great deal of 
urgency for attending to those particular pieces and stretches of 
highway that can cause some pretty serious injuries and 
damage. It’s bad enough that in rural Saskatchewan you have to 
try to avoid hitting deer, and then trying to swerve around 
potholes makes it all the more dangerous. 
 
On the matter of highways and another incident that I just 
recently reported to you, Madam Minister, that is subsequent to 
a concern that I brought to you about Highway No. 10 near 
Balcarres — that scares the daylights out of me every time I 
travel that stretch and I see the increase in traffic. And, as we 

discussed last year, you had responded by saying there would 
be some history, that you would look into accidents, and some 
studies done this summer. Madam Minister, I appeal to you on 
behalf of that community — we can’t wait. 
 
That community at the intersection of No. 10 and 310 has 
already had far too many incidents involving fatalities. There 
have been too many near misses. We’ve got to have a speed 
zone through that stretch of highway. There are at least five 
businesses on the south side of the highway, opposite the town 
of Balcarres. Presently the new health care facility is nearing 
completion on the north side of the highway. There is also a 
service station and a confectionery and a very good 
restaurant/bar on the north side of the highway that people now 
access. 
 
(1615) 
 
In order to access either the health care facility and the town of 
Balcarres from the west side and that roadside stop, people 
travelling from west to east need to make a left turn. And when 
they come to a stop with their signal lights flashing, people 
travelling from behind in a 100-kilometre speed zone 
unfortunately may not, for whatever reason, have occasion to 
stop in time, as happened on May 1 on that location, which 
nearly cost us two lives. Nearly cost two lives there. 
 
I came upon the scene not long after it happened, and it just sent 
shivers through me. And I must admit — and I should 
apologize — a little bit of anger that we had discussed the 
concerns . . . The town of Balcarres had brought this concern to 
Highways department previously on different occasions from a 
safety-factor point of view, and nothing was done. Nothing. 
There were no counts from that . . . anytime up to this point that 
I’m aware of. 
 
And I know you said there’d be some counts done this summer. 
But you know what’s going to happen to summer: more 
B-trains, more heavy trucks, more summer traffic going to 
Katepwa Lake that will trangress that area. 
 
Madam Minister, I just would appeal to you. That particular 
area — just down the road, and you’re familiar with Terminal 
T-22 — that entire area needs to be very closely looked at and 
needs to be desperately looked at immediately. No further 
studies. 
 
I know there needs to be some reviews by engineers and safety 
experts — great. But we need it now in that area, and I appeal 
to you to give us a commitment that you will attend to that 
particular stretch of No. 10 Highway at your earliest 
convenience. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Okay, to the member opposite. I think 
there was two questions there. The first one was on the 
marking, and actually it’s one of the things our department is 
very, very proud of, is that we have some of the most efficient 
striping and marking equipment and technology in all of North 
America for the Department of Highways here. And actually 
some of the equipment was developed right within our own 
Department of Highways and has been asked to be used in other 
parts of the country actually in some of the national parks and 
so on, because it’s such an effective machine and it does such a 



1120 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1999 

good job. 
 
Now they do work full out once we get into the season where 
we put the markings back on. Certainly sometimes they wear 
out, and like you say, you’re not able to see them. And so they 
work full out through the whole season right up to the winter in 
which they cannot do marking any longer. 
 
Some highways are marked more than once a year because of 
the volumes on it and them wearing off. So we do make an 
attempt to have the markings on these highways as best as 
possible. 
 
On the second part of the question there on Highway No. 10, 
they have reviewed the kind of information so far. They’re 
going to do some more counts as quickly as possible in the next 
two to three weeks. 
 
They will be meeting with the town and area I think in about 
four to six weeks to look at — and they will have both the 
engineers, the safety people there — to see what the options 
should be. If it’s slowing down the traffic, turning lanes, I mean 
whatever will . . . I mean you’ve got to take all of the situation 
into consideration. But certainly our objective is to have the 
highways as safe as possible. 
 
And so we will look at the whole piece there and try to find out 
what will work in the best interests of that particular highway 
that you’re mentioning to us. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you. It still concerns me a little bit that 
we need to wait another four to six weeks. But I appreciate, you 
know, that you understand the urgency. Four to six weeks takes 
us into June. School’s out, summer traffic, lake traffic in that 
area — things get moving rather rapidly, Madam Minister. 
 
I want to thank you for that and thank your officials, and defer 
to my colleague from Thunder Creek. Thank you, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and good 
afternoon to the minister and her officials. Just a little bit further 
along the issue of pavement marking, could you let us know 
here this afternoon what was the pavement marking budget last 
year, and what will it be for this year? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — To the member from Melville on that 
question . . . Oh no, sorry, member from Thunder Creek that 
asked me that question. In ’98, we spent about — we don’t have 
the exact number — but around the $5 million mark on 
marking, and we will be spending that amount plus inflation, so 
probably somewhere 200 to $300,000 and more this year in our 
budget for it to cover the inflation. But it usually stays about 
standard, the amount of marking that we can get done in a year. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, 
I believe in the year prior to last year you had spent something 
closer to five and a half million dollars on that same sort of a 
treatment . . . on the marking of the lines on highways so there’s 
been a substantial reduction, if I understand it correctly, in last 
fiscal year. And if all you’re going to do is maintain that sort of 
a level, well certainly that’s not doing enough. 
 

And then with your response to my colleague from Melville, 
when you mentioned how the marking equipment here is put to 
use elsewhere, well I can see why if we’re not spending the 
money here in the province that we used to in terms of marking 
highways, well certainly, I guess it might be employed 
somewhere else. 
 
Because I even . . . when you look at the document that was 
prepared for the Department of Highways in July of last year, 
there’s transportation engineering literature, I’m told, that 
identifies these pavement markings. And here we can get into 
what we were yesterday in terms of cost-effectiveness. They 
refer to these pavement markings as being one of the most 
cost-effective means of providing safety on highways in the 
province. 
 
So certainly it seems that your concern is lacking in this 
particular regard. I know of a number of these types of, I guess 
you refer to them as collector highways, secondary, tertiary — 
I’m not quite sure of the term; it’s all to make them sound like 
they’re not very important anyway. 
 
There’s a lot of those highways where there are virtually no 
markings left now. Why would you not be considering to have 
had at least in place some sort of a level of funding that would 
allow for the safe marking of all of these centre and shoulder 
lines on some of these highways where it’s needed? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — I think there was two or three different 
questions there but back to the pavement marking budget. In 
’97-98 the budget was 5.4 million. What the actual spending 
was that year was 5 million? And so that year was an incredibly 
good season, just the needs that were . . . the paving marking 
was done in a very effective, efficient manner and that’s what 
we spent. And so that’s what we have put into the next two 
year’s budgets about, but we’ve added inflation to that. 
 
So pavement marking is one of the things that I think too is 
extremely important right across all of our paved surfaces. 
Every paved surface in the province of Saskatchewan gets 
marking every year. And some of the high volume roads will be 
marked two or three times because they do become worn off. 
But whether it’s secondary or, like you said, tertiary or primary 
road, marking is done on every one of our paved surfaces in the 
province. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, 
I’m looking at the construction projects for ’99 and 2000. I 
don’t see very many projects on the go in the Thunder Creek 
constituency. I notice Highway 339, Briercrest north, seven 
kilometres are going to receive preservation spot improvements. 
And would you be able to describe that specific process to me. 
 
We’re going to get into these specific processes here again this 
afternoon I can see, and the cost effectiveness of them, and the 
safety aspects I’m sure that I’ll again be trying to have you 
address. 
 
(1630) 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — To the member from Thunder Creek. 
Actually there’s a fair amount of work being done in your 
constituency now on highway . . . first 334, that is going to be 



May 6, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 1121 

completed into Avonlea. That’s a highway that was affected. It 
was a TMS (thin membrane surface) highway affected by a lot 
of the changes in the grain transportation on the heavy truck 
haul. 
 
Last year we did a major project on that and this year we will be 
completing that into Avonlea, and so that’s changing that from 
a TMS to a granular surface structured type of pavement. So 
that’s quite a big improvement for the community and area 
around Avonlea. 
 
In Highway 339, we’re doing spot improvements and you’re 
asking what does that mean? Well like I had said previously, all 
of these TMSs, get say somewhere 2 to $3,000 spent on them 
per kilometre each year. When we talk about a spot 
improvement we’re talking about then going in and doing some 
significant work on an area that has got the most damage and 
needs to be rebuilt. And so on 339, I think on spot 
improvements we’re going to be spending somewhere close to 
$270,000 on that in your constituency. 
 
And overall in the constituency of Thunder Creek, it’s close to I 
think about $5 million worth of road work that’s going to be 
done there on major projects. That’s not talking about the 
routine maintenance and preservation that’s also being done in 
that constituency. 
 
So I think a tremendous amount of work is actually being done 
in your constituency of Thunder Creek. I could give you some 
more examples there, but on the two that you’ve named I think 
I’ve told you what is going to be happening on 334 and 339. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. Well 
thank you, Madam Minister. I would be interested in having all 
of the examples that represent that $5 million worth of road 
work. I must be missing some of them on this list. 
 
It doesn’t look . . . if I add up the number of kilometres here, 
unless I’ve added it incorrectly, it looks like only about 36 
kilometres all told that are going to have any work done. 
 
So perhaps I’ve missed something. If you’d outline them all 
please. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — I could list off I think. Of course 
certainly Highway No. 1 is still in that constituency and so from 
let’s see — Highway No. 1 there’s resurfacing of over 30 
kilometres on that, so we put that together; that’s over $2 
million. Highway No. 1 again near Pense is having some work 
done on drainage ditch repair. Highway No. 1, they’re doing 
some turning lanes and so on on that. So then there’s, like I just 
said, there’s . . . let’s see that’s over 2 million maybe on that. 
 
Highway No. 19, Chaplin to 9.2 kilometres north, that’s $1.1 
million being done on that. On Highway 334, as I had said 
earlier, Avonlea east — that’s another 1.3 million. And that’s in 
addition to last year. I’m not just sure what those dollars that 
were spent last year on that, but that was in the millions of 
dollars too. 
 
And then we’ve got the Briercrest to Moose Jaw Creek at 
around $270,000. So that adds up to close to five million — it’s 
$4.977 million. Compared to my constituency at around $1 

million, I think there’s a significant amount of work being done 
in Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. And thank 
you, Madam Minister, for outlining those projects. 
 
And incidentally, I’d also just like to commend the minister. It 
seems like you’ve had a change of opinion with respect to 
Highway 301, because I noticed this morning there were some 
highway crews out there who were actually rolling some asphalt 
on the surface instead of doing, you know, the spray the oil and 
lay the gravel. And this was occurring right over where there 
was a previous treatment. 
 
So I appreciate the fact that you have taken some safety 
concerns at heart with respect to this. And anywhere else in my 
constituency that you might be able to reconsider some of these 
types of applications, I’d certainly appreciate it. I suppose I 
maybe am running the risk of sounding selfish here then, I 
sense from some of the members here, when we speak of 
Thunder Creek only. 
 
I noticed on this list, we can . . . well we can head practically to 
the other end of the province if we want. With respect to 
highways in the North, the highway that goes into Cumberland 
House, I don’t see very much on here for Highway 123 in the 
way of preservation or spot improvements. Is this the sum total, 
1.1 kilometres? Is that all that you’re actually going to improve 
on that highway during this fiscal year? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — To the member from Thunder Creek. 
Part of . . . too what we work on looking at the whole system 
and trying to spend the dollars in the most beneficial way as to 
preserve the system, but we also like to consult with the people 
in areas and get their input on the priorities. 
 
Now in Cumberland, certainly the Cumberland Bridge was a 
major expenditure that was expended by our government and 
was important for the community in that area. 
 
When looking at . . . There still will be dollars spent on 
Highway No. 122 on regular maintenance and preservation. But 
also in talking to the community, they felt their priority was to 
do surfacing of the highway as it goes through town and its 
connection to the bridge. And so that’s the major work that’s 
being done this year. 
 
Certainly there will be work done in other years coming up on 
Highway 123 and there will be work still done on regular 
maintenance and preservation of Highway 123. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Madam 
Minister, it sounds to me like perhaps you’re not consulting 
enough with some of the people in the North. I’ve got a letter 
here in front of me from somebody who is speaking with 
respect to the conditions of Highway 123. I could just quote 
briefly some of it here. It doesn’t sound very pretty — I have to 
warn you in advance. And to quote: 
 

To get to the oldest settlement in Saskatchewan, 
Cumberland House, you drive on Highway 123, the worst 
road in Saskatchewan, arguably the worst road in western 
Canada. 



1122 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1999 

And this individual goes on, and I quote: 
 

When doctors travel from Nipawin to Cumberland House, 
they don’t drive the road, they fly over since one of their 
members was killed on that road. 

 
I can quote further: 
 

This road is so bad that the ambulance from Nipawin got 
stuck twice in the middle of the road. 

 
And further: 
 

Finally we have a bridge paid for by the local residents, the 
poorest of the poor. Now through neglect of successive 
Tory and NDP governments, we no longer have a road. 
When will this government remember that Cumberland 
House exists and do something about Highway 123? 

 
And that’s the end of the quote. So there’s the sorts of things 
that we hear from people who are representing people in the 
North. These are the sorts of concerns that they have. I don’t 
know that I’ve heard yet this afternoon anything that would 
really satisfy individuals such as this. But I certainly judge by 
the content of this letter that Highway 123 sounds like a prime 
candidate to have been introduced as a Romanow road as well. 
 
But perhaps you could outline for us what you anticipate in the 
way of future work on this road. You’ve briefly made some 
mention, but could you give some of these people a little bit 
more hope. I’d certainly appreciate it. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Well thank you on that question, 
because actually I visited that community and met with the . . . 
met with the community in Cumberland. And certainly they had 
some circumstances, especially last spring, with some real 
concerns about some of the soft spots, and I know in the spring 
that we do have some of those difficulties on those roads. And 
so I had an opportunity to meet with the community up there. 
 
We’ve had discussions with them. And what they said, they 
really appreciated us as a government spending $6 million on 
the Cumberland bridge. I don’t think they’d ever thought that 
we’ve forgotten about that community. They’ve recognized that 
we have certain limitations due to the amount of resources. 
 
They also said, when we were up there — and I heard some of 
those, I’m not just sure when you got that letter — but the 
concerns last year too about some of those soft spots. We 
actually added dollars into our budget last year later on in the 
season — I think it was over $300,000 — to do those 
improvements on those spots because of the difficulty, as you 
say, for ambulance service. I think that is extremely important 
that we keep the road in good shape. 
 
But the community said to us, rather than this next year, if we 
could put more dollars onto the gravel and work on that part of 
the road, or would they rather have the paved surface of the 
highway through the town, they said their priority would be 
doing the paving this year through the town of Cumberland. 
That would be their priority and that’s what we have done in 
this budget. 
 

But we’re certainly still going to continue to spend money on 
Highway 123 in routine types of maintenance and preservation 
and making sure that that road is an accessible road for that 
community. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Madam 
Minister, I . . . Always we’re before various ministries and in 
estimates — and I’m not criticizing, certainly not criticizing the 
Chair’s decision here — but on a number of occasions we’re 
told, well you’re in estimates for a particular department so you 
should stay on track. 
 
Well in that vein perhaps ministers could respond in that same 
fashion. And I just simply put to you, could you not endorse a 
policy as a Minister of Highways where the entire amount of 
revenues collected in fuel taxes by a provincial government 
were put back to the very use of constructing and maintaining 
highways in the province? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Thank you for that question, because I 
think again this question, there’s been a lot of maybe 
misconception out there and I think that we have recognized — 
as I’ve said previously — that we need to continue to put more 
dollars into highways and roads in this province because it is 
certainly a priority of this government and a priority of the 
people of the province. 
 
But also a priority of the people of the province is to have a 
balanced approach and so they know with every surplus budget 
that you can do some tax reduction, some debt reduction, and 
some program enhancement. 
 
So if we actually take the dollars that we’ve been adding into 
our budget on Highways and Transportation, and also the 
dollars that go into the municipal roads from the provincial 
coffers, and we compare that to the amount of revenue that we 
take in that would be actually revenue on road fuel tax — not 
on locomotive tax, not on tax that is rebated to farmers, but 
what we would consider tax that is on road tax — and we do the 
numbers over last year, and now with again some increase in 
our budget this year, we are very close to spending 80 per cent 
of the dollars collected back onto highways and roads in this 
province. 
 
I think we always have to remember, as the Minister of Finance 
has said, in every dollar collected in revenue, 16 cents of that is 
also going to still interest payments. So we’re very much 
approaching putting the dollars that we collect on revenue from 
gas tax back onto the roads. 
 
But I also want to just caution, there could be a government and 
there was a government at one time that cut fuel tax. Does that 
mean that zero dollars go back on the roads? I think that the 
argument that needs to be made — and we can compare it to 
fuel tax if we want — is that we know we need to spend more 
dollars, and that’s why they’re continuing to add more dollars. 
And we need to have some federal participation because on fuel 
tax they’re only putting back into the highways and 
transportation system across this country at a 6 per cent level. 
 
(1645) 
 
So we recognize we need more dollars. We need to have the 



May 6, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 1123 

federal dollars. Certainly we can do the comparison to fuel tax. 
But I think if we had a fuel tax level, we could drop our fuel tax 
and say, okay we got 100 per cent going back onto roads. But 
that’s not enough dollars. I mean the percentage isn’t all that 
valuable. 
 
We know we need more dollars, good planning, federal 
contributions. Thank you. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Minister, I 
want to thank you for coming again this evening, and along 
with your officials. 
 
I had some calls about some of your response of yesterday. And 
in fact there was one caller who listened to some of your 
responses and wanted to pass one thing on this evening, if you 
were coming back. And I said you would be. And that’s, shame 
on you for what you’re saying is enough spending on highways 
in Saskatchewan when they as seniors have to drive on these 
things. And this call came from the Mankota area. 
 
And they said, if you want to see really what it’s like, come 
down there. In fact, Madam Minister, I’d drive you down just to 
show you what these roads are like. 
 
If you think you’re spending enough on the highways system, 
you just come into the south, southwest. And I told this senior 
couple that I would raise this with you. And on behalf of them, 
shame on you and your government for what you’ve done to 
rural Saskatchewan, especially in regards to highways. 
 
Another issue that was raised — and I believe it has been raised 
with you and your department — is that the signage on No. 4 
Highway at the community of Cadillac. Now I know that the 
community of Ponteix has requested a sign be put up on No. 4 
Highway to show that in fact there is a community to the east. 
There’s many communities between Cadillac and Assiniboia. 
 
But in fact, are you going to do or have you already agreed to 
put up a sign saying that Ponteix is just a little bit to the east? 
This is a community that is a francophone community. There is 
a great number of tourists that visit Ponteix each year for 
cultural reasons. And in fact they — I think it’s a plesiosaur — 
they have people coming to view their plesiosaurs and such. 
And can I have some commitment that you’re going to at least 
do that small amount for the community of Ponteix — is get the 
sign up on No. 4 Highway? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — To the member for Wood River then. On 
the issue of Ponteix, yes, they brought that up to me — I think it 
was at the SARM convention — and Highways officials have 
been out and met with the people. And it’s my understanding 
that there will be a sign put up for Ponteix on Highway No. 4. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, I appreciate that, but when I 
heard your response I was thinking wouldn’t it cost more to 
send the officials out there to discuss whether or not they’re 
going to buy a, you know, a $40 sign then just go ahead and put 
the sign up when you first asked? 
 
That may be the problem with your government is that, you 
know, there’s so much bureaucracy to get the smallest of things 
done, and you probably add those costs onto what you’re 

spending on highways in rural Saskatchewan when in fact it 
makes no sense to the people. You know, it’s really a case of 
trying to get a grip on your department, Madam Minister. 
 
I’m going to raise a few concerns. Last night we talked about 
the chunk of pavement that did a lot of damage to the wheel and 
vehicle of the Grydes at Climax. You assured me that this 
would be taken care of. Another one was sent in and this one, 
I’m just looking at remarks from the adjuster. I’ll read: 
 

My name is Donald M. Mitchell of 526 MacKenzie Drive 
of Swift Current, Sask. I was going east on High No. 18. 
The blacktop was really loose on that road. I hit a pothole 
and a piece of asphalt came hitting the bottom of my car. It 
touched the cross member, cracked the oil pan. I kept on 
driving, not knowing anything was wrong. 
 
I only had eight miles from my farmyard to go. When I got 
to the farm, I checked underneath my car and seen that the 
oil was running out of the bottom of the car. I did not drive 
my car after that. 
 
Highway No. 18 is really bad all the way from Climax to 
the No. 4 junction. You can only go 40 kilometres per hour 
on that highway at the best of times. It will be fairly 
smooth and all of a sudden there’s a big hole with the 
asphalt all broken up. 
 

And this Don Mitchell, and I look at his repair bill for oil pan 
damage to a car — I think it was $280. And I was wondering: 
do you have a system or a process in place where people when 
they’re getting their vehicles smashed, completely destroyed, 
things like this are happening, where they can in fact get a, you 
know, a process that’s . . . (inaudible) . . . and taking care of 
these bills without jumping through all the hoops with SGI and 
such? Because really it comes down to your department, 
whether or not you’re taking care of the highways. 
 
And they’re disastrous. Last year we raised several cases. I 
think it was a vehicle that the Coburn’s had. Now we raise the 
case of the Grydes. And you can say that you’re spending 
enough on highways, but when you have chunks of asphalt 
coming through the vehicle windows that are huge. We brought 
one in as you recall about a year ago. What did that weigh? 
Some, some 20 pounds. You know chunks of pavement 
wrecking vehicles, ripping the bottom out of a car. 
 
This has gone on too long. It’s just, it’s getting absolutely 
dangerous. There’s a safety factor. 
 
But at least for these people that have the damages on their 
vehicles, will you make sure that there’s a process that they can 
actually phone your office or an office in your department to 
say okay, here’s the bill? 
 
Just accept that the problem is yours because perhaps you’re not 
as effective in cabinet as others are. And so that spending would 
go to Guyana or Chile or Santiago or New Zealand or whatever. 
And so you’re not quite as effective in getting money for 
Saskatchewan highways. 
 
So really then it comes to you just making sure that these 
people’s bills are being paid. Will you insure that process is 



1124 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1999 

being put in place? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — To the member from Wood River. First 
of all, the particular case that you just brought forward, I’m not 
sure that we’ve had that but certainly forward it to us if we 
haven’t received it, because we will certainly look over it. 
 
I’m talking about the process here. We do have a process in 
place. Clearly, we have said, as I said previously to one of your 
other caucus members, if the department is totally at fault then 
we are legally liable. If there is a claim in which we are not 
legally liable, there can be — I’ll just wait; I’ll just keep talking 
I guess. 
 
But anyways, we do have a process in place. It’s a public claim 
process. Pamphlets can be brought to your constituency office 
and it has the phone numbers on there for you to be able to 
phone to understand that process. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well you know, Madam Minister, my 
colleagues had raised these construction projects and I look at 
where some of these damages are constantly occurring. In fact, 
you know, some of the constant claims that are coming in are 
from Highway No. 4 from Cadillac to Val Marie; 18 from Val 
Marie over to Climax, and then back up 37 to Shaunavon. And 
you’re getting quite a number of those claims coming in. 
Hopefully you are. At least, I’m getting a number of bills and I 
have to assume that they’re all going in to your department. 
 
I look at your construction projects. You know, they talked 
about the worst highways in Saskatchewan. I’ll tell you one of 
the worst highways that I’ve ever been on in my life is from Val 
Marie to Cadillac. That is a highway that you can’t, you can’t 
take your eyes off the road and you have to always have two 
hands on the wheel. It is so wavy. 
 
You know, you talk to somebody who’s hauling grain or fuel on 
that highway — they’re afraid there’re going to roll their 
vehicles in the middle of the road. Absolutely ridiculous. 
 
You’re cutting Saskatchewan people off. You’re not prepared to 
do what you have to do or what your department could do in 
ensuring that we’re saving some railroads out in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
You know, your thrust is, oh let’s do something with the federal 
government. Well you sit back and do nothing. You do nothing. 
At least will you fix their highways? That No. 4 Highway is an 
absolute disgrace. These vehicles that are being damaged here, 
that’s where they’re being damaged, is in that loop, just that 
loop. 
 
And I mean it goes on and on. If you look at the Wood River 
constituency, it’s absolutely horrible. The other day I was in 
Assiniboia heading down to Coronach. And if you head east of 
Assiniboia, you go through a stretch — I don’t know, four or 
five miles — I’ve never seen so many red flags. 
 
I think you’ve bought all your red flags and put them right 
there, and it is disastrous. You know, you can easily throw a 
rock from red flag to red flag for quite a stretch. And it’s just 
embarrassing. It should be really embarrassing for the 
government. 

Yet I look at your construction projects and your news release, 
“Highways and Transportation Minister Judy Bradley has 
announced nine projects in southwest Saskatchewan.” Well 
when I look at these projects in southwest Saskatchewan, what 
is there for the Wood River constituency? Well really you have 
nothing. 
 
You think the highways are fine in the Wood River 
constituency, and you’re getting all these claims in. And a year 
ago was several claims from the Ponteix area. You recall those. 
Bridges were being washed out. You didn’t even have flags to 
put up. 
 
You know, at what point are you going to just accept that some 
of these highways — 4 and 13 and 18 and 37 — shouldn’t they 
ever get into your construction project lists? You’re spending 
nothing, and I look at what you’re saying is good — spot 
improvements, spot improvements. 
 
You know they may look like you can do spot improvements 
from 25,000 feet in the jet, and on a clear day I think you can 
even see some of those supposed highways. But get down and 
drive on them and you’ll find out why these people have just 
absolutely had enough. 
 
When are you going to start to spend some money in some of 
these other areas? Wood River constituency gets no money, 
virtually no money spent there. I have to sit back and think, are 
you really so crass as to be doing highway projects based on 
politics? Oh, I hope not but I suspect that’s exactly what it is. 
 
Madam Minister, when I take a look at your flags, you know 
here we have a freedom of information request that was 
answered for 1998 — approximately 1,200 warning flags for a 
cost of $6,700. 
 
Do you know how many kilometres of miles of highway that it 
just completely beats to nothing — don’t have flags. I sit back 
and wonder: well if that’s your only highway and transportation 
budget spending is flags, aren’t you even prepared to buy 
enough flags? 
 
You know are you using . . . I’ve had so many people raise this 
with me, Madam Minister, that in fact they’re wondering with 
this upcoming election if in fact who these two NDP candidates 
are — bump and danger. Because they seem to be all over the 
province but maybe you’re short. Maybe you’re short some of 
these candidates or red flags. Twelve hundred flags aren’t doing 
it. And it’s quite clear when you’re seeing the kind of damage 
to the vehicles that are out there. 
 
Madam Minister, it’s as simple as this. Do you feel that you 
even have enough red flags up if you’re not prepared to fix the 
highways? 
 
(1700) 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — I just want to tell the member from 
Wood River that we are doing work in his constituency. And 
actually I have driven on a lot of the highways and roads in that 
area. I’ve had the chance to go down in that area several times. 
I’ve met with communities. I just met with the Southwest 
Transportation Planning area committee and they actually know 



May 6, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 1125 

— and I want to just reconfirm — is that, you say we’ve got 
enough money; I say no, it’s not enough money. 
 
But are we trying to address it? Yes, we are. We continue to add 
money. And each year in good seasons we’ve even been able to 
add more money. But we have to keep a balanced budget. As I 
said before, we’ve got to work with your communities. We’ve 
got to work as a province doing the best we can with the dollars 
we have and the best kind of planning, and we do need that 
federal partnership. 
 
But to be a little bit more specific on the constituency of Wood 
River, we are working on Highway No. 4 with some spot 
improvements. And as I’ve said earlier today, spot 
improvements are above what the regular maintenance and 
preservation work is done. And that’s worth over half a million 
dollars on Highway No. 4. 
 
On Highway No. 13, in your area of Limerick to Hazenmore, 
there’s a full seal coat being done in there. That again is a major 
project being done over 49, almost 50 kilometres worth of work 
that’s being done there. 
So we are addressing issues in your constituency, actually at a 
level very close to the amount of dollars that’s being spent in 
my own constituency. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Madam Minister, can I have your 
assurance you will send over that list and the dollars that you’re 
spending in the Wood River constituency? 
 
And the fact that you even break it down by constituency — 
and that’s what you’re looking at — your quoting from sheets 
that are breaking this down by constituency tells the people that 
are watching tonight, yes, it is political. Otherwise who would 
break it down by constituency? 
 
But please, we’ll leave it at that. I think you fool no one. Send it 
across, send it across, and we will have a look at it. 
 
I know we’re wanting to wrap up here right away, Madam 
Minister, but there is one other thing that I think I want to 
briefly touch on and that is something that has become very 
obvious in each Crown and department as we’re getting closer 
to the election — the horrible increases that your departments 
and Crowns are spending on polling and advertising. 
 
I had one freedom of information request answered here where 
in fact Quest Communications Group for the ‘97-98 fiscal year, 
$506,642 spent on Quest Communications and that’s pretty 
substantial. It’s very substantial. 
 
And when I take a look at another freedom of information and 
the cost of operating communications and public relations 
branch of the department for the last two years, and for the 
’97-98 year it was $775,000; and for the ’98-99 — and this only 
goes up to the end of February — you’d already spent 620,000. 
 
Madam Minister, the point is, and the people sit back and they 
ask this through us: why you would spend these kind of dollars? 
You know it’s nothing for you to spend a million here and a 
million there. I’m sure if you stand up, you’d have to admit that 
you’re spending a mere pittance in the Wood River 
constituency with all those highways that you’ve completely 

neglected since you’ve been in power. And yet you’re prepared 
to do all this advertising. 
 
That’s the problem with your government. It’s all advertising 
friends; it’s building election — padding election accounts. 
That’s what it’s really coming down to all too often. 
 
So, Madam Minister, I’m not even going to wrap up by asking 
you a question. I’m just going to ask that you start to show a 
little compassion and show a little caring for the people that are 
in this province that, you know, you’ve closed their hospitals, 
you’re busy closing their schools, you’re having . . . you’re 
forcing kids to go further and further by bus, and you’re forcing 
ambulances to be taking people out of these constituencies for 
health care. 
 
I could go on and on. At least give them a proper road to be on, 
and we’ll discuss the other stuff at another day. But you’ve got 
to do something on the road issue first. I’ll leave you with that 
thought. I don’t even need a reply. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Minister, and to 
your officials. Madam Minister, I actually have a number of 
questions but to save some time, can you give me an assurance 
that if I contact you and give you specific . . . specifics 
regarding these questions, that you and your department 
officials will get back to me as quickly as possible on issues 
that have just been raised and brought to my attention in the last 
few days and I think it’s imperative that we at least get a 
response to. Is that an assurance given? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — I’d absolutely be able to give you that 
response. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Madam Minister. And thank you 
certainly to your officials for some of the other answers we’ve 
received, certainly answers we’re still waiting for regarding 
expenditures by kilometre for different levels of highway 
construction as well. Thank you. 
 
Subvote (HI01) agreed to. 
 
Subvotes (HI02), (HI04), (HI10), (HI03), (HI06), (HI11) agreed 
to. 
 
Vote 16 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Lending and Investing Activities 
Highways and Transportation 

Vote 145 
 
Subvote (HI01) agreed to. 
 
Vote 145 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Lending and Investing Activities 

Saskatchewan Land Information Services Corporation 
Vote 159 

 
Subvote (SL01) — Statutory. 
 



1126 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1999 

Vote 159 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1998-99 
General Revenue Fund 

Budgetary Expense 
Highways and Transportation 

Vote 16 
 
Subvotes (H104), (H103) agreed to. 
 
Vote 16 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1998-99 
General Revenue Fund 

Lending and Investing Activities 
Highways and Transportation 

Vote 145 
 

Subvote (H101) agreed to. 
 
Vote 145 agreed to. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Okay. Thank you. I want to thank the 
opposition on both sides for their questions. I also want to thank 
the members of my department that were here in order to help 
respond to those questions. Thank you. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 6 p.m. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 


