





























































Hansard: April 26, 1999


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 749 
 April 26, 1999 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Our petition today 
is to do with agriculture in Saskatchewan. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
demand the federal government work with Saskatchewan 
to put in place a farm aid package that provides real relief 
to those who need it, and that the provincial government 
develop a long-term farm safety net program as it promised 
to do when it cancelled GRIP against the wishes of 
farmers. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

The communities involved with the petition, Mr. Speaker, are 
from Langenburg and Churchbridge. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
today for disenfranchised widows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to have the Workers’ 
Compensation Board Act amended whereby benefits and 
pensions are reinstated to disenfranchised widows and 
whereby all revoked pensions are reimbursed to them 
retroactively with interest to April 17, 1985. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

The people who have signed this petition are from Saskatoon 
and Regina. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I bring a petition 
forward from the good residents of Saskatchewan. Prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call on federal and provincial 
governments to dedicate a significantly greater portion of 
the fuel tax revenues for road maintenance and 
construction so Saskatchewan residents may have a safe 
highway system that meets their needs. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The signatures are from Ituna, Lestock, Goodeve, Grenfell, 
Indian Head, Wolseley, and many other small communities 
from this great province of Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I join with my 
colleague in bringing forward petitions regarding fuel taxes. 
The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call on federal and provincial 

governments to dedicate a significantly greater portion of 
fuel tax revenues toward road maintenance and 
construction so Saskatchewan residents may have a safe 
highway system that meets their needs. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed these petitions are 
from the Coronach, Rockglen, Assiniboia, Limerick, Saskatoon, 
Yorkton, Regina, Climax, Val Marie, Mankota areas of the 
province. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 
petitions on behalf of citizens that are concerned about the state 
of our highway system. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call on federal and provincial 
governments to dedicate a significantly greater portion of 
fuel tax revenues toward road maintenance and 
construction so Saskatchewan residents may have a safe 
highway system that meets their needs. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Those who’ve signed these petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from 
the communities of Gravelbourg, Herbert, Rouleau, and many 
other centres across this province. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to rise 
again today to present a petition on behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan in this House. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call on federal and provincial 
governments to dedicate a significantly greater portion of 
fuel tax revenues toward road maintenance and 
construction so that Saskatchewan residents may have a 
safe highway system that meets their needs. 
 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions have been signed by the good folks 
from the Humboldt, Lanigan, Watrous area. And I so present. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
again on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan who are concerned 
about children with learning disabilities. And I’ll read the 
prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide essential funding and ensure the delivery of 
scientifically proven, diagnostic assessment and 
programming for children with learning disabilities in 
order that they have an access to an education that meets 
their needs and allows them to reach their full potential. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 



750 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 1999 

All of the people who have signed this petition today, Mr. 
Speaker, are from Prince Albert, and Tway, Saskatchewan. And 
I present it on their behalf with pleasure. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the petitions presented at the last 
sitting have been reviewed and found to be in order. Pursuant to 
rule 12(7) these petitions are hereby received. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 31 ask the government the following question: 
 

How many full-time, part-time, and casual registered 
nurses were employed in each of the health districts on the 
following dates: December 1, 1998; January 1, 1999; 
February 1, 1999; March 1, 1999; and April 1, 1999; 
 
By district, how many full-time registered nurses had been 
hired in the following months: December 1998; January 
1999; February 1999; March 1999; and April 1999; 
 
By district, how many registered nurses had quit during the 
following months: December 1998; January 1999; 
February 1999; March 1999; and April 1999; 
 
And by district, how many registered nurses that were 
employed full time had requested to be casual employees 
during the following months: December 1998; January 
1999; February 1999; March 1999; and April 1999. 

 
Thank you. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on Wednesday next move the first reading of a Bill, The 
Children’s Law Amendment Act, 1999. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
would like to introduce to you and through you to members in 
the House my husband Dan who is making a very rare 
appearance in the west gallery today. It’s been suggested to me 
by some of my colleagues, Mr. Speaker, that anyone who can 
endure living with me for 42 years deserves a very warm 
welcome to this place. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Recreation Association Awards Banquet in Prince Albert 
 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
recognize a couple of volunteers from my constituency, Marj 
and Dwayne Biccum. The Biccums were two of eleven 
volunteers recognized at the North Central Regional Recreation 
Association awards banquet held in Prince Albert. They 
received the 1999 volunteer recognition for their contribution to 
special services. 
 

Dwayne and Marj own and operate the Wakaw Recorder, a 
weekly newspaper. They are and have been two of the most 
involved people in Wakaw. Together they have been active in 
the church choir, parish council, and board of trade. They also 
work together for minor sports and the arena association. 
 
Marj’s other involvements include past president of the Wakaw 
Ukrainian Dancing Association, figure skating club, and ladies 
curling club. She was also actively involved in pastoral care, the 
Catholic Women’s League, the hospital auxiliary, and the Girl 
Guide movement. Marj is presently involved on the Wakaw 
town council, P.A. (Prince Albert) and district victim services, 
and coordinator of the Heart Beat Tour. 
 
Dwayne is a 24-year member of the Wakaw Lions Club and is 
past-president and present secretary. He has chaired the Wakaw 
Housing Authority and is past mayor of Wakaw. 
 
Dwayne has served on the volunteer fire department, the Sage 
Hill Economic Development Corporation, the curling club, the 
arena committee, the school board, and the coordinator of 
Donor’s Choice. 
 
Currently Dwayne is involved with the Knights of Columbus, 
the parish finance committee, Wakaw Farmers’ Market 
Committee, and takes his turn with Meals on Wheels. 
 
Dwayne and Marj’s countless hours of volunteering have 
contributed greatly towards a caring community in Wakaw. 
Congratulations to both of them on receiving this very 
deserving award. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Nurses’ Watch Program 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to announce that today the Liberal caucus will begin its 
nurses’ watch program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the watch has long been associated with the 
nursing profession as a common part of the uniform. The word, 
however, has taken on a whole new meaning. The people of 
Saskatchewan have been watching nurses get fewer in number 
since the NDP (New Democratic Party) came to power. 
 
The deplorable working conditions that have resulted from the 
NDP’s decision to cut 600 nurses, close hospitals, and slash 
acute services are forcing nurses to leave the profession and 
sometimes the province. 
 
It’s time this government was held accountable for the number 
of nurses leaving. We intend to hold the NDP accountable for 
the nursing shortage. Under our nurses’ watch program, we will 
ask for regular updates on the numbers of nurses quitting, 
leaving, and being hired in each district. 
 
Only by holding the NDP accountable can we hope to reverse 
the trend so we no longer have to watch our nurses leaving. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



April 26, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 751 

Mitchell’s Gourmet Foods of Saskatoon 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I 
would like to speak about yet another example of jobs being 
created in Saskatchewan and yet another example of local 
businesses achieving success in Saskatchewan. 
 
Recently Mitchell’s Gourmet Foods of Saskatoon announced an 
agreement with the Schneider corporation. The two companies 
have formed an alliance which will allow Mitchell’s to remain 
an independent food processor, but also allow them to expand 
with the financial backing of Schneiders. What this means for 
the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, is 150 new jobs at 
Mitchell’s bringing full-time total employment at the Saskatoon 
plant to 1,450 people. 
 
Mitchell’s will be spending $50 million on the expansion and 
hopes to improve on last year’s sales of $300 million. 
Mitchell’s is now Canada’s third largest processor of 
value-added pork and pork products. 
 
I’d like to extend my congratulations to Mitchell’s Gourmet 
Foods, and in particular to the chairperson, LuAnne Mitchell. 
Thank you, LuAnne, for continuing to invest in Saskatchewan 
and best of luck in the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Eyehill Rural Development Corporation in Macklin 
 

Ms. Murrell: — Mr. Speaker, again today I would like to 
discuss what the Small Business Loans Association is doing for 
rural Saskatchewan. 
 
We’ve heard about what the SBLA (Small Business Loans 
Association) has done for Wilkie, Glaslyn, Medstead, 
Canwood, Shell Lake, and Spiritwood. And today I have the 
pleasure of telling members about what it has done for the 
Macklin area. 
 
I was honoured to present a job creation certificate to the 
Eyehill Rural Development Corporation in Macklin on behalf 
of our Economic and Co-operative Development minister. Kim 
Gartner, the Chairperson of Macmillan’s SBLA accepted the 
award for the corporation. 
 
The corporation has created 37 full-time and two part-time jobs 
while maintaining eight more jobs. Help from the Small 
Business Loans Association made this possible and has aided 
many other businesses at the community level. The SBLA is a 
positive initiative promoting entrepreneurship and full-time 
employment. 
 
I’m happy to see that these partnerships are paying off for rural 
residents and businesses while also making our economy 
stronger. For small and new business, it is often difficult to get 
loans from banks and other agencies. It’s encouraging that these 
businesses are now being given a fair chance at success with the 
help SBLA. 
 
Thus far the Small Business Loans Association has helped 
create and maintain 12,800 jobs. 
 

Please join me in congratulating Eyehill Rural Development 
Corporation and its staff for doing their best to keep our 
economy healthy and strong. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Party Candidate for Saskatoon Riversdale 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. April 26 was a 
momentous day in Saskatchewan. This day, 17 years ago, was 
the day Joanne Zazelenchuk was elected to this Assembly. 
Joanne was a university student working part time as a gas 
jockey at a service station and she was a very able 
representative for her constituents, Mr. Speaker. 
 
She was young and had only a part-time job, unskilled and 
low-wage position — very similar, Mr. Speaker, to a good 
many of her constituents. Joanne could empathize with a good 
many of her constituents. 
 
I believe it’s important, Mr. Speaker, to recognize that people 
from all walks of life can and do serve in this Assembly. And 
it’s important that the representative, to represent a 
constituency, you must know and understand the people you 
serve. 
 
Joanne Zazelenchuk was an able representative for the 
constituency of Riversdale. I look forward to an equally good, if 
not better representative in the future, in the Saskatchewan 
Party’s candidate Jessie McGhee. I’m not sure anyone 
remembers the current MLA (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly) for Riversdale, but I’m sure that Jessie McGhee will 
soon be known and loved in Riversdale. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Estevan Bruins win Anavet Cup 
 
Mr. Ward: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First let me 
congratulate the Regina Pat Canadians for winning the Air 
Canada Cup in Prince Albert last night. I’m told it was an 
exciting overtime win. 
 
Of course the real hockey news this weekend came out of The 
Pas, Manitoba. My Estevan Bruins also won an overtime game, 
and in the process took the Anavet Cup over the Manitoba 
champions — the OCN (Opaskwayak Cree Nation) Blizzard. 
The score was 3:2. The Bruins won the series 4 games to 2. The 
Blizzard was considered to be one of the top teams in the 
country. Saturday night’s loss was only their second at home all 
season. 
 
First, Mr. Speaker, we saddled the Broncos from Humboldt. 
Then we melted the Blizzard from The Pas. Now we move on 
to the nationals next week, the Royal Bank Cup in Yorkton, 
where I’m sorry to say to the member from Yorkton, we will 
devour his puppy dogs and any other teams that dare to show 
up. 
 
My congratulations once again to coach Glen Watson; to John 
Wood, who scored the winning goal; to goalie David Guerrera, 
who made 40 saves; and to all the Bruins who have brought so 
much excitement to Estevan this season. 



752 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 1999 

See you in Yorkton, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Swift Current Girl Plays in 
National Ringette Championship 

 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I want to tell 
everyone about a very driven and talented young lady from my 
constituency. Her name is Caila Horne and she lives on her 
family’s farm outside of Swift Current. 
 
Caila’s passion is ringette. She has been playing the sport 
locally for some time and gets younger fans of the game 
involved by coaching. Caila’s parents, Cathy and Garnie Horne 
have been supporting her interest in the sport. They’ve been 
driving her to Regina this winter to try out for more competitive 
teams in between looking after the family farm and running 
Horne’s Electric in town. 
 
Caila joined a team here in Regina which went on to represent 
Saskatchewan at the Canadian ringette championship. The 
tournament was held in Halifax, Nova Scotia, from April 5 to 
10. The girls played hard all week, and Caila scored 15 goals on 
her own. The team ended up winning the bronze medal in the 
18 and under category. 
 
Please join me in congratulating Caila Horne on her ringette 
season and encouraging her to continue in the sport that she is 
obviously so talented in. Thank you. 
 

Block Parents Mark 15th Anniversary 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
recently I was privileged to attend the national Block Parent 
annual general meeting and awards night hosted here in Regina. 
This meeting marked the 15th anniversary for the Block Parent 
program here in Saskatchewan. In April of 1984, when the 
provincial organization was founded, 22 communities were 
represented. Now I am happy to report that there are 70 
Saskatchewan Block Parent communities. In these 70 
communities there are more than 10,000 Block Parent homes. 
Most of the homes will probably never need to be used for their 
intended purpose of shelter or refuge for a lost or threatened 
child, however, Mr. Speaker, the Block Parent sign in the 
window is a beacon of safety and assurance for our children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Block Parents are also volunteers. Almost half of 
the population in Saskatchewan over the age of 15 volunteers in 
some capacity, and we shouldn’t exclude the kids from under 
15 who do their fair share as well. The Block Parent program is 
one such activity and I congratulate those who participate. 
 
In particular I’d like to recognize two members from my 
constituency of Regina Sherwood, who serve as police liaisons 
to the Saskatchewan Block Parent Advisory Committee. They 
are Constable Ray Van Dusen of the Regina Police Service and 
Sergeant Rick Wychreschuk of the RCMP (Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police). 
 
And finally to another constituent, Mr. Bill O’Donavon of BBS 
(Baton Broadcasting Services) sports, I want to say what a good 
job he did as MC (master of ceremonies) on this night. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Extra Billing for Days in Hospital 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
for the Minister of Health. Madam Minister, your government’s 
disastrous management of the health care system is taking its 
toll on families across Saskatchewan. Lois Francis is a senior 
citizen who was hospitalized on March 6th after she fell and 
broke her hip. Lois was admitted to Regina General Hospital for 
treatment and then flown to Minot during the nurses’ strike. 
Lois was then returned to Regina Wednesday and readmitted to 
the Regina General Hospital. 
 
Madam Minister, Lois Francis was in hospital under doctor’s 
orders and yet on March 31, Lois was informed she would be 
extra billed for any day she was in the hospital after April 6. 
 
Can you explain that, Madam Minister, if Lois Francis was 
hospitalized under doctor’s orders and flown to Minot during 
the nurses’ strike, why is she being extra billed by the NDP for 
her days in the hospital? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We certainly 
can’t comment on individual cases, but we’ll look into that if 
the member would share the details with me after the House 
sits. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, 
perhaps you can answer in a general way the policy because 
Lois Francis was hospitalized because of a serious injury. She 
was flown to Minot during the strike because she needed 
hospital care. 
 
She was readmitted to hospital when she got back because she 
still needed hospital care. Her doctor kept her in the hospital 
because that is where he thought she should be. But your 
government, the NDP government obviously thinks differently. 
 
Madam Minister, Lois Francis was in the hospital because 
that’s where her doctor said she should be. But the NDP have 
sent her a bill for almost $700. 
 
Now why, Madam Minister, would anyone in the hospital be 
receiving bills, extra billing? Since Lois Francis was in the 
hospital on orders for her doctor, why are you charging her 
almost $700 to stay in the hospital under doctor’s orders? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — As I said before, the details, if the member 
would share them with me, we will answer those questions 
looking into them. The policy is not to bill anybody who has 
need of services in this province or out of the province during 
the special circumstances that we were in during the nurses’ 
strike. 
 
So if the details are shared with me, we will be looking into 
that. 



April 26, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 753 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Madam Minister, surely you know the 
reasons. You’re the Minister of Health. In a general policy 
sense, why would you be charging extra billing to any patient in 
the hospital under the doctor’s orders? 
 
Madam Minister, this patient was sick enough to be flown to 
Minot and back again after the strike was over. Now why are 
you charging her extra billing for being in the hospital under 
doctor’s orders? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, thank you very much. The 
same answer. As the details are shared with us, we will look 
into those details. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Child Sex Trade 
 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Social Services. Mr. Minister, 
last week we saw further evidence of how your government’s 
lack of attention to the child sex trade is putting children at risk. 
A pimp visited a girl at a Saskatoon safe house for over an hour. 
I’m sure he wasn’t there just to visit, Mr. Minister. He was there 
to threaten and intimidate this girl and get her to return to her 
life on the street. 
 
Mr. Minister, this would not have happened under the 
legislation that the Saskatchewan Party tabled this sitting 
entitled The Protection of Children Involved in Prostitution Act 
which provides for full assessment services and protective 
security measures for those trying to end the cycle of child 
prostitution. 
 
Mr. Minister, this so-called safe house in Saskatoon is funded 
by your department. How could this happen? How could you let 
a pimp enter a safe house and visit a girl who is obviously 
looking for protection? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the 
member for the question and to make some comments in this 
matter. The member is correct that this did happen on one 
occasion. This safe house has been operating for a short period 
of time. Their staff are new. 
 
The staff are only now beginning to develop the protocols that 
they should be to ensure that this kind of thing doesn’t happen 
again. It’s my understanding that following this incident there 
have been meetings between my department and the operators 
of the safe house to in fact to ensure that this will never happen 
again. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, today we 
will be discussing your new legislation in Committee of the 
Whole. This legislation is about three years too late and the 
Saskatchewan Party doesn’t believe it goes far enough, as is 
evidenced by the situation in Saskatoon. 
 
The legislation that you have on the table called for fines of up 
to $25,000 — up to $25,000 for people who buy sex from 
children. I will be introducing an amendment calling for a 

mandatory fine of $25,000 for those convicted of buying sex 
from children. And we would like to see that money dedicated 
to victims’ services and child protection. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you support this amendment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, we’ll certainly 
entertain that question during Committee of the Whole when we 
examine this Bill in detail and that particular clause, and be 
prepared to provide a response to the member at that time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, some 
people may wonder why myself, a MLA (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly) from rural Saskatchewan, is so 
concerned about the urban problem of child prostitution. 
 
Mr. Minister, it’s because the sexual abuse of children can and 
does happen anywhere and everywhere in this province. Just 
last week, a man from my constituency was sentenced for 
sexually abusing 13 different children over two decades. 
 
This is a crime that scars and debilitates children physically, 
psychologically, spiritually, and emotionally for life. And most 
of them are forced to deal with it on their own because they 
don’t know where to turn for help and healing. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you look at increasing fines for all persons 
convicted of child sexual abuse and will you dedicate this 
money to helping those who have been victims of this terrible 
crime? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I want to let the 
member know and the House know that this government is also 
very concerned about some of the social conditions in 
Saskatchewan, and in addition to concern I think has acted 
demonstratively to deal with some of these issues. We have, 
since 1991 when we were elected, put into place the children’s 
action plan to deal very specifically with some of the needs of 
children in Saskatchewan. 
 
We have also redesigned our social assistance program, Mr. 
Speaker, to put more money in the hands of people who find 
themselves in poverty to ensure that more money is available to 
those families to help raise their children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we don’t talk about doing these things, we act on 
these things and will continue to do so. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

Milgaard Settlement 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My questions are 
for the Minister of Justice. 
 
Mr. Minister, David Milgaard was convicted in 1970 for a 
murder he did not commit. It took 23 years for Mr. Milgaard’s 
family to prove his innocence. Now three years after being 
released from prison David Milgaard and his family are still 
waiting for justice. They are waiting, Mr. Minister, on your 



754 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 1999 

government. 
 
According to a news release this morning from the Justice 
department, the government remains committed to a fair 
settlement with the Milgaard family. Mr. Minister, what is the 
status of those negotiations and when can the Milgaard family 
expect to have this ordeal put behind them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This matter is a 
tragedy for Saskatchewan and we know that, and we’ve made a 
commitment in 1997 to deal with the compensation issues and 
also to have an inquiry at the appropriate time, and that will 
happen. 
 
What I will say is that this is an extremely complex and lengthy 
file. The lawyers have been — for the Milgaard family — have 
been working very diligently on their side. Also so have our 
lawyers. They’ve been working at this a great length of time 
and we are committed to working through the lawyers, through 
the spokespeople that we have to deal with this, and not through 
the public and not through the media. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Minister, it truly has been a lengthy 
affair. And it appears that negotiations between the Milgaard 
family and the Department of Justice are being handled by 
retired Quebec Judge Alan Gold. But the Milgaard family is not 
satisfied with the progress of the negotiations. Now the 
government of Saskatchewan is making another $150,000 
payment to David Milgaard. 
 
Mr. Minister, does that signal that the government believes a 
final settlement is still a long way off? What is Judge Gold’s 
role in these negotiations? Is he the NDP’s chief negotiator? 
And how much money has the government spent on paying 
Alan Gold to negotiate the settlement? And how much more 
time will it take to negotiate a fair settlement? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The former 
Justice Gold, Mr. Gold, is retained by the Department of Justice 
to work with us in resolving this matter. He has been dealing 
directly with the lawyers for the Milgaards and progress is 
continuing to be made. We’re working on this matter but we 
will not be discussing it or solving it through the public or 
through the media. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Minister, there’s a couple of questions 
you didn’t answer and we’ll repeat those. First of all, is Judge 
Gold the NDP’s chief negotiator — we need to know that — or 
is someone else negotiating behind the scenes that we’re not 
aware of. We also want to know how much is Judge Gold being 
paid for negotiations that he’s doing. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Justice Gold is on our 
legal team as the negotiator and he is, he is working with us and 
providing advice to us. And he is basically billing us at the rates 
that he charges in his normal practice, and he’s continuing to do 
that. 

We are working with him. We’re listening carefully to his 
advice. We’re also doing research and looking at the matter and 
we intend to resolve this matter in the negotiations rather than 
through the public. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Well I guess we have to repeat a few of these 
questions. The question was, one of them, how much is he 
being paid. You haven’t answered that. 
 
We’re also asking how much has the government spent paying 
Alan Gold to negotiate that settlement. What’s the total bill that 
has been supplied so far? You say in your answer that he’s 
continuing to bill you. We’re asking how much. 
 
And we also want to know who is the chief negotiator. Is he 
totally in charge and is his decision final on what takes place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We have a team 
of lawyers working and part of that team is Mr. Justice Gold. 
As it is with any legal problem you all work together and I 
don’t think there’s one person who has a say over what anybody 
else has to say. We know that this is a very complex problem. 
We have been waiting a long time for the information. We’re 
now getting most of that information and we’re dealing with it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — It has been decades since this story started, 
Mr. Minister, and it seems like you want to carry this on for 
decades more. And it’s time that you and your government get 
this thing going; you negotiate and expedite this thing as 
quickly as possible. 
 
So the question is: how long do you intend to have this last? 
And is he the chief negotiator? Now you’re telling us there’s a 
team negotiating. Who has the final say on that team? And we 
still haven’t been told how much Judge Gold is being paid for 
his work. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The simple answer is that Mr. Justice 
Gold is the chief negotiator. He’s working with us as a team. 
And practically we’re continuing to deal with this. 
 
We know that the best solution will come if we can resolve this 
matter with the Milgaards’ lawyers. If there’s some other 
process that ultimately arises, well we’ll deal with that. But at 
this time we’re working with Mr. Justice Gold. My 
understanding is that Mr. Justice Gold’s bills to date are less 
than $50,000. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Retention of Nurses in Province 
 

Mr. McLane: — Mr. Speaker, what does the Premier of this 
province have against nurses? It’s as if the Premier believes he 
can win the next election if he can just get every nurse out of 
the province before June. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Joanne Sinclair is a maternity nurse here in 
Regina with over 20 years experience, and she will likely be 



April 26, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 755 

leaving in June. North Carolina is where she’ll be, Mr. Speaker. 
They have offered Joanne a full-time position at over $22 an 
hour US (United States), paid housing, and of course all her 
moving expenses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, nurses like Joanne don’t want to move but they 
tell us they won’t stay here in a system that won’t respect them. 
You forced them, Mr. Premier. Every time you messed up, you 
packed another set of nurse’s bags. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Premier apologize to nurses and tell us 
what he’s going to do so that Joanne and nurses like her can 
choose to stay here in Saskatchewan and work? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — In the memorandum of understanding that 
was signed between all three parties — the Premier and SAHO 
(Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations) and SUN 
(Saskatchewan Union of Nurses) — there was an extensive 
package proposed for recruitment and retention, including $7.4 
million which would be jointly administered by SUN, and 
SAHO, and the government. Many of the things that are needed 
to recruit nurses to this province and to retain them here could 
be included in that package and that’s why we’re hoping that 
the parties get back together and we can more on with this 
process. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Mr. Speaker, it’s just not one nurse here, one 
nurse there. Soon there’ll be enough — you’ll have a ward in 
every state called a Saskatchewan wing. Mr. Speaker, the 
Premier has got to know that laying off over 600 nurses and 
treating them like medical waste is not the way to build better 
health care in this province. 
 
While Joanne heads for North Carolina, Kathy Stednyk is 
looking at either Phoenix or Florida. It’ll be $25 an hour US, 
subsidized housing, and flights home for two weeks every six 
months plus of course an all expense paid move. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Premier just admit he has a problem with 
nurses? They say that’s the most important step. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — I think as everyone is aware, the nursing 
shortage is not particular to Saskatchewan. It is across the 
country, and indeed the world. We have had some recent 
success in Regina that shows that we can do this and we can 
attract people to Saskatchewan —88 nurses have been hired 
into Regina; some of them from outside of Canada including 
Australia, several from the United States and from all the other 
provinces in Canada. 
 
So we do have a very attractive climate here for nurses to come 
here and we’re working on it to make it better. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Mr. Speaker, I would invite the minister to 
table those documents that she has so the rest of the House . . . 

(inaudible) . . . Mr. Minister, it’s not just nurses leaving, it’s 
nurses quitting. Debbie Steven is a nurse from Moose Jaw with 
19 years of experience and she is likely going go call it quits. 
For her there is no full-time work and she has to work five out 
of six weekends. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, Debbie is hoping that either her husband gets 
transferred out of province so that she can continue nursing, or 
is she going back to school and learn another profession. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Premier please tell the nurses like Joanne 
and Kathy and Debbie and all the rest, what are you going to do 
to change their minds, to bring them back to the jobs that they 
once loved here in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I said before 
there are many things on the table that can be put into the 
newest collective agreement for SUN, many of the things that 
nurses have worked for for many years. These things are there. 
We need to see the language. We need to see the people get 
back to the table and put that language into place so we can get 
on with what we actually can do with this new agreement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Mr. Speaker, last week Steve Kelleher, the 
facilitator for the SUN and SAHO dispute, urged a cooling off 
period for both sides. He felt such a period would allow cooler 
heads on both sides of the dispute to rethink their positions and 
perhaps start to move towards an agreement. 
 
The Premier agreed with that report and the call for a cooling 
off period. However, tomorrow the courts will hear the 
injunction brought by SAHO against SUN, with SAHO asking 
for hefty fines. Surely, Mr. Premier, this is not conducive to 
allowing cooler heads to prevail. 
 
If the Premier is serious about cooling off this dispute, instead 
of throwing gasoline on the fire, will he call off his dogs and 
drop the injunction and repeal Bill 23 to allow for a civilized 
collective bargaining to resume? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, this matter is before the 
courts so I can’t comment specifically about it. But what I can 
say is that one of the roles that we have as legislators is to 
uphold the rule of law. And it’s a very important fact that we as 
legislators have a role, along with the executive branch and the 
judiciary, to create a democracy. 
 
And it’s important that when some of these rules are challenged 
that appropriate arguments are made to the courts so that 
decisions can be made. 
 
Unfortunately this is one of those situations. And I think it 
behooves all of us who are members of this legislature to be 
very cognizant of the fact that it’s important to watch and 
support the rule of law because that’s how we organize our 
democracy. 
 



756 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 1999 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Associate 
Minister of Health, the former president of SUN. Madam 
Minister, if you were still the president of SUN what would 
your advice be to your membership tomorrow? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Now the hon. member recognizes of course 
that in question period it is necessary to put questions to 
ministers in the context of their responsibilities as members of 
Executive Council and that the question just put clearly is 
beyond that scope. 
 
The question must be ruled out of order. Next question. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 
the Associate Minister of Health. Mr. Speaker, Madam 
Minister, what will your advice be to the president of SUN and 
her membership tomorrow? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m not here to 
advise SUN — that is not my job. I think that the leadership of 
SUN and the legal process will proceed as it will. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Farm Aid Program 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Agriculture or his designate. Mr. 
Speaker, for months the Saskatchewan Party has been calling 
for an acreage-based farm aid program. Meanwhile the minister 
wanted an income-tested program and in the end he got his 
way. Then when it finally came time to work out the details of 
the program, he declared the farm crisis over and went to 
Mexico. 
 
Now the minister finally realizes the program doesn’t work. 
And what’s his latest brainstorm, Mr. Speaker? He wants 
farmers to spend hundreds of dollars filling out forms even if 
they don’t qualify for aid, so he can show Ottawa his program 
isn’t working. 
 
Mr. Minister, if you had been doing your job in the first place, 
Ottawa would know the AIDA (Agricultural Income Disaster 
Assistance) program will not work in Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Minister, why weren’t you at the table when you could have 
made a difference and why are you calling on farmers to bail 
you out now at their cost? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Speaker, I’m glad for the 
opportunity to answer that question. 
 
I think the members opposite heard the other day the Minister 
of Agriculture for our province urging farmers to complete the 
forms to the best of their ability, even though they are complex, 
because the federal government has indicated that if what we’ve 
been saying all along is true and that there will be minimum 
payouts here based on the current criteria, that they are prepared 

and willing to consider some enhancements to the program, Mr. 
Speaker. But nobody will ever know the truth until the forms 
are filled out. 
 
And in the meantime, we might not be in this position if your 
leader hadn’t been in Ottawa undermining our negotiations last 
fall. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s kind of funny. The Minister of Agriculture spends 
a week in Mexico and it’s the farmers of Saskatchewan that get 
burnt. 
 
Mr. Minister, instead of forcing every farmer to spend hundreds 
of dollars filling out these forms, why haven’t you figured it out 
yet? Does your department have any kind of an estimate? How 
many Saskatchewan farmers do you expect to qualify for AIDA 
and what will the average amount of the cheques be? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 
knows that until the information is in that no such estimates 
could possibly be made with any accuracy. 
 
But it’s interesting to hear him say, at last, that what they’re 
advocating, Mr. Speaker, is an acreage payment. Well tell me 
how much . . . how much would the acreage payment be — $20 
an acre for $80 million? Where would that come from? Where 
would you get it from? 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s very interesting that the truth 
finally comes out and we now have the basis for what their farm 
program would be, except they don’t have the money to pay for 
it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, if the members opposite in the NDP government were 
paying attention, we were saying there should be an acreage 
payment. It would be simple; it would be easily . . . a program 
to put in place. Had they been listening, they would also know 
that every farmer in Saskatchewan wanted an acreage payment. 
Every farmer in Saskatchewan is not happy with what’s going 
on there. 
 
Madam Minister, will you re-look at this program? Will you 
lobby Mr. Vanclief, try and get the rules changed so that we’re 
not stuck in a two-year program; at worst we only have one 
year under this idiotic AIDA program that you helped design? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Well, Mr. Speaker, while the member 
opposite is summerfallowing through a whole bunch of grey 
areas here, he very well knows that there isn’t a way. And 
farmers will tell him this — and I’m sure they have but I’m not 
sure he’s been listening — that an acreage payment is not 
necessarily the most fair way to distribute aid either because 
there is a great variety of conditions in the province, Mr. 
Speaker. There’s the northwest that suffered a four or five year 
drought. There’s some parts of the province . . . some parts of 



April 26, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 757 

the province and some crops where the commodity prices are 
better, where farmers are doing very well, thank you. 
 
An acreage payment doesn’t address those differences, Mr. 
Speaker, and the member opposite knows that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to make a 
somewhat extended ministerial statement. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Announcement of Job Development 
in the Forestry Industry 

 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it was a great pleasure to be part of history in the 
making in Saskatoon this morning. Today’s announcement is 
the biggest single jobs announcement in the history of the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Today we are announcing 10,000 
new jobs, well over half a billion dollars in private-sector 
investment, and exciting new partnerships. Our forestry strategy 
represents perhaps the most thorough and forward-looking 
economic development plan ever undertaken for a sector of our 
economy. 
 
Our first concern throughout has been for the environment. Our 
goal is to create jobs and opportunities for Saskatchewan people 
at the same time as we develop our force in a sustainable way. 
 
We are able to create so many more jobs from this sector 
because we are more fully utilizing every part and particle of 
the wood supply, including scrap fibres and waste wood 
because we’re doing more value added and processing of the 
wood right here in Saskatchewan; because we are applying 
innovation and technology — for example, using new glues and 
resins to bind scrap wood fibres into marketable products; and 
because we’re expanding the role of small business, the sector 
of our economy which creates the most jobs for every dollar of 
investment. 
 
We are making better and smarter use of our forestry resource 
so that we can create thousands of new jobs and opportunities 
while still preserving our precious forests. 
 
We are transforming our forestry sector. Years ago we 
transformed agriculture. We expanded a traditional industry to 
include such value-added activities as food processing and such 
high-tech sectors as biotechnology. We intend to do exactly the 
same thing with our forest industry. 
 
Today’s announcement also reflects our commitment to a full 
participation economy, an economy where all people — First 
Nations, Metis, and Northerners — can share fully in the 
benefits of our economic success. Today’s announcements 
represent new partnerships with the private sector, with First 

Nations, with Metis, and with local communities. 
 
In closing, let me note that the level of investment — $850 
million in investment — is much more than a huge dramatic 
number. It is an expression of confidence by the private sector 
and by communities in the Saskatchewan economy. It is a clear 
demonstration by industry in this province’s business climate, a 
clear demonstration that Saskatchewan is a good place in which 
to do business. 
 
We’re proud and excited by this expression of confidence by 
industry in our future. And we look forward to working with 
our forest industry partners to build a new Saskatchewan — a 
Saskatchewan whose economy is dynamic and diversified; a 
Saskatchewan which is confident, innovative, and 
outward-looking; a Saskatchewan which has the best quality of 
life of any place in the world. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Saskatchewan Party would like to take this opportunity to 
applaud the many players involved in the forestry industry as 
well as the provincial government for whatever role it has 
played in this initiative. 
 
Mr. Speaker, generally speaking, it’s our feeling that industry 
players, if liberated from excessive government interference and 
regulation, will come to the fore and create opportunities for the 
people of this province. And certainly it seems as if in this 
instance government respectfully took the back seat and let the 
industry develop its natural advantages. 
 
Private-sector investment and subsequent job creation has 
always been encouraged by the Saskatchewan Party, and its 
potential to create jobs in manufacturing, agri-forest research 
and development is commendable. And equally important is the 
fact that in this whole announcement it seems as if there has 
been reasonable consideration for the environmental and 
long-term sustainability of the ecosystem as well, and we 
applaud that consideration as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is important that all of the people of our 
province are given the opportunity to participate in our 
economy. And certainly the potential of utilizing the northern 
forests to their utmost potential creates opportunity for our 
northern citizens that have been sorely lacking under this 
government’s administration. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is not often where we can encourage this kind of 
activity to happen. I got a little nervous when the minister said 
that they’re going to redesign forestry as they’ve redesigned 
agriculture. And I think many of our farmers are shuddering at 
the fact that what has been in store for them may also be in 
store for the forestry industry. 
 
But insofar as this announcement creates the opportunity for 
private sector development and initiative that recognizes the 
opportunity for Aboriginal and northern people, we think that 
this is very much an important initiative for people to 
participate in this economy and we congratulate all those 



758 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 1999 

involved. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Minister of 
Economic and Co-operative Development has come to us today 
with what she terms a good news announcement for our forest 
sector and the manufacturing and service industries involved 
with its day-to-day work. 
 
Jobs for our economy are extremely important, Mr. Speaker, 
and the Liberal caucus welcomes — genuinely welcomes — 
any announcement of new employment like the one today 
which is so important to this great province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while we welcome news of jobs, there are still 
priorities of people of Saskatchewan in several areas that 
unfortunately are not being addressed by the government. Jobs 
are needed and welcomed in all sectors. Yet the people of this 
province are wondering where the full-time nursing positions 
are to attract nurses and other health workers to this province. 
 
While people welcoming and welcome the efforts of private 
companies and community groups to use a Crown resource to 
create jobs in the forest sector, they also want to see this 
government create more road building jobs to stop our 
highways, streets, and rural roads from falling apart. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they also want to know what this government is 
doing to preserve jobs in the 170 communities where bulldozers 
are scheduled to knock down the elevators. 
 
While the minister devotes great effort to a good news 
announcement, many of my constituents want to know what the 
government is going to do to ensure that they don’t lose their 
farms. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is this government’s plan to preserve 
Saskatchewan’s farms and farm jobs? We haven’t heard any. 
 
We wish our forest industry great success in managing this 
precious resource, Mr. Speaker, and we hope that this 
government will focus more of its effort on dealing with the 
priorities of Saskatchewan people and less on making 
electioneering announcements like the one today. 
 
Thank you. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 30 — The Cemeteries Act, 1999 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 30, The 
Cemeteries Act, 1999 be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 31 — The Funeral and Cremation Services Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 31, The 
Funeral and Cremation Services Act be now introduced and 
read a first time. 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 

The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, the Chair has two 
reports to table. First of all, the Report of the Provincial Auditor 
to the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan on the final . . . 
financial statement of Crown agencies for years ending in the 
period April 1, 1997 to December 31, 1998. And secondly, the 
Report of the Provincial Auditor to the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan on the 1998 financial statements of CIC 
subsidiary Crown corporations. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Ward: — Convert for motion debatable, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Item no. 1, question no. 64 is converted to 
notice of motions for returns (debatable). 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 25 — The Education Amendment Act, 1999/ 
Loi de 1999 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 

 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 
pleased to outline the nature and purpose of these amendments 
to The Education Act, 1995. As members will know, this statute 
provides the primary legislation framework for our province’s 
kindergarten to grade 12 school system. The Act covers a wide 
range of topics and requires amendments on a regular basis to 
deal with emerging issues and to respond to evolving needs and 
circumstances of our schools. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the . . . Mr. Speaker, the present Bill includes 
amendments dealing with three quite different but equally 
important topics. The topics are as follows: (1) First Nations 
representation on boards of education; (2) the operating grant 
entitlement period and payment schedule for school divisions; 
and (3) deals with the correct administration of existing law 
respecting payments of taxes to public and separate school 
divisions. I will speak about each of these three topics 
individually. 
 
First, in respect to the First Nations representation. Some First 
Nations operate their own schools for students who live on the 
reserve. In other cases, First Nations have entered into tuition 
fee agreements with the neighbouring school divisions whereby 
students from the reserve attend the public school. In these 
latter cases, the First Nations clearly have an interest in the 
governance of the school division from both the program and 
from the financial perspective. 
 
For this purpose the legislation currently authorized the 
Minister of Education to establish the reserve as a separate 
subdivision within the school division. Residents of the reserve 
can then elect a representative to sit as a full voting trustee on 
the board of education of the school division. Mr. Speaker, the 



April 26, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 759 

Saskatchewan Rivers School Division and the Muskoday First 
Nations have a tuition agreement such as I’ve just described. 
 
The board of education and the band council have jointly 
requested that the Act be amended to create the second option 
for the participation of reserve residents in the governance of 
the school division. The second option would allow for the 
Minister of Education to incorporate the Indian reserve within 
the boundaries of the school division and would enable reserve 
residents to vote in the school board election in the same basis 
as all other residents in the school division. 
 
We have accepted this joint request from Saskatchewan Rivers 
and Muskoday and are proposing an amendment to make it 
possible. 
 
I want to emphasize the three key points about the amendment, 
Mr. Speaker. First, the legislation deals only with those cases 
which a First Nation is paying a school division to have reserve 
students to attend the public school. It does not apply for First 
Nations who operate their own school boards. 
 
Second, the amendment does not eliminate the existing 
provision for the creation of an Indian reserve as a subdivision 
for electoral purposes. It simply creates a second option. 
 
And third, the minister will be authorized to implement this new 
option only where the First Nations and the board of education 
wish to use it. The option cannot be imposed against the wishes 
of either the First Nations or that of the school board. 
 
Mr. Speaker, effective mechanisms for First Nations 
representation in our provincial school system are important as 
we work together to address challenges of our growing 
Aboriginal student population. The amendment in this Bill 
represents a local request from a board of education and a First 
Nation who wants their affairs in the new way that they feel 
will meet their needs more efficiently and effectively. 
 
(1430) 
 
Let me now turn to the second issue — the school grant 
entitlement period and payment schedule. Mr. Speaker, annual 
provincial grants are paid to school divisions through the 
foundation operating grant program. The money available for 
distribution through the grant program each year forms part of 
the provincial annual budget and is announced on budget day. 
 
However, the period of time in which the grants apply is not the 
provincial government’s fiscal year — from April 1 to March 
31. Rather, grants apply to the calendar year because the 
legislation says that each school division is entitled to an 
operating grant in each calendar year. 
 
This entitlement period and the associated grant payment 
regime are awkward in a number of ways. First, a few years ago 
the provincial government moved to an actuarial accounting 
system. This means that grants included in the provincial 
budget from the upcoming fiscal year actually cover part of two 
fiscal years. They apply to the last three months of the previous 
fiscal year, i.e., January to March, and the first nine months of 
the new fiscal year, April to December. 
 

Second, the payment schedule associated with the current grant 
regime means that boards receive no grant payment in January, 
February, or March. They have to wait until the budget is 
announced and then receive payments retroactive for those three 
months. As well, the current regime means that by the school 
boards . . . by the time the school boards learn of their new 
grant levels, three of the twelve months of which the grant 
applies have already gone by. This makes it difficult for boards 
to plan ahead effectively and to respond to the changes in their 
grant from one year to the next. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are proposing an amendment which will 
address these various problems by changing the grant 
entitlement period for the calendar year to that of the 
government fiscal year. There will be a number of benefits, not 
only to the government from the accounting perspective, but 
also to school divisions from the perspective of cash flow and 
planning. So in future, when school boards learn of their annual 
grant on budget day, that grant will apply to the following 
12-month period from April to March. In other words, the grant 
will be fully perspective rather than partially retroactive. 
 
Each year boards will learn of their grant level from the 
January-March period almost a year in advance, at the time of 
the previous year’s provincial budget, rather than learning of it 
only when the three-month period has just been over. 
 
With the changes in the entitlement period, we’ll also be 
changing the payment schedule. Boards will now receive 
one-twelfth of the annual grant entitlement during the months of 
April to June and September to March. In other words, the 
amendment will entitle the current situation and these boards 
receive no payments to January to March and must borrow for 
this period. We estimate that on a provincial basis the new 
payment schedule will save boards about $1.5 million in 
interest costs every year, and this is money that they’ll be able 
to relocate to program expenditures. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I should indicate that this amendment will not 
affect school operating grants for 1999, and the intention is to 
pass the amendment now in order that it will be in place for the 
government’s 2000-2001 fiscal year. In the meantime, the grant 
entitlement period and payment schedule for 1999 will be the 
same as it was for 1998, based on the existing legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the third topic covered by the amendment of the 
Bill is the allocation of the education portion of property taxes 
to those communities that have both a public and a separate 
school division. In accordance with the Constitution of Canada, 
the legal requirements for this allocation are clearly set out in 
the statute already. Where a public and a separate school 
division exist together the rules are as follows: all property 
owners who are of the minority faith that is established in the 
separate school division must pay their taxes to the separate 
school division; all other property owners must pay their taxes 
to the public school division. 
 
These provisions based in the Constitution make it clear that the 
allocation of taxes is based exclusively on the faith of the 
property owner. It is not a matter of personal choice or 
preference, nor is it affected by the school that the students 
attend. Mr. Speaker, although the legal requirements are already 
clear, we do not have an effective process for ensuring the 



760 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 1999 

property owners know the rules for ensuring that they are a 
designate . . . where they may designate their taxes to the 
correct school divisions. 
 
Owners are often asked simply to indicate whether they are 
supporters of the public or the separate school division. Parents 
might well consider themselves to be supporters of the school 
division where their children attend school and designate their 
taxes in that way without realizing the designation may be 
contrary to the Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the solution in appropriate forms to be used where 
both the public and the separate school division exists. These 
forms would require the property owner to declare either that 
the owner is of the minority faith or is a . . . pays taxes to the 
separate school division, or that the owner is not of the minority 
faith and is to pay taxes to the public school division. 
 
In this respect, the forms will be similar to those already in use 
for the school board elections where electors are required to 
declare that they are of the minority faith in order to vote for the 
separate school board. 
 
This Bill will replace the ambiguous term, supporter, with the 
more accurate term, taxpayer. Further it will authorize the 
creation of tax declaration forms that all affected municipalities 
will be required to use. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have to emphasize that the Saskatchewan School 
Trustees Association, including the Catholic section of the 
SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees Association), are in full 
agreement with the correct interpretation of the law. They are 
strongly supportive of the measures to ensure that the law is 
administered accurately and consistently across the province. 
Both the SSTA and the Catholic section support the proposed 
amendment. 
 
I also want to indicate that trustees and other affected groups 
will be consulted fully in the development in the forms 
themselves. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, I want to advise all members that the 
provisions of this Bill have been discussed with the partners in 
education. These specific amendments are of particular interest 
to school trustees and the Saskatchewan School Trustees 
Association has indicated its support for them. 
 
These amendments will address a variety of needs and interests 
of the education system and will help keep the statute up to 
date. 
 
I am pleased, Mr. Speaker, to move therefore, Bill No. 25, An 
Act to amend The Education Act, 1995, will now be read a 
second time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, we’ve had the opportunity to look at The Education 
Act, 1995 and its many changes. And I want to first, I guess, 
begin maybe in the reverse order almost in what the minister 
has indicated in terms of the three items that this Bill highlights. 
 

No question, the first item that has been of concern to many 
taxpayers in the province has been the distinguishing the 
religious faith of a taxpayer. That has been a dilemma in school 
divisions that have coterminous boundaries — that is, both 
those in the public and those of the Catholic faith. 
 
What has further clouded this, Mr. Speaker, is most recently of 
course we had the creation of the first separate school division 
that was non-Catholic. It was the Protestant school divisions in 
Englefeld. 
 
And I think the interpretations by both administrators of school 
divisions as well as the administrators of the many different 
municipalities that are involved has come into question — the 
fact that a prescribed form, as is indicated in the Act right now, 
is up to the individual municipality to enable to create. And 
what happens is we have a various number of forms that are 
created to try to help the administrators determine exactly 
which level of school system the tax should be contributed to. 
 
So we have had, as the minister has indicated, I’ve had the 
opportunity to talk with the Saskatchewan School Trustees 
Association. But we have had some response from individual 
boards of education that have asked a number of questions that I 
have been unable to answer. And I want to be able to assure all 
of those people that call myself or the minister, that indeed the 
interpretation that the minister has indicated today is the correct 
one. 
 
So we’re going to, we’re going to have to spend a little time on 
this one to determine exactly the reasons why the term, 
supporter, has been changed to taxpayer, and how it will affect 
the Englefeld Protestant system. 
 
The second point that the minister brought up was around the 
Aboriginal representation on school boards. No question, the 
population, the Aboriginal population in many parts of 
Saskatchewan is increasing and there is a need to ensure that 
there is representation on the public board of education. There 
are many Aboriginal students that are attending off-reserve 
schools and there needs to be a representative elected by that 
system. 
 
And I think from the brief time that we’ve had comments from 
other people on that particular section, this section appears to be 
something that will serve everyone. 
 
The final point is in regard to the budget year. This has been a 
sore point, Mr. Speaker, with boards of education for many, 
many years. And I think people in Saskatchewan must 
recognize the conflicts that exist. 
 
We have a school year that normally operates between 
September 1 and June 30. That’s where the bulk of expenses 
occur for a division board. They plan for the school year. The 
board’s fiscal year is of course the calendar year. It runs from 
January 1 to December 31. And then finally we have the 
government’s fiscal year which is April 1 to March 31. 
 
The tremendous differences that occurs between those years in 
terms of the finances available to school divisions causes a 
great amount of concern to board members. As the minister has 
indicated and I’ve indicated in this House before many times, 



April 26, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 761 

the boards of education, because the grants payable by the 
government to boards of education do not occur until 
sometimes as late as April or May where they will get their first 
one-twelfth, that puts boards of education into a huge 
borrowing position. 
 
Many school boards, because of tax arrears, because of the fact 
that in rural Saskatchewan a lot of the taxes are not paid until 
later on in the year — in fact not only rural Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, but urban Saskatchewan as well. Many incentives are 
there to pay taxes in June or in early part of July, so as a result, 
the income that boards of education would receive from taxes is 
limited. 
 
The income from the grant is non-existent for January, for 
February and March so the boards of education have had to rely 
on financial institutions to provide lines of credit. As a result, 
large costs have been borne by the taxpayers in the various 
school divisions to pick up that extra interest. 
 
The concern that we have to flag for the Minister of Education 
is the transition time. The minister has indicated that the current 
change proposed to The Education Act, 1995 will not affect this 
current fiscal year but will take into effect for 2000 and 2001. 
 
The concern, I guess, that many people are expressing — and 
I’ve talked to a number of individual trustees on this particular 
section — deals with next January, February, March. Will there 
be additional monies provided by the government upfront to 
deal with those three months? Or will the grant that is currently 
allocated, the current operating grant of 397 million, will that be 
divided up and moved, a portion of it moved back into January, 
February, and March? 
 
Tremendous concerns by school boards because, if indeed there 
isn’t additional monies put into the entire grant system to be 
able to pay those additional amounts in the first three months, 
boards of education will be no better off because they’ll only be 
getting their monies just slightly in advance but they’ll be 
losing at the other end. 
 
So those are the concerns that have been raised by individuals, 
Mr. Speaker, by boards of education, and of course in 
discussion with the school trustees association we want, we 
want to ensure that all three major sections of this Act are the 
things that the people of Saskatchewan want to indeed improve 
the system. 
 
So with those necessary changes, Mr. Speaker, that I’ve 
outlined with the kinds of things that we need to hear from 
taxpayers, I move that we adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 29 — The Health Information Protection Act 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise today to 
move second reading of The Health Information Protection Act. 
Mr. Speaker, the protection of personal health information is 
important to every citizen in this province. Personal privacy is 
something we all expect from the health system. Historically 
people gave private information to health providers because 
they trusted those providers to keep the information private and 

to use it only when appropriate to provide care. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan trust their health professional to 
protect their personal health information. They trust their 
doctors and nurses to use the information wisely. They trust 
hospital staff to use only . . . to only use personal information 
for reasonable purposes associated with care. They trust 
laboratory technicians to keep the results of lab tests private. 
They trust dentists and pharmacists, health records technicians, 
and all in the health system to protect the records of their 
personal health. 
 
In short, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan trust their 
health professionals to handle their personal health information 
with respect for their right to personal privacy. The people of 
Saskatchewan deserve no less. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, the demand for information needed to 
provide health services is growing. As the volume of 
information about us grows, as we ask for more tests and 
additional treatments, as the demands on the health system 
continue to increase, so too does the demand for information 
exchange. With increased demands for information comes an 
increased risk to the privacy of the individual. And, Mr. 
Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan demand that their personal 
health information continue to receive the protection they 
expect. 
 
(1445) 
 
That is why, Mr. Speaker, The Health Information Protection 
Act is so important. It ensures that even in the fast moving 
health system of today the tradition of respecting individual 
privacy will continue into the future. In fact, Mr. Speaker, we 
believe that this new important legislation adds significantly to 
the protection we have all come to expect from the health 
system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Health Information Protection Act is about 
the rights of individuals to protect their personal health 
information. The Act enshrines in legislation certain rights that 
every person in this province has in regard to their personal 
health information. 
 
The Act then sets out the duties and responsibilities of 
government and the heath system to ensure that those rights are 
respected. Mr. Speaker, The Health Information Protection Act 
will ensure that people’s privacy rights are protected. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to explain why this important new 
legislation is needed. In Saskatchewan today personal health 
information is regulated by a number of statutes, by 
professional ethics and bylaws, and in some few instances it is 
not regulated at all. 
 
Personal health information held by the Department of Health 
and district health boards is regulated by the freedom of 
information, protection of privacy statutes, and several program 
specific statutes such as The Hospital Standards Act. Personal 
health information is also regulated by professional bylaws and 
professional ethics. Personal health information is regulated by 
policy of institutions and health care providers. 
 



762 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 1999 

This patchwork of legislation, regulation, and bylaws reflects 
the health service structure of the past — programs operating in 
relative isolation from one another. It does not support the 
health information needs of Saskatchewan people today. 
 
Since 1995, the Department of Heath has worked to develop a 
comprehensive framework of health information management 
principles and broad policies within the public sector. These 
principles, Mr. Speaker, are consistent with the best national 
and international information management principles in the 
world today. 
 
These principles include: accountability to the individual; 
collection, use, and disclosure of personal health information 
only for legitimate health purposes; the right of individuals to 
access their own information; and that health professionals hold 
personal health information in trust for individuals, and manage 
it accordingly. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, that was not enough. It is not enough to have 
legislation and policy that only applies to government 
institutions and district health boards. There are many partners 
in the health system who share information and who require 
information to provide the very best care to Saskatchewan 
people. In the past each of these partners has managed 
information with the utmost respect for the individual. 
 
In Saskatchewan we can proudly cite a solid record of 
protecting health information. But as demands for information 
to provide care increase, everyone involved in the health system 
has to be confident that personal health information is protected 
no matter where it is held. The rules need to be the same for 
everyone. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the government announced the creation of 
the Saskatchewan Health Information Network or SHIN, we 
made a commitment to consult with the public about privacy 
and confidentiality of personal health information. Mr. Speaker, 
this legislation has been the focus of very intense consultation 
over the past year and a half. There have been several major 
steps in our consultation on this matter. 
 
In October 1997, we began a province-wide consultation on key 
health issues that sets the stage for the legislation we have 
before us today. 
 
In December 1997, we began consultations on the preliminary 
draft of The Health Information Protection Act. We circulated 
that draft to over 200 stakeholder groups. We listened to what 
they had to say. 
 
In June 1998 we took a revised draft of the Act back to the 
stakeholders for additional consultation. In the summer and fall 
of 1998 we conducted meetings throughout the province to 
receive comments on that draft. Finally, Mr. Speaker, in 
February 1999 we distributed a third draft to major stakeholder 
groups throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
Throughout it all we have met with individuals and 
organizations across the province to listen to their concerns, to 
understand their needs, and to learn from the people who 
provide the services, and from those who receive the services. 
 

Mr. Speaker, we have learned much from these consultations. 
We have learned that the people of Saskatchewan care 
passionately about their personal privacy. We learned that 
health providers want to be able to serve the public while 
respecting that need for privacy. 
 
We learned that people want an Act to protect their personal 
health information in this ever changing world. We learned that 
people want an Act that focuses on their rights and not who can 
get access to their information. 
 
We learned that people want to ensure that their records are 
safely stored and are only used when needed. We learned that 
people want to have access to information when it is needed, 
but not if it risks abuse of their personal privacy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me give you some examples of how the Act 
responds to the voice of the people. The people of 
Saskatchewan have told us that they are concerned about who 
has control over their personal health information; that the 
government should not control health records on a 
computerized network. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this legislation ensures that even on a 
computerized network such as SHIN (Saskatchewan Health 
Information Network), it is the individual and their health 
provider who control what happens to the record. The people of 
Saskatchewan have told us that they are concerned about 
unauthorized access to personal information if their complete 
health record is on a computer network. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this legislation clearly states that access can only 
be given to those who need to know the information to provide 
a service. Even then, Mr. Speaker, there must be consent from 
the individual in most circumstances before access can be 
given. Mr. Speaker, there will be surfing of records on SHIN. 
 
Saskatchewan people told us that health information must be 
secure. It must be protected from unwanted access and it must 
be accurate and available when it is needed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this legislation will require all health providers, 
the government, SHIN, and anyone identified in the legislation 
as a trustee to have security in place. We will be able to perform 
audit trails. For example, it could be possible on SHIN to keep 
track of all who use the system and track what an individual 
looked at while using the system. 
 
Over the past 18 months we’ve been discussing this draft 
legislation with the public and with stakeholders throughout the 
health system. Hundreds of individuals and organizations have 
been consulted. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Act you have before you is the result of these 
consultations. The Health Information Protection Act will do 
many things for the people of Saskatchewan. It puts into law a 
number of critical rights that individuals have with regard to 
their personal health information. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Health Information Protection Act states 
clearly: individuals have the right to consent to the collection, 
use, or disclosure of their personal health information, and that 
trustees of that information must protect that right; individuals 



April 26, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 763 

have the right to revoke their consent and trustees in the system 
must comply; individuals have the right to prevent records of 
their personal health information from being on SHIN or any 
other electronic system if that is their desire; individuals have a 
right to be informed about why their personal information is 
needed and how it will be used or disclosed; individuals have a 
right to limit the collection of their health services number from 
their health card, especially where requested for a non-health 
service. 
 
Individuals have the right to access their own personal health 
records held by any trustee in the system and to request 
amendments to those records if needed; individuals have the 
right to an appeal to an independent third-party arbitrator if they 
believe their personal health information is not being treated 
properly; individuals have the right to designate others to make 
decisions about their personal health information. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Health Information Protection Act will put 
into statute these important rights to protect every person’s 
personal health information. In addition to identifying these 
important rights, The Health Information Protection Act sets out 
the duties and responsibilities of all parties to respect those 
rights. 
 
It will require appropriate security measures to be taken to 
protect personal health information. It will limit the collection, 
use, and disclosure of personal health information to reasonable 
purposes required to provide health services to individuals and 
to support the system. It will ensure the protection of personal 
health information within electronic systems. It will require 
legally binding agreements between trustees and 
information-management service providers, like SHIN, to 
ensure that the rights of individuals are protected. It will clearly 
state that SHIN, as an information management service 
provider, cannot make decisions about personal health 
information on the network. Those decisions are left to the 
health professional and the individual. 
 
To deter abuse of personal health information, the Act will 
contain very significant penalties for violations. In short, Mr. 
Speaker, this legislation will enshrine in law the rights of the 
individual to protect their personal health information and it 
will ensure that all trustees follow the same rules to ensure 
those rights are fulfilled. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s also important to consider what The Health 
Information Protection Act will not do. It will not require 
anyone to disclose personal health information if they would 
not do so today. It will not require anyone to reveal personal 
health information to the government or to SHIN. It will not tell 
health providers what they can and cannot collect. It will not 
interfere with professional ethics or practice. It will not dictate 
specific detail for managing information. It will not add any 
rights of access to information that do not exist today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Health Information Protection Act is the 
result of many years of work and of extensive consultation. It is 
an important piece of legislation that will take health 
information practices forward into the next century. It protects 
the privacy of individuals while at the same time providing 
enough flexibility to ensure information is available when 
needed. And finally it will make our health information more 

secure than it is now in our present system. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of 
this Bill, The Health Information Protection Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
this is a fairly substantial Bill. In fact it’s one that I believe the 
government wanted to introduce last year but for some reason 
did not do so; I think perhaps because the Saskatchewan 
Medical Association had a considerable number of concerns 
about this Bill, and hopefully the government has addressed 
them. I have calls in to the SMA (Saskatchewan Medical 
Association) to find out indeed whether or not the government 
has addressed the concerns that the Saskatchewan Medical 
Association was raising last year. 
 
What this Bill is all about, Mr. Speaker, is about everybody’s 
health care records — whether or not you had an appendix 
operation, or whether or not you’re getting Tylenol by 
prescription, or whatever the case may be, Mr. Speaker — and 
it deals with a large number of medical practitioners, not just 
doctors but all of the people within the health care system that 
we may interact with from time to time, Mr. Speaker. All of 
those kind of records would be now lumped together in one 
location. 
 
And I guess one of the most pertinent questions is, Mr. Speaker, 
who does the information belong to? Does it belong to the 
patient? Does it belong to the government? Does it belong to 
the individual medical practitioner that collected the 
information? To whom does that information belong? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister says that the individual patient will 
have the right to deny the collection of that information into one 
central location, that they can put a stop to it. Well I think that’s 
good. Some individuals, Mr. Speaker, do not want to have their 
information scattered hither and yon, and they wish to know 
who has access to their information at all times. Therefore for 
those people I think it’s well and good that they should be able 
to restrict the collection of that information, Mr. Speaker, to the 
people that they interact with directly. 
 
There is some value though, Mr. Speaker, to the patients and to 
the medical providers to have access to a broad based collection 
of information. The patient who ends up in the hospital for 
whatever medical distress may not be in a position to be able to 
communicate to the emergency people what their problem is, or 
what their past history has been with medical services. 
 
Therefore to be able to access those kinds of records for the 
medical practitioners at that time would be of value to the 
medical practitioners, but particularly of value to the patient 
who will receive the benefit of whatever services. If they’re 
allergic to something, then that would be information that 
would be contained in those records and would prevent that 
medical practitioner from using that particular prescription or 
drug on the person. And that would be certainly of benefit. 
 
One of the areas though, Mr. Speaker, that I do have a great 
deal of concern in this is that the government will be able to 
de-identify the medical information. Well what that means, Mr. 



764 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 1999 

Speaker, is that they would pull a person’s name and address 
off, but all of the rest of the information would remain. 
 
Now I have to ask, for what purpose? Why does the 
government want to be able to disclose the information without 
a person’s name and address included? To what benefit would 
this be used, Mr. Speaker? And again it relates back to who’s 
information is this? 
 
Does this information belong to the government, does it belong 
to the doctors, or the medical practitioners that collected it, or 
does it belong to the patient? I would submit, Mr. Speaker, that 
this information belongs to the patient because it’s about them 
and their conditions. Therefore if that information is going to be 
released to other parties that are not directly related to that 
patient’s health and health services, that the information would 
have to be released only, Mr. Speaker, only with the consent of 
the patient involved. 
 
So if for some reason the government wanted to release all of 
the records dealing with heart conditions in this province to 
someone in a study let’s say, that they would have to approach 
all the people whose information they were about to release to 
provide that information. Because, Mr. Speaker, and my belief 
is that information belongs to the patient, not to the 
government. 
 
One of the concerns that a good many people will have, Mr. 
Speaker, because this information is being collected and stored 
on computer systems, is how secure is this. We hear fables, Mr. 
Speaker, that even the Pentagon’s computers are not secure 
from hackers who try and try and try and finally manage to 
break into certain areas with discoveries of the codes that are 
necessary to enter there. 
 
(1500) 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s very incumbent on the government 
to ensure that once this system is up and running and the 
medical information is being gathered, that it is indeed secure, 
that no one is going to be able to access the system without 
permission, without the permission from the patients. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think it’s incumbent on the government 
to ensure that the information even stored on the computer is 
further encrypted so that while you may have access to a certain 
patient’s information by having the proper password or code to 
enter into the computer system to access certain information on 
one individual but you can’t in turn access the information on 
the next individual on the list. I think it’s very important, Mr. 
Speaker, that all those kind of safeguards be built into this 
system. 
 
When you look at the formation of SHIN and who was in 
charge of it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think questions on security 
of the computers are very valid. Because after all, the man who 
was put in charge of SHIN last year was the person who didn’t 
want to run the computers at STC (Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company) because they weren’t working 
properly, because they weren’t sending out the bills that were 
needed to be collected from STC. And yet that same person is 
shifted over to the SHIN computer system to collect the medical 
information on every person in this province. 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think it’s of great deal of concern, 
valid concern, by the people of Saskatchewan that the security 
of the SHIN system be ensured by this government before that 
information is collected and before that information is made 
available to the medical practitioners of this province and the 
various medical organizations and whoever else may be entitled 
to receive this information, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The other concern I have, Mr. Speaker, is as I mentioned 
earlier, the availability of de-identified information. Is this 
information going to be placed for sale, so that someone can 
access all of the medical records of Saskatchewan while not 
identifying the individuals but using the people of 
Saskatchewan for studies on whatever reasons; and that the 
Government of Saskatchewan would financially benefit from 
the sale of those lists. 
 
Because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I said earlier that information 
should belong to the patients, not to the government and not to 
the medical system. If anyone is to benefit financially from it, 
then it should be the patients themselves directly. 
 
The minister has said the information health cards, our health 
card numbers, do not have to be given out or used in 
non-medical areas. Well I have a question, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 
what are they going to do with hunting licenses? Because our 
medical . . . our health card number is used in the province of 
Saskatchewan to identify Saskatchewan residents on their 
hunting licenses. 
 
So I would hope that by this fall, this being the case, Mr. 
Speaker, that the government has changed their hunting licenses 
so that the people of Saskatchewan no longer have to provide 
their health card number, because that health card number will 
gain access to your personal information, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So the government is going to have take a very serious look at 
all of the areas in which that health card number is used and 
ensure that it’s only used as it’s related to medical services, and 
no other service in Saskatchewan, including hunting licenses. 
 
When a person tries to access the system, Mr. Speaker, to 
access their own information, will there be a cost? Will the 
government be using this as another method of tax collection 
when a person is trying to access their own record, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker? This government has a clear record that it charges 
access fees on everything that moves; any opportunity that 
arises, this government slaps a fee on it and taxes you. And this 
surely will be another area, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in which this 
government will be taxing. I’m sure that they will try, at the end 
of the day, to pay for the SHIN system, perhaps from people 
who access the system by forcing them to pay for their own 
information, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In a lot of ways, George Orwell in his book, Nineteen 
Eighty-four, could envision this program where the government 
is collecting all of the information from everyone in the 
province. And if a person was a conspiracy theorist, they would 
wonder why that information is being collected and for what 
ends and what means would it be collected, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think though at the end of the day, having access to this 
information when a person is in an emergency ward, will be 



April 26, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 765 

valuable. It will also be valuable, Mr. Speaker, to check up on 
people who may wish to double-doctor, who may wish to 
access various doctors to gain access to prescription drugs. In 
those areas, Mr. Speaker, I believe that this may very well 
prove to be an invaluable resource and aid the people of 
Saskatchewan in the long run. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, while we do have some questions and 
some concerns about this particular Bill, these questions and 
concerns can only be answered in Committee of the Whole. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, just a 
few brief comments on this piece of legislation. It’s been about 
seven long years, Mr. Speaker, since this government started 
working on the Saskatchewan Health Information Network. 
And it’s really quite ironic, Mr. Speaker, that at this point in 
time they only choose to bring forward the piece of legislation 
that respects the patients and the people of this province’s 
rights. 
 
You would have thought as they did have in many other 
jurisdictions, Mr. Speaker, that they would think of the people’s 
rights first before they start an information system. But not this 
government, Mr. Speaker. No, that’s the last thing they speak of 
and think of, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The other thing is as well, Mr. Speaker, that this government 
has already wasted $30 million on the Health Information 
Network, Mr. Speaker — $30 million not knowing where 
they’re headed with it, not knowing what kind of a program 
they’re going to have. And then today, Mr. Speaker, they bring 
in legislation to try and protect the patient’s rights. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can only hope that this piece of legislation hasn’t 
been bungled as has the Saskatchewan Health Information 
Network system been bungled over the last seven or eight years 
— blown millions of dollars of taxpayers’ money, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And needless to say, that we’ll have many more questions to 
ask about this piece of legislation as it moves through the 
process. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 1 — The Child and Family 
Services Amendment Act, 1999 

 
The Deputy Chair: — I’ll invite the minister to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Seated 
beside me is Bonnie Durnford, who is the assistant deputy 
minister responsible for policy in the department, and seated 
behind Ms. Durnford is John Labatt, who is the director of 
community youth services. 
 

Clauses 1 and 2 agreed to. 
 
Clause 3 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Welcome to the minister 
today and to his officials. I’m pleased to see the officials here 
for this very important Act. 
 
Mr. Minister, in subclause . . . it states here that: 
 

Subclause 11(a)(iii) is amended by adding “including 
involvement in prostitution and” after (the word) 
“purpose,”. 
 

Could the minister please give the public and myself an 
indication of what the existing subclause 11(a)(iii) contained? 
What the statement was in the previous Act? 
 
(1515) 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chairman, the current clause 
11 of The Child and Family Services Act states: 
 

A child is in need of protection where: 
 
(a) as a result of action or omission by the child’s parent: 

 
And then sub-sub (iii): 
 

the child has been or is likely to be exposed to harmful 
interaction for a sexual purpose, including conduct that 
may amount to an offence within the meaning of the 
Criminal Code. 
 

So the amendment is to clarify that when we talk about harmful 
interaction for a sexual purpose, that it very clearly means 
including involvement in prostitution. We have always taken 
that clause to mean that, but just to be very crystal clear about it 
we’re proposing to amend it to include that specific provision. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I think it’s 
interesting that you have included that clause then in that 
statement. However when I reviewed the existing Act, it was 
clear to me that that the department would come into play to 
assist children that were in fact being subject to any sexual 
abuse within their home by their parent, guardian or so on. 
 
Now this extra wording including involvement in prostitution 
would imply that parents or guardians that are seen . . . or 
involved in perpetuating or adding to the danger of children 
being exposed to child prostitution would in fact then be . . . the 
children would be, would be able I guess to get help from 
Social Services if that was found that their parent or guardian 
was engaging them in the child prostitution activity. 
 
However for me, that means that children within a home that 
have a guardian are those children who this is . . . who are 
getting this help. This does not do anything to assist or to 
include children on the streets. 
 
So I just wanted to make that comment that I, even though those 
words are there, I don’t think it’s going to be an addition that 
will assist children in any way or form in the protection that 



766 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 1999 

they need — and I’m referring to those children on the streets. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, the amendment is 
intended to clarify that as we indicated under sub (a), that as a 
result of action or omission by the child’s parent, there may 
well be circumstances where it’s not a question of direct action 
by parents where a child becomes involved in prostitution, but 
there also may be omission by the parents. That is to say the 
parent is not providing the proper supervision or the parent is 
unaware or the parent isn’t attending to where their child may 
be at some point. 
 
And we also wanted to clarify that it’s not a question of parents 
being . . . or the parents guiding a child in a certain way, the 
parents acting in a certain way to lead the child in a certain 
direction, but that children may act because their parents aren’t 
attending to those children. That is to say there’s an omission 
by the child’s parent. And we also wanted to make sure that 
we’re in a position to deal with that. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I just want to make 
one more comment before going to the next clause, and that’s 
that many times we’re implying that there’s a parent or a 
guardian in place. Oftentimes children come into the cities with 
absolutely no assistance and no guidance by anyone. 
 
And so those children are simply there and they are on the 
streets with no one to assist or to protect them, with no one to 
go back to . . . for the authorities to go back to or for Social 
Services to go back to saying there has been an omission or 
there has been misguidance here. 
 
So I know there’s a group of young people that often end up on 
our city streets that have come from situations that are 
intolerable for them already, end up on the streets and don’t 
seem to have anyone there to protect them in any way or form. 
 
So I just wanted to make that mention. And I thank you for 
clarifying the part about the omission. It’s important for the 
public to know that, but it’s also important for all of us to 
realize that many children do not have any guidance. And the 
act of them being on the streets is simply because they are 
desperate and they need to have . . . they need to have money 
for one thing or the other. 
 
So I’m going to sit down with that, and allow for the further 
clauses to come forward. 
 
Clause 3 agreed to. 
 
Clause 4 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Chair, I was standing I think when you were 
talking about clause 4 and I didn’t know if you missed me. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Yes, I apologize to the hon. member for 
Humboldt. I did not see you standing. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, in clause 4 
and right under that, the “Duty to investigate,” it says: 
 

13 Where a report is made pursuant to subsection 12(1) or 
(4), an officer or peace officer shall investigate the 

information set out in the report . . . 
 
Now this statement implies that there is a written report that 
must go forward before a police officer or a peace officer can 
investigate. Could you give me an example of who might have 
issued a written report to a police officer? 
 
And my concern with this clause, Mr. Minister, is that 
oftentimes on the streets when children are being subjected to 
being picked up by a john or being subjected to danger of child 
sexual abuse, there isn’t really a great deal of time for written 
reports to go in. Otherwise, if we wait for all of that to happen, 
the child may already have been solicited and have been subject 
to child sexual abuse. 
 
So this is why I have a problem with the existing legislation — 
and with this legislation — because it does not provide for any 
immediate assistance by police officers to remove the child 
from the street when they can see that there has been or is, 
rather, at hand a dangerous situation taking place. 
 
In my Bill, or the Bill that I placed on the Table this session and 
last session, police officers would be provided with the 
authority to remove the child just because simply that they can 
see that there is danger at hand. If they have reasonable and 
very probable grounds to believe that, they could then take a 
child to a place, a safe place with simply a phone call to a peace 
officer so that the peace officer is ensuring that the police 
officer is accountable. 
 
There would be different provisions that the police officers 
would have to be subject to, and that’s what the child’s name is 
if they can get it, it would also mean that the police officer 
would have to say where the child was picked up, what their 
reasonable and probable grounds were that the child was in 
danger, and some other provisions to make sure that the police 
are accountable. 
 
But it would for sure end up assisting the children, in fact 
rescuing the children from the streets and taking them to a safe 
place for assessment, for some medical services and accounting 
— not accounting, I’m sorry, Mr. Minister — having their 
whole situation looked at and it would ensure that there was 
security for that child wherein . . . In fact in a safe house, if 
we’re looking at a safe house, there would be a provision to 
make sure that there was a stay-away order, restraining anyone 
who would try to interfere with that child’s assessment from 
thereon in or their healing from thereon in. 
 
So this clause does not do that. This clause simply says when a 
report is made. Well that implies a written report. By that time, 
it’s too late for the child. 
 
If you could give me an example, for instance, Mr. Minister, of 
who might have the right or who might issue such a report, a 
written report, and why in fact you think that’s going to help a 
child? Because by the time this has all happened, the child will 
have been abused by that time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Chair, item 4 of the Bill 
is to repeal section 13 and replace it with a new section 13. The 
intent is to make it more clear that an officer or peace officer 
can, should act in certain ways if they have reason to believe or 



April 26, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 767 

get a report that a child is in need of protection. But such a 
report need not be in writing. What we’re simply doing is trying 
to clarify their responsibilities, but any report they act on need 
not be in writing. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, why then 
was not . . . why then did we not word this in a way that says 
that a police officer, with reasonable and probable grounds 
believing that a child is in immediate danger, could assist the 
child off the streets. The fact that we’re . . . The way this is 
written, it says “an officer or peace officer shall investigate the 
information set out in the report” — that takes time, Mr. 
Minister. That takes too much time. 
 
By the time that’s done, you can be sure that there’s going to 
have to be a place for the police officer can investigate it. He’s 
not going to be doing that right there on the street when he sees 
a child’s in danger. So if there are reasonable grounds for a 
police officer to assist a child off the streets when they see they 
are in immediate danger, then why is it not simply stated here 
that that can be done by a police officer, without adding all of 
these words in here about the police officer having to 
investigate a report? 
 
And again I ask you the question, who might be the person that 
would issue such a report? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — There are other provisions of the 
Act which make it very clear that a peace officer or an officer, 
as defined in the Act, which would be I guess one of the people 
from our department or one of the child and family service 
agencies, can act immediately where they have reason to 
believe that a child is in need of immediate intervention. And 
they will take steps to do so. 
 
The protocols that we discuss with the police agencies, and 
certainly our own staff would be aware of that, is that a written 
report is not required for them to be able to act. Where do those 
reports come from? They come from doctors, could come from 
teachers, could come from other family members, could come 
from others in the community. It could come for example now 
from the people who are running the safe house in Saskatoon. It 
could come from any number of areas. 
 
But those reports need not be in writing for an officer according 
to this Act, or a peace officer, to be able to act. 
 
(1530) 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, common 
sense tells you that teachers and doctors and even social 
workers are not on the streets at night or in the afternoon when 
this is happening. There are some people that see that this is 
happening and they may then call a police officer with a verbal 
report. And I’m glad to hear that that verbal report may be acted 
on by the police. 
 
But what you’re speaking of, is speaking of social workers or 
for instance teachers or doctors bringing to attention of a police 
officer that a child is most likely in danger of sexual abuse. 
Those kinds of sexual abuse acts are most generally happening 
in a home or in some premises as such, not on the streets. 
 

Now I’ve talked to a number of social workers and they just 
simply say to me, look I’m not even going to be on the streets 
where there are a lot of johns and pimps; it’s dangerous. I’m not 
well-equipped to be able to handle that situation. 
 
So I think we’re fooling ourselves if we think that there are 
going to be reports from people like social workers that are on 
the streets at night. There are people, for instance that you 
mentioned, maybe at the safe house in Saskatoon, there are 
people like Egadz that possibly will report this. And I think that 
is commendable and that’s a good thing for them to have a way 
to report this and have that report acted on immediately. 
 
But the other situation at hand is we have a safe house in 
Saskatoon and we don’t have measures in place right now, and 
those measures should have been put in place by Social 
Services, to ensure that there is a stay-away order; a fine in 
place for people that are trying to intervene with the healing 
process of those victims. 
 
So I just find that this is not substantial enough. We need to be 
able to have a piece of legislation in place that allows police 
officers who are themselves on the streets and who are most 
likely to be the ones noticing children that are in immediate 
danger. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, I would just point out 
that we do have and try to . . . or not try but are providing 
support for a number of community outreach measures in 
addition to the mobile crisis family units that do operate in our 
major cities. But we are assisting these outreach groups to make 
contact with children and then, where they see a need, to make a 
report of a child that in their view needs the protective 
intervention of our department, then we will act. 
 
But the point is the groups are being supported by us to make 
the contacts with children and then, where they see the need, to 
report to us so that we can respond appropriately. And by we, it 
could be someone from my department, it could be someone in 
a mobile crisis unit, it could also be police officers. But that’s 
the system that we’ve set up so that we can respond. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. As much as I do 
appreciate the work of the people with mobile vans, I know the 
immense amount of work they have to do at their stations and 
their ability to be able to be all over the city every night of the 
week is limited very much so. That being another reason that I 
believe police officers who do patrol the cities and so on should 
have the immediate authority to assist children who are in need 
of protection and assist them immediately. 
 
The other comment I would make on the safe houses, Mr. 
Minister, is as I’ve mentioned before, we don’t have proper 
measures or instruction or any pathways of support it seems 
within the safe house that is existing in Saskatoon, to ensure 
that there is a stay-away order for pimps. And if you are 
working on that, I applaud you on it. But it’s needed 
immediately, and I think that we need to make sure that there’s 
a fine in place that would deter them from that activity. And I 
also think that we have to ensure that there’s proper security at 
those places so that this sort of a situation that happened in 
Saskatoon does not happen again. 
 



768 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 1999 

I would, with that comment, invite you to continue on with the 
further clauses. 
 
Clause 4 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 5 to 10 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 11 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, 
this clause does nothing at all to add to a deterrent that is so 
badly needed in this province. As I mentioned today in question 
period, Mr. Minister, there are children being sexually abused 
throughout our province every day. This is a major, major 
problem in the province and it’s a major concern by many of 
our citizens because it deals with children whose health and 
well-being — the total person — is being destroyed. 
 
Mr. Minister, we must . . . we have to enact a major deterrent 
within this Act if this Act is going to have any teeth at all. It is 
not a substantial enough measure to acknowledge that there’s a 
problem and to put down some wording that may or may not 
assist children off the streets and give them the protection they 
needed and the healing they need. 
 
It is not enough to acknowledge that, Mr. Minister. We must 
take concrete measures. We cannot wait with this any more. A 
number of things need to be done, a better Act needs to be 
enacted in this provincial legislature, a more substantive Act. 
But at least for the time being while this Act is on the table, I 
implore you to accept and support the amendment that I’m 
going to bring forward. 
 
The amendment is, as you well know, to make a mandatory fine 
of $25,000 for anyone that interferes in any way with children 
that have been subject to child sexual abuse, but interferes in 
any way with their healing starting from day one. A $25,000 
fine would also be given to johns or pimps that are convicted of 
child sexual abuse through the prostitution trade. This fine 
would be imposed on any person in this province who engages 
in child sexual abuse whether it’s in the home or on the streets 
or anywhere. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I implore you to accept this amendment 
because I think it would in fact be the major deterrent and 
would provide for those children in this province that are being 
sexually abused an assurance and a guarantee that in fact the 
government is doing something to assist them in a meaningful 
manner. 
 
And so at this time, Mr. Chair, I would like to propose an 
amendment to The Child and Family Services Act, and I 
propose that clause 11 of the printed Bill be considered and by 
striking out subclause (2)(b)(i) and substituting the following 
subclause: 
 

(i) by striking out “not more than “$5,000” and substituting 
“$25,000”; 

 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, or Mr. Chair, we do 
not support the amendment. Let me make a number of points in 
support of that. One is that the main amendment before the 
House is to increase the penalties in the Act which apply to a 

number of contraventions of the Act or to a number of offences. 
 
We are proposing to increase that fine from 5,000 to a 
maximum of 25,000. We’re doing that, in great part, because 
we have a concern that some of those who are involved with 
children who are being sexually exploited and doing it as an 
economic activity, may not be deterred by the fines that were in 
the Act. So therefore we’re proposing to increase the maximum 
fine to 25,000. And I might say — and 24 months in jail — and 
I might say that those penalties are consistent if not identical to 
the penalties that are included in legislation in Alberta. 
 
But again, the reason that we’re proposing to increase it to 
25,000 is so that it will act as a deterrent — and 24 months — 
so that it can act as a deterrent to pimps or others who are 
engaged with some of these children and are exploiting these 
children for sexual purposes and for economic gain, so it does 
stand as a significant deterrent. 
 
I would also point out that this section of the Act also deals with 
a number of other offences such as neglect of a child by a 
parent. There may be instances where, oh, as an example, if 
some parents go to the bar and leave their children outside and 
those children are not being attended to and in a sense neglected 
and found to be such under the Act, that . . . you know, the 
member’s amendment would then fix that fine for those parents 
also at a rate of 25,000. I don’t know whether that’s appropriate 
under the circumstances. 
 
You may also have abandonment of children by parents. That is 
to say, parents who take off for an evening and leave their 
children at home, they believe perhaps in the care of a 
babysitter but it wasn’t firmly fixed, we are called in because in 
our opinion those children are abandoned. The courts also hold 
that those children are abandoned. Now the member’s 
amendment would say that the minimum fine under such 
circumstances would also be $25,000. We don’t necessarily see 
it that way, so . . . 
 
And there are other contraventions of the Act that are also 
covered by this clause, so we have some concern that we fix a 
minimum fine in this particular instance. We believe that the 
$25,000 maximum and the two years in jail that is now the new 
maximum for this Act will act as a significant deterrent. And I 
would not be surprised that if our judicial system and our 
department, in acting under the auspices of the Act to lay 
charges against pimps or others who are involved with children, 
that the courts would recognize that there has been an increase 
in penalties for this purpose and would act appropriately. Now I 
can’t prejudge the courts, but my sense is that they would do so. 
 
I would also point out that the number of interventions under 
this Act by police officers would be small compared to actions 
that they would take under the Criminal Code of Canada where 
the penalties for similar kinds of clauses and similar kinds of 
activities are much more severe than they are under our Act. 
 
But again we feel that this increase from 5,000 to 25,000 and 
from what was six months to 24 months, and which is identical 
to the legislation Alberta, will serve as a deterrent or as a further 
deterrent to those who would contravene the Act and those who 
would try to exploit children for sexual purposes. But it’s not 
our intention to make this a minimum and in that way to catch 



April 26, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 769 

others in a web that may not be appropriate. 
 
(1545) 
 
Ms. Julé: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, past 
history has proven to us that any fines that are slated as “up to,” 
gives the judge in a court the discretion to put forward a fine 
that they believe is appropriate. We have had the public, Mr. 
Minister, speaking out loud and clear that these fines are not 
enough for a major deterrent. 
 
Mr. Minister, would you accept this amendment, Mr. Minister, 
if we asked you to direct the 25,000 mandatory fine to johns 
alone? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Again, Mr. Chair, we are 
proposing to amend this section to increase the penalties from 
$5,000 up to $25,000 and from 6 months to 24 months because 
we believe that the offence of engaging children in sexual 
exploitation or forcing them into prostitution or encouraging 
them in prostitution is a very severe offence. We want to ensure 
that the courts have that discretion to be able to exact those 
kinds of fines and to impose those kinds of sentences where it’s 
appropriate for them to do so. 
 
There’s no doubt in my mind that the court makes a clear 
distinction between certain kinds of activities, for example, as I 
mentioned earlier, between those who might abandon their 
children in some way or those who might neglect their children 
in some way as opposed to this kind of activity. 
 
I would also point out that the Criminal Code — it takes one 
kind of approach to adults who are involved or had some 
involvement in the area of prostitution. For example, the 
maximum penalty faced by those communicating with adult 
prostitutes is six months in jail. But when we come to children, 
sexual assault of those children under the age of 14 has a 
maximum penalty of 10 years in jail and engaging children 
under the age of 18 in prostitution can see people hit with a 
maximum penalty of five years in jail. 
 
So I think the courts clearly understand the gravity and see the 
sign post that we put for them in terms of this maximum 
penalty. And I have every confidence that where we do . . . or 
peace officers do move under this particular Act that the courts 
will behave or act appropriately to punish offenders. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, 
we have had three to four years to look at doing something, 
something meaningful to assist our children, to protecting our 
children. It is up to the purview of the public, and of course to 
the government of the day, where children are not in the care of 
responsible parents or guardians to assist those children and to 
make sure that they are not abused in any way or form. 
 
The United Nations Rights of the Child states these 
fundamental rights. The United Nations Rights of the Child 
makes a statement that it is up to the public purview to make 
sure there are measures in place. And the public purview in my 
estimation in this province is the responsibility of the 
government of the day. 
 
I am deeply disappointed, Mr. Chair, that we couldn’t after 

three to four years enact some legislation that has some real 
teeth in it to assist our children. Our children have no one else 
to go to. They expect to be protected. A natural instinct in them 
that they be loved and protected is there within their heart and 
within their soul. 
 
Instead what we’re doing is we’re as much as saying that we’re 
not going to do anything very meaningful to help you. We are 
just going to hope that what has happened in the past doesn’t 
happen any more. We’re going to hope that johns get a lesson, 
an example set by other johns that may get a slap on the wrist. 
We’re going to hope that our children’s lives are not destroyed. 
We’re going to hope and hope, but we’re not going to do 
anything any more that’s going to . . . any more than what we’re 
doing now, rather, that’s going to assist these children. 
 
My disappointment goes deep. As I’ve mentioned today — 
before, and many times — there are children throughout the 
province who are having to be subjected to sexual abuse daily. 
And here we have a government that will do basically nothing. 
There is no reason in this world that this government could not 
direct a $25,000 mandatory fine at johns to ensure that we have 
a deterrent in place that is going to stop this activity — at least 
slow it down, at least make people think twice. 
 
And I believe that that measure would in fact slow down this 
activity. It would send a message that this is an intolerable 
crime that’s taking place. This is a crime that is repeated daily, 
over and over, a crime that is directed at the same child many 
times over and over. This crime is worse than murder. Murder 
happens once. This crime happens daily, repeatedly, to the same 
child many times. This child in fact is murdered day in and day 
out. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chair, rather, I grant the government no 
excuse for not bringing forth meaningful legislation. There is, 
as I’ve mentioned, no reason in the world that they could have 
not taken one small but very meaningful step in making sure 
that we have a fine in place directed at johns of $25,000 to stop 
this abhorrent activity. 
 
It is well known out there on the streets, it is well known in the 
complete public sector, Mr. Chair, that many of the men and 
some women abusing our children are elites in our community. 
There are many people in our community who have influential 
positions who are perpetuating this crime. Those people have 
$25,000. If in fact they have sinned accordingly —if I may use 
the word, sinned — or committed this crime, then the least that 
can be asked of them is that they take some of their riches, their 
money, and use it . . . have it used towards assisting children 
towards their healing, towards assisting them towards their 
education, to assisting them in whatever way is necessary to 
hopefully set them on a path where their well-being will be 
intact and their lives will eventually be enhanced. 
 
For our government to be this uncaring, for them to continually 
say no to the children of the province is inexcusable and another 
reason why this government should not be tolerated any further. 
Thank you 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, I just want to indicate 



770 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 1999 

to the committee that again we are proposing to increase the 
fines in this case from 5,000 to 25,000, and the sentences that 
can be imposed from six months to 24 months. 
 
I think this is a very clear signal for the courts and all concerned 
that we, as members of the Legislative Assembly and society, 
view this matter very seriously and that here is a new signpost 
for the courts to look to when it comes to imposing penalties for 
those who are caught and those who are charged in these 
circumstance. I have no doubt that this will happen. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
The division bells rang from 3:55 p.m. until 3:57 p.m. 
 
The amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 8 
 
Krawetz Bjornerud D’Autremont 
Draude Julé Heppner 
Osika Hillson  
 

Nays — 22 
 
Flavel MacKinnon Lingenfelter 
Shillington Goulet Johnson 
Serby Cline Crofford 
Van Mulligen Teichrob Sonntag 
Scott Nilson Langford 
Murray Hamilton Wall 
Kasperski Ward Murrell 
Thomson   
 
Clause 11 agreed to. 
 
Clause 12 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, I would like to 
thank the minister and his officials for coming in. For whatever 
it was worth today, thank you. 
 
(1600) 
 

Bill No. 15 — The University of Regina 
Amendment Act, 1999 

 
The Chair: — I would ask the Minister to introduce his official 
please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. With me, seated 
to my right, is John Biss, the executive director of the 
universities branch. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. Mr. 
Minister, welcome and to your official. A few questions on this 
Bill, Mr. Minister. As I indicated in our comments back in 
second reading that there isn’t a lot of controversy regarding 
this Bill. I just think that we need to have a few points clarified. 

The very first one is surrounding the requests of the auditor. 
The Provincial Auditor has indicated that there has been some 
conflict within the existing provisions of The University of 
Regina Act and now the amendments. Could you identify what 
the Provincial Auditor saw as the problem that needed 
correcting? 
 
The Chair: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, with leave of members to 
introduce some guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
through you and to all members who are gathered in the House 
just now, I’d like to introduce a group of young people who 
have come today from Moose Jaw. 
 
They are all participating in programming at the Grinning 
Lizard teen wellness centre, an exciting youth centre in our 
community, and these are some of the exciting young people 
from our city. 
 
They’ve been over at the University of Regina. They’re now 
doing just a real short tour of the legislature and they wanted to 
sit in on some of the debate this afternoon. So I would ask all 
members to welcome these young people from the Grinning 
Lizard teen wellness centre. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 15  The University of Regina 
Amendment Act, 1999 

(continued) 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Yes, to the member, the issue was 
around purely the interpretation of the legislation. The 
Provincial Auditor was of the view that it required an order in 
council to grant approval for overdraft. And the board of 
governors was of the view that it simply required board 
approval. 
 
In consultation with the Provincial Auditor’s office, who have 
reviewed the legislation, and at the request of the University of 
Regina, we are proposing this amendment that should satisfy 
both parties. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Minister, the second bit of clarification I think is around 
short-term and long-term borrowing. We recall a few years ago 
the situation that occurred at the University of Regina 
regarding, you know, going extremely a large amount of money 
over budget and that type of debt that was placed on the 
government. 
 
Is there any clarification on what is meant by short-term 
borrowing, what is meant by long-term borrowing, and the 
amounts that may be put forward in those categories? 



April 26, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 771 

Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The short-term borrowing is defined as 
120 days. And our understanding is that their maximum line of 
credit cannot exceed $120 million . . .(inaudible interjection). . . 
Sorry. I’m sorry. Let me clarify — $10 million. We got the 120, 
120 days is the definition for maximum short-term and the 
maximum is $10 million. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you for clarifying that, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, you’ve indicated that, also at the request of the 
University of Regina, the board of governors, that this 
interpretation now that you are putting will clarify the situation. 
 
I’m wondering: is there any comments from the board of 
governors regarding the kinds of things that they will be doing 
regarding spending and still having to send it to, of course, 
Cabinet for approval, because we’re going to be looking at the 
Lieutenant Governor in Council as approving these costs. Will 
the recommendations still be coming from the board of 
governors of the University of Regina regarding any borrowing, 
whether that be short-term or long-term? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The short answer is for long-term 
borrowing, they would come . . . yes, it would require the 
process through Cabinet. 
 
I just want to clarify. The rationale for this as well is to cover 
off periods of time, for instance, when tuitions come in in the 
fall, they would obviously have a substantial amount of cash on 
hand. This time of the year is when their accounts are drained 
and when they would need these amounts of money. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, I note in your explanatory notes 
that were circulated, you’ve indicated that the revisions to The 
University of Regina Act should bring it into line with the new 
University of Saskatchewan Act. Are there differences in limits 
or are we dealing now with two Acts that are relatively similar? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Both Acts would be relatively similar. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — One final question regarding The University 
of Regina Act as far as the finances are concerned. It mentions 
an overdraft limit. What is the amount that has been placed on 
that category? You mentioned 10 million as being the 
short-term borrowing. Is there an overdraft limit that is different 
from that amount? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The maximum is $10 million. It’s 
actually through CIBC (Canadian Imperial Bank of 
Commerce), although my understanding is CIBC may make 
some exceptions, where there are receivables that are imminent, 
within a day or so. But that would be purely for the CIBC to 
decide. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — With the differences in sizes of campuses 
obviously, the University of Saskatchewan and the University 
of Regina, you’re indicating that the Bill is fairly similar, the 
Acts are fairly similar, I’m wondering is the 10 million suitable, 
if it’s suitable for Regina. Is this the same figure that the 
University of Saskatchewan is operating on as well? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I’m sorry, we don’t have that 
information but we can certainly get it for you. 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you. The final part of the Act deals 
with the Wascana Centre and the University of Regina parking. 
Just to clarify, Mr. Minister, under the existing conditions, 
before this time, where we have the Wascana Centre as the 
entity that makes the bylaws and puts in place the regulations, 
who was administering the parking tickets, the issuing of 
parking tickets, the collecting of them? And also where did the 
revenues from those fines, where did they go to? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Just as a general statement regarding 
this issue, the parking amendment, it’s also to try and bring it in 
line with how the University of Saskatchewan currently 
functions right now as well. And all of the things that you’ve 
just described were the responsibility of the University of 
Regina, but the authority was designated to them by the 
Wascana Centre Authority which created some administration 
difficulties, and that’s the rationale for the request for this 
amendment. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — So the little bit of an extra part to my first 
question was: did the revenues stay within the University of 
Regina before? And you can, you can add to that one. 
 
The other part, Mr. Minister, is now that we’re going to create 
the power to be held within the University of Regina, I guess 
they will have to create their own set of bylaws and their own 
regulations. Will they be duplicating the Wascana Centre’s and 
just recreating them, or do you see a long tedious process and a 
lot of new regulations and new bylaws that have to be put into 
place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Just in continuation of the answer to the 
first question. Yes, it’s our understanding that the revenues did 
stay with the University of Regina. 
 
And certainly there won’t be any significant changes regarding 
parking to our knowledge anyway, and don’t believe that would 
happen. They would be working in concert with the Wascana 
Centre Authority. They have a member on the board actually of 
the Wascana Centre Authority now. And we wouldn’t anticipate 
any major changes at all as it pertains to parking. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — With the changes now to the University of 
Regina being in control of not only the actual implementation 
of the bylaws but actually creating the bylaws, how will this 
affect students? Will students see any change to how their 
university parking has been run before and how will it be run in 
the future? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — For all intents and purposes, no. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — And my final question, Mr. Minister, comes 
from a student who wants to know whether or not there are 
designated parking lots for night parking. Does that exist right 
now or will you have to create bylaws and regulations that will 
actually put that into place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I would have to say I’m in the dark on 
that one. We don’t know the answer to that question. We’ll 
surely get it for you though. Okay. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Yes, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Minister. I 
understand that up until this year any loans required by our 



772 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 1999 

universities have been guaranteed by the province of 
Saskatchewan, and that practice is now going to cease so that 
universities have to incur loans on their own which will involve 
higher costs. 
 
And I want to ask you if it is the intention with this amendment 
to facilitate the University of Saskatchewan borrowing money 
not guaranteed by the province, as is apparently being done in 
the University of Saskatchewan to finance the University of 
Saskatchewan replacing and renovating and repairing some of 
its older buildings that they’ve have had so much trouble with, 
and of course especially the building that collapsed on us. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — This won’t have any impact on the 
University of Saskatchewan at all. This is The University of 
Regina Amendment Act. So if I’ve understood your question 
correctly, it won’t have any impact on borrowing for capital at 
all. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — I realize this is just the University of Regina 
not the University of Saskatchewan. But my question is, is it the 
intention that the University of Regina will also now start 
floating loans not guaranteed by the province? 
 
(1615) 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — There won’t be any changes 
significantly as a result of this. Any capital borrowings that 
would be required would still require a cabinet approval and 
through order in council. This amendment to The University of 
Regina Act wouldn’t in any way affect that. 
 
And I should say while I’m on my feet as well, that the capital 
requirements of the universities, we would try to keep them 
consistent as well with the recommendations in the DesRosiers 
report. And again I would say that this legislation doesn’t . . . 
these amendments don’t contemplate any change in that 
whatsoever. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — I guess though, Mr. Chairman, my point is that 
we’ve had a very dramatic change in the case of the University 
of Saskatchewan. First of all because the province wasn’t 
guaranteeing capital loans, they were forced to pay a higher rate 
of interest which is a direct cost to the university and ultimately 
to either the students or the taxpayers, one or the other or both. 
And secondly the University of Saskatchewan had no credit 
rating. And I’m told that the process alone of the university 
being evaluated for credit rating purposes was about $150,000. 
 
So it was very expensive for the University of Saskatchewan to 
go into the money markets themselves not guaranteed by the 
province of Saskatchewan. And this is something that was first 
done when our University of Saskatchewan was something like 
100 years old — 90 years old, I mean — so we had close to a 
century of the province taking responsibility for our 
universities. 
 
Now the province, the provincial government is apparently 
abrogating that responsibility in the case of U of S (University 
of Saskatchewan). Are they going to abrogate it in the case of 
the University of Regina as well? And if they do, that is a big 
new expenditure, a big new cost to the borrowing of money, 
and that . . . So it might help the province’s books in the short 

term because the province can say they don’t have that liability 
on their books, but in the long term it means that the 
university’s borrowing requirements will cost more money, and 
when the university’s borrowing requirements cost more 
money, obviously either the students or the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan will have to pick that up. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well my remarks to that really . . . my 
answer to that question really doesn’t pertain to the legislation 
or the proposed amendment, but I’ll answer the question 
nonetheless. 
 
In this past budget, there was a commitment in the budget to 
actually fund over the next period of years the Thorvaldson and 
the kinesiology building at the University of Saskatchewan. So 
in fact it relieved any responsibility of the University of 
Saskatchewan for in fact having to borrow any funds. But again 
I go back to the amendments as proposed under The University 
of Regina Amendment Act, 1999. This would not contemplate 
any change in what is the current practice regarding capital 
borrowing. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 1 — The Child and Family Services 
Amendment Act, 1999 

 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill 
be now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 15 — The University of Regina 
Amendment Act, 1999 

 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Public Service Commission 

Vote 33 
 
The Chair: — I would ask the minister to introduce her 
officials please. 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I would like to 
introduce to you, Wynne Young, who’s the Chair of the Public 
Service Commission, and she’s to the left. Immediately behind 
me we have Rick McKillop, executive director, employee 
relations of the Public Service Commission. To my right and a 
little bit behind is Clare Isman executive director, human 



April 26, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 773 

resource development division, and behind me, directly behind 
me, Sharon Roulston, who’s the director of administrative and 
information services division. 
 
Subvote (PS01) 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I’d 
just like to welcome the minister’s officials here this afternoon. 
Madam Minister, I just have a few questions to do with the 
Public Service Commission. Can you give us an update on the 
Public Service Commission’s goal to implement pay equity? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you. I thank the member 
opposite for the question. I believe what you’re asking is maybe 
where we’re at, and what our goal is. The goal is to have a new 
classification plan that achieves the government’s goal of 
jointly negotiated pay equity. When fully implemented, the plan 
will have achieved internal equity and removed gender 
discrimination in job evaluation for all SGEU (Saskatchewan 
Government Employees’ Union) employees. 
 
The new plan enables any job assignment to be equitably 
classified through a common set of job evaluation factors 
worked on with the union representatives. It reduces the 
emphasis on supervision as the only basis for advancement and 
recognizes the importance of knowledge, problem resolution, 
and human relation skills in achieving the government’s goals. 
As I stated it’s very structural and stands us in good stead for 
the future. 
 
We know that all aspects of the classification plan and all the 
related processes were mutually determined with 
representatives of the bargaining unit in accordance with 
established pay equity principles and practices. All employees 
then have the opportunity to appeal their allocation to a joint 
union management appeal panel and the allocation of all 
negatively impacted employees are then reviewed. 
 
(1630) 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. When pay 
equity is fully in place somewhere in the future — and we don’t 
know how far down the road that will be — can you give us an 
idea of what that will cost the cost the taxpayers? A rough 
guesstimate? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — At present we’re working on it and 
we’re about halfway through. We expect when it’s fully 
implemented, it would be about 16.1 million within the SGEU 
(Saskatchewan Government Employees’ Union) bargaining 
unit. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. That cost 
then, Madam Minister — correct me if I’m wrong — would be 
an annual cost from that point on, would it not? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Yes, Mr. Member, that’s correct. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Madam Minister, I believe that Public 
Service Commission went through a reclassification process for 
government employees. How much did this reclassification 
process cost in terms of higher salaries for in-scope employees? 
 

Hon. Ms. Hamilton: —I would inform the member that part of 
the pay equity initiative, because it’s a structural initiative, 
includes sitting down with the representatives of the unions and 
determining what the values and the evaluations will be within 
their jobs and then set up a job classification plan. So they’re 
part of the same process; job classification and evaluation is 
part of the pay equity initiative and so therefore that would 
mean that it’s included in the $16.1 million. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. The Public 
Service Commission has been undergoing a process for 
modernizing the information technology systems it uses. Can 
you tell us what this process was budgeted at and what the final 
bill will be for this information technology upgrade? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — The Internet personnel system is one 
that replaces the PALS (personnel attendance and leave system) 
network when we found that would not be Y2K (Year 2000) 
compatible and that there were things that we wanted to 
accomplish in addition to the old system. We are in the process 
of and I believe almost to the end of full implementation. It has 
been implemented now. And that would be at a final additional 
cost of about $1.1 million. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, can you tell us what the management development 
centre is and how much it will cost? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — I thank the member opposite for 
providing me with an opportunity to tell you more about the 
management development centre. Because as anywhere else 
within workplaces and so on, the Saskatchewan public service 
has experienced a great deal of change. 
 
They’ve demanded that the public service become more flexible 
and innovative and responsive in meeting the needs of 
Saskatchewan citizens. Executive and senior managers need to 
both be highly effective public administrators, and 
organizational leaders. So this is a newly established 
management development centre at the Public Service 
Commission, and it’s recently completed a learning needs 
identification process with senior managers. 
 
This learning needs assessment which was conducted over the 
past year concluded that senior managers are quite strong in the 
area of public administration. Something I believe we knew all 
along, but here we have it confirmed. 
 
Through the same process, senior managers identified the broad 
area of leadership as their priority for learning and for 
development. This focus on leadership skills for senior 
managers is not confined to the Saskatchewan Public Service. 
The Conference Board of Canada, for example, having looked 
across other jurisdictions and sectors, has concluded that 
leadership now and in the future is a critical management 
competency and that managers need expertise in multiple skills 
including leadership, management of people, and in change. 
 
The management development centre was established to 
provide training, education, and development opportunities for 
senior managers that addressed their high priority needs 
learning . . . learning needs. And it will, we believe, enhance 
their effectiveness as senior managers and consequently the 



774 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 1999 

effectiveness of the public service overall. 
 
With the positive results that we will have, the managers who 
need to face the change of the future — I believe that the cost is 
about $130,000 for programming cost plus some of the staff 
that are involved, and I believe there are about five individuals 
in Clare’s area. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, how then in your view will the management 
development centre and the costs associated with it benefit the 
average taxpayer in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — I believe that there are a number of 
ways the taxpayer would benefit from that. If you have 
managers who are able to look for new ideas and innovation 
and able to access the expertise of their staff and the personnel 
around them, they can quickly formulate recommendations and 
ideas that can be implemented. And in many areas, that would 
have cost-saving implications for the taxpayers. I also believe 
then you have a workplace that has less stress. 
 
It also has the ability to maintain the people that we have 
employed within the province and to be able to see them 
moving up as their skills increase and their competency levels 
improve. So you have a workforce that’s here, that wants to stay 
here, and we can maintain them. And I believe that’s also of 
benefit to the taxpayers of the province. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. And I 
understand what you’re saying about how you’re spending the 
money and what you feel the benefits will be. But I guess where 
I have some concerns is, take the nurses for an example where I 
believe one of the things that they would like to see is part of 
their training paid for also by the government. And that would I 
believe be of benefit to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan and the 
public in general, and we don’t see that happening. 
 
Madam Minister, one of the goals of the Public Service 
Commission equity program is to get more women, more 
Aboriginal people, and more handicapped people into the public 
service. Can you tell us what percentages these categories now 
make up in the public service, and compared to that the 
percentage they make up in the general population? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — As the member opposite would know 
asking that question, that we believe employment equity in 
government is a very important aspect of the Public Service 
Commission work. We have areas of representation, persons of 
Aboriginal ancestry. By March 31 of 1998 we believe that 
representation would reach 7.2 per cent, which is up from 1992: 
3.1 per cent then, 7.2 per cent now. 
 
Our desired goal and our aspiration is to reach 12.2 per cent 
which would be reflective of the population at large. 
 
Persons with disabilities — again in 1992 as of March 31 — we 
had 2.4 per cent and we now have as of March 31, 1998 — 3.1 
per cent. Our goal is 9.7 per cent. And I think we would all 
agree that that’s one of the areas we have to look at ways that 
we can access those individuals who would be willing to work 
within government services and how we can best accommodate 
their needs. And we’re very hopeful that the issues that . . . 

disability issues directorate will be of great assistance in that 
way as well. 
 
Members of visible minority groups have gone from 1.9 per 
cent in March 1994 to 2.5 per cent. So we’re about half way 
there. We would want to see about 5.1 per cent if we were 
looking at representational workforce. 
 
And women in management about 35.2 per cent as of March 31, 
1998, and our desired representation level would be 45 per cent. 
 
In non-traditional positions, women in non-traditional positions, 
is about 20.3 per cent at present. And our desired representation 
in the workplace would be about 45 per cent. 
 
So again another area where we really need to do some 
encouraging to look at ways we can access women who are 
willing to be employed in the non-traditional areas of 
government work. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, also there was an order in council approved for 
$950,000 to provide for relocation costs of the Public Service 
Commission’s Regina offices. Can you tell us why this move is 
being made and why it would cost as much as a million dollars 
to move? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Okay. As the member would be aware, 
the lease expired at the Public Service Commission’s current 
site on 11th Avenue in November of 1998. The site at 2103 
11th Avenue did not meet all Public Service Commission needs 
due to accessibility and parking restrictions for clients. 
 
SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation) 
tendered for the space on behalf of the Public Service 
Commission in a fair and open tendering process. The Broad 
Street location was the most economical and most favourable 
location for the Public Service Commission from the results of 
that tender. 
 
As we stated, the reason why we wanted to see the move was 
the people who have to access the Public Service Commission 
for a number of reasons — anything from working with our 
representative unions to people who are looking for 
employment opportunities and just people within government 
who need to seek the advice of the PSC (Public Service 
Commission). It was felt that the new location would meet 
those needs. 
 
When the move is completed, it would save about $350,000 on 
an annual basis. There are some renovations that are needed in 
the new location, but once we’re up and running, totally there 
would be about $350,000 annual saving. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Minister, I just 
wanted to ask you a specific question in as far as gender equity 
is concerned. It is my understanding that in the area of SERM 
(Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management), that 
we do not have any efforts really being made. In fact we have a 
detraction and a dissuasion, I guess, in no uncertain terms, of 
women being placed as conservation officers. They apparently 
are directed to other jobs and so on, but they are certainly not 
able to be able to access the jobs of conservation officers. Could 



April 26, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 775 

you tell me — if you have that information with you — how 
many women in Saskatchewan are actually conservation 
officers at this time? 
 
(1645) 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — We don’t have the specific numbers 
for you at this time, and I’ll endeavour to get that information to 
you. But what I can say is that there are areas like that where we 
really want to see movement forward and SERM is 
implementing a mentoring program to try and do just that. 
 
There are as you know some times that within a workplace, for 
whatever the reasons, some of them may be a need to educate 
people both in the workplace and outside of that on what can be 
expected in the jobs is important, and that the programs that we 
put in place we’re hopeful that we would eliminate any of those 
barriers including within the conservation area classification. 
SERM is moving forward on that with their mentoring program. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam Minister, it 
seems to me that mentoring programs, as you’ve stated, that are 
in place are an effort to be able to close this gender-equity gap 
as far as women being placed, for instance, in SERM as 
conservation officers. 
 
But what’s really happening out there on the field is women that 
are trying to access those jobs are feeling as though they are 
bullied, intimidated, and certainly given the direct message that 
they had better be happy with what they have or, you know, 
they will be without a job — amen. 
 
So I would hope that the minister takes into consideration some 
of those things that are taking place, and that you pay close 
attention to any of the complaints that might come forward in 
this regard. Thank you. 
 
Subvote (PS01) agreed to. 
 
Subvotes (PS02), (PS06), (PS04), (PS03) agreed to. 
 
Vote 33 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1998-99 
General Revenue Fund 

Budgetary Expense 
Public Service Commission 

Vote 33 
 
Subvotes (PS02), (PS03) agreed to. 
 
Vote 33 agreed to. 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Chair. I’d like to thank my 
officials. I know that the members opposite would know that 
they’ve had quite a workload with all of the interesting 
bargaining processes going forward, a new Act for government 
employees scope review and other initiatives going forward. 
And they’ve worked very long hours and diligently so I’d like 
to take the opportunity to thank them at this time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Bjornerud: — I also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, would like to 
join with the minister and thank the officials this afternoon. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation 

Vote 53 
 

The Chair: —I would ask the minister to introduce her officials 
please. 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I have with me 
today, John Law, the president of SPMC, to my immediate left. 
Behind John, Mr. Garth Rusconi, the vice-president of 
accommodation services. Directly behind me, Rob Isbister, 
acting vice-president of finance. Just behind me and to the right, 
Barbara Loveridge, acting director of financial planning, 
finance and corporate services. And I’m looking for . . . there. 
Al Moffat is beside John Law, who is our vice-president of 
commercial services. 
 
Subvote (SP01) 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Again, 
Madam Minister, I’d like to welcome your officials here today. 
 
Madam Minister, I’d like to start today, this afternoon, by a few 
questions on the Plains hospital, the building that the Plains 
hospital was in, where SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of 
Applied Science and Technology) is going now. When this 
project was first announced, Madam Minister, what was the 
original completion date that was projected? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’m pleased to 
be able to answer questions for you on a very exciting project 
that is part of what in the future will be known as the 
knowledge corridor, and that’s the SIAST redevelopment 
project. 
 
As the members would know, that we began taking over that 
project about November 30, 1998. The original completion date 
was scheduled to be September 2001, and it was subsequently 
moved ahead to September 2000. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, you said this was an exciting project. Actually I 
haven’t found that to be the case in southern and eastern 
Saskatchewan. I couldn’t find anybody excited about the Plains 
closing and I’m kind of surprised you would say it that way. 
 
Madam Minister, what was the original budget for redoing the 
Plains hospital or the building that the Plains was in? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you to the member opposite for 
that question. The budget in total for the redevelopment of that 
project, which I believe a number of students from the SIAST 
campuses are quite excited about being located together, is 
about $29 million — 28.8 to be exact. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Madam Minister, I’m sorry if I didn’t quite 
hear you right. Was that the original budget that you had 
planned for or is that the actual budget that you’re working on 
right now? Are we over budget from what we originally 
planned? 



776 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 1999 

Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — That was the original figure 
contemplated. And my officials tell me there’s no reason to 
believe there’s a change in that budgeted amount. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. And I guess 
time will tell, Madam Minister. Madam Minister, those items 
that were not transferred to the Plains or the General Hospital 
— office equipment, all kinds of things, garbage disposal units, 
all kinds of equipment like that — if they weren’t moved to 
those other two hospitals, can you tell me what you did with 
that equipment? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you for that question. The 
salvaging of the equipment and material from the former Plains 
Health Centre followed a three-part process. 
 
Any equipment or fixtures which could be used by the Regina 
Health District in the General or the Pasqua hospitals or in any 
other facilities were taken from the building once it had been 
decommissioned on November 30, 1998. So the first part was to 
see if we could use any of those in the health facilities. 
 
Then SPMC analyzed the remainder of the building to 
determine what material could be reused for the SIAST 
redevelopment project. And this included items such as doors, 
frames, hardware, kitchen equipment, walk-in freezers, 
countertops. Even the trees located where the industrial shop 
addition is being built are going to be relocated to another side 
of the building. 
 
After that was done, the third part of the process was to look at 
any remaining material, and if it was of some value, to be 
turned over to the government auction. Material deemed not to 
have any value would be disposed of in an environmentally 
sensitive manner. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, so far how many firms have been given contracts to 
work on the new SIAST buildings, and can you name them, and 
what have they been hired to do? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Yes, through you, Mr. Chair, the 
overarching teams that are at work there would be Pattison 
MGM who were responsible for the design, and they’re on 
ongoing basis looking at the design for the project. And then 
PCL Maxam is the construction manager. 
 
And the way the contracts work and are let, every other contract 
then would be the responsibility of PCL. And there would be a 
number of them. Anything from, as you know, the asbestos 
removal work to electrical to rebuilding — any of the trades 
that would be there would be the responsibility of PCL. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, then would this also include the subcontractors that 
you’re talking about here today? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Yes, that would include any of the 
subcontractors. Contracts are let based on the information that 
people who are buying for the construction manager tender 
would be, and then those become the responsibility of PCL 
Maxam. 
 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. And you may 
have answered this but I’d like to ask it again. The 
subcontractors — how were they hired? Were they tendered by 
the government, were they tendered by PCL, or were they 
tendered . . . How did they go to get the job? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Yes. My officials inform me that every 
other contractor or subcontractor there, would be hired by PCL 
Maxam. But they would be hired subject to the terms and 
conditions that we set forward in the contract. So they would 
have to meet those terms and conditions, and then PCL would 
go out to a tender process to access those subcontracts. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, would it not be of a concern to the government if one 
or more of these contractors were not bonded? 
 
The Chair: — Before the minister answers, it now being the 
normal time of recess, this committee stands recessed until 7 
p.m. later this day. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 


