





























































Hansard: December 08, 1999


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 41 
 December 8, 1999 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
today to present petitions on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan 
concerned about the automobile insurance Act. And the prayer 
reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to repeal the provision of the 
personal injuries benefit contained in the automobile 
insurance Act and adopt a return to an add-on insurance 
system that would provide benefits on a no-fault basis to 
all victims without taking away the innocent victim’s right 
to seek compensation from the person responsible for the 
accident, but with appropriate modifications to reduce 
overall personal injury costs. 

 
And the signatories on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Humboldt, from Burr, Saskatchewan, from Clavet and Regina 
and other places throughout the province. I so present. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition this 
morning . . . or this afternoon on behalf of the citizens of this 
province regarding concerns they have with the automobile 
insurance Act: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to repeal the provision of the 
personal injury benefits contained in the automobile 
insurance Act and adopt a return to an add-on insurance 
system that would provide benefits on a no-fault basis to 
all victims without taking away the innocent victim’s right 
to seek compensation from the persons responsible for the 
accident, but with appropriate modifications to reduce 
overall personal injury costs. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is from the good citizens of Wolseley, 
Glenavon, Pilot Butte, Prince Albert. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
stand today to present a petition on behalf of Saskatchewan 
citizens regarding the automobile insurance Act. The petition is 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to repeal the provision of the 
personal injury benefit contained in the automobile 
insurance Act and adopt a return to an add-on insurance 
system that would provide benefits on a no-fault basis to 
all victims without taking away the innocent victim’s rights 
to seek compensation from the person responsible for the 
accident but with appropriate modifications to reduce 
overall personal injury costs. 
 

And this petition is signed by people from Saskatoon, Hanley, 
and the Humboldt area.  

I so do present. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As well to present a 
petition and reading the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitions humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to repeal the provision of the 
personal injury benefits contained on the automobile 
insurance Act and adopt a return to an add-on insurance 
system that would provide benefits on a no-fault basis to 
all victims without taking away the innocent victim’s right 
to seek compensation from the person responsible for the 
accident but with appropriate modifications to reduce 
overall personal injury costs. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the petition I present is signed by individuals from 
the communities of Wynyard, Indian Head, Quinton, Carievale, 
and Regina. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
petitions. And I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to repeal the provision of the 
personal injury benefits contained in the automobile 
insurance Act and adopt a return to an add-on insurance 
system that would provide benefits on a no-fault basis to 
all victims without taking away the innocent victim’s right 
to seek compensation from the person responsible for the 
accident but with appropriate modifications to reduce 
overall injury costs. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And these are signed by good people from Warman, Humboldt, 
St. Louis, Prince Albert, and Saskatoon. 
 
I so present. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to give notice of 
motion for the first reading of a Bill. I give notice that on Friday 
next, I will move the first reading of a Bill entitled, The 
Four-year Taxation Plan, 1999. 
 
And further, Mr. Speaker, I give notice of a motion for the first 
reading of a Bill, for Friday next and would move first reading 
of that Bill, entitled The Legislative Assembly and Executive 
Council Amendment Act, 1999. 
 
A third notice of motion for the first reading of a Bill. I give 
notice that I shall on Friday next move the first reading of a Bill 
— and I would ask my colleagues across the way to take note 
— entitled The Respect for Constituents Act. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, I give notice of a written question. I 
give notice that I shall on day no. 8 ask the government the 



42 Saskatchewan Hansard December 8, 1999 

following question, to the minister of Executive Council: 
 

What role does the Department of Executive Council play 
in calling and examining requests for proposals from 
communications firms, marketing firms, market research 
firms, and polling firms for the work done by all 
government departments and Crown corporations; and 
please give a complete rundown on the government’s 
policy in awarding contracts to such agencies for this type 
of work; and please give a complete list of all contracts of 
this nature awarded by the government through the 
Executive Council during the 1998-99 fiscal year; whether 
the tending process in each case followed government 
policy; how many companies tendered for each project and 
which company got final contract; how much the contract 
was worth; and how many other companies bid on a 
contract in each case. 

 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to give notice of 
motion of the first reading of a Bill. I give notice that I shall on 
Friday next move first reading of a Bill entitled The Highway 
Traffic Amendment Act, 1999. 
 
I also give notice of a written question, that I shall on day no. 8 
ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Education: provide a complete list of all 
in-province and out-of-province travel undertaken by you 
in your capacity of minister and please state which 
ministerial assistants accompanied you on each trip. 
 

Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on Friday next move first reading of a Bill entitled The 
Accountability of Subsidiaries of Subsidiary Crown 
Corporation Act. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, I give notice that I shall on day no. 8 
ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of CIC: what is the policy for awarding 
contracts by the Crowns from communication firms, 
marketing firms, market research firms, or polling 
companies; what role does Executive Council play in 
awarding contracts of these types by the Crown 
corporations? And please give a complete listing of all 
contracts of this type awarded by Crown corporations so 
far in 1999; how many of these tenders follow government 
policy; how many firms bid on each job and how much 
each contract was worth; and how many companies bid on 
each contract? 
 

Thank you. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too give 
notice for motion for the first reading of a Bill on Friday and 
. . . the Bill entitled The Protection of Children Involved in 
Prostitution Act. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I would like to give 
notice of written questions. I give notice that I shall, on day no. 
8, ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Intergovernmental and Aboriginal 

Affairs: how much provincial funding went for services on 
Indian reserves in Saskatchewan in 1995 and ’96? And, 
Mr. Speaker, I have similar questions pertaining to the 
years 1996-97, and 1997 — rather 1998-99. 

 
I also give notice that I shall ask the Minister of 
Intergovernmental and Aboriginal Affairs the following 
question: 
 

How much provincial funding in 1999-2000 is budgeted to 
go to on-reserve services in Saskatchewan; and what are 
these services? 

 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, I have a further question to the 
Minister of Finance: 
 

How much did the First Nations’ exemption from paying 
the PST (provincial sales tax) cost the provincial 
government in 1996, 1997? And I have similar questions, 
Mr. Speaker, for the years 1997-98, and 1998. 1999. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’d like to give notice of motion of the first reading of 
two Bills. The first is that I give notice that I shall on day no. 10 
move first reading of a Bill entitled The Government 
Accountability Act. And I give notice that I shall on day no. 10 
move first reading of a Bill entitled The Balanced Budget Act, 
1999. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, I give notice of a written question. I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 8 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Finance: what effect does the 
bankruptcy of Eaton’s department store have on the 
mortgages held by the provincial government against 
Cadillac Fairview and Eaton’s, due to mature on December 
1, 2001? 
 

Thank you. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on Friday next move first reading of a Bill, 
The Agriculture Implements Amendment Act, 1999. 
 
And I also have a written question. I give notice that I shall on 
day no. 8 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Agriculture: what mode of 
transportation did he use to attend the recent World Trade 
Organization meeting in Seattle? How many staff members 
accompanied him? And did any members of his immediate 
family accompany him on the trip? 

 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well to 
give notice of the first reading of a Bill. I give notice that I shall 
on Friday next move first reading of a Bill entitled The 
Health-care Funding Audit Act. 
 
I also give notice that I shall on Friday next move first reading 
of a Bill entitled The Health Ombudsman Act. 



December 8, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 43 

And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to give notice 
that I shall on day no. 8 ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the Minister of CIC: please provide a complete listing 
of all new charges SaskTel has placed on in-home service 
calls since January 1, 1999; and what new charges of this 
type are planned to be put into place in the year 2000? 
 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on Friday next move first reading of a Bill, 
The Crown Corporations Amendment Act, 1999 (Appointment 
of Directors). 
 
I as well give notice that I shall on day no. 8 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Intergovernmental and Aboriginal 
Affairs: how many middle management positions within 
your department have had their jobs terminated since you 
became minister? 
 

Mr. Peters: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on Friday 
next move the first reading of a Bill, The Health District 
Amendment Act, 1999 (Elected Boards). 
 
And while I’m standing, I’d like to ask the question . . . I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 8 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Education: please provide a complete 
list of all ministerial assistants employed in your 
ministerial office and their salaries. 
 

Thank you. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to give notice of motion 
for first reading of a Bill. I give notice that I shall on Friday 
next move first reading of a Bill, The Vehicle Administration 
Amendment Act, 1999. 
 
And I will also give notice that I shall on day no. 8 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Intergovernmental and Aboriginal 
Affairs: what mode of transportation did he use to attend 
the recent World Trade Organization meetings in Seattle; 
how many staff members accompanied him; and did any 
members of his immediate family accompany him on the 
trip? 
 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on Friday 
next move first reading of a Bill, The Justice System Review 
Act, 1999. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on Friday next move 
first reading of a Bill, The Referendum and Plebiscite Act, 
1999. 
 

And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 8 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Justice: what specific role, if any, did 
the deputy minister of Justice play in drafting the coalition 
agreement between the Liberal Party of Saskatchewan and 
the New Democratic Party of Saskatchewan, dated 
September 29, 1999. 
 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — I give notice of motion for first reading of a 
Bill. I give notice that I shall on Friday next move first reading 
of a Bill, The Health Districts Amendment Act, 1999 (Block 
Funding). 
 
While I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on 
day 8 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Intergovernmental and Aboriginal 
Affairs: how much has the advertising and communication 
budget within your department been reduced since you 
became minister. 
 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
give notice that I shall on Friday next move first reading of a 
Bill, The Saskatchewan Farm Security Amendment Act, 1999. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 8 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of CIC: how much has been cut from all 
Crown legal, polling, and consulting budgets since October 
1, 1999. 
 

Also I give notice that I shall on day no. 8 ask the government 
the following question: 

 
To the Minister of Education: how much is the advertising 
and communications budget within your department been 
reduced since you became minister. 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice 
that I shall on Friday next move first reading of a Bill, The 
Property Rights Act. 
 
I give notice that I shall on day no. 8 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of CIC: how much has been cut from the 
Crown corporations advertising budget since October 1, 
1999. 
 

And I give notice that I shall on day no. 8 ask the government 
the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Finance: how much is the Government 
of Saskatchewan spending on the program known as the 
Three Century Club wherein portions of the Trans Canada 
Trail is purchased in the name of certain senior citizens to 
mark the new millennium. 

 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 



44 Saskatchewan Hansard December 8, 1999 

shall on Friday next move first reading of a Bill, The 
Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act 1999, (Votes 
of Confidence). 
 
And while I’m on my feet, I also give notice of a written 
question. I give notice that I shall on day no. 8 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Intergovernmental and Aboriginal 
Affairs: please provide a complete list of all the ministerial 
assistants employed from your ministerial office and their 
salaries. 

 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to give notice 
of motion of first reading a Bill. I give notice that I shall on 
Friday next move first reading of a Bill, The Crown 
Construction Tendering Agreement Nullification Act. 
 
And also while I’m standing, I’d like to give notice of a written 
question. I give notice that I shall on day no. 8 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Education: how many middle 
management positions within your department have been 
terminated since you became minister? 

 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to make notice 
of a motion for first reading of a Bill. I will give notice that I 
shall on Friday next move first reading of a Bill entitled The 
Crown Corporation Managers’ and Permanent Heads’ Salaries 
Act. 
 
While I’m on my feet, I’d like to make notice of a written 
question. I give notice that I shall on day no. 8 ask the 
government the following: 
 

To the Premier: please provide the number of full-time 
equivalent positions that have been eliminated in Executive 
Council since October 1, 1999 and how money has been 
saved with these staff reductions. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on Friday next move first reading of a Bill entitled, The 
Trade Union Amendment Act, 1999. And while I’m on my feet, I 
give notice that I shall on day no. 8 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Premier: how many positions have been eliminated 
from the Executive Council’s house business and research 
office since October 1, 1999; and how much money has this 
reduction saved? 
 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — I give notice that I shall Friday next move first 
reading of a Bill, The Regulatory Reform Act; and I also give 
notice of a written question. I give notice that I shall on day 8 ask 
the government the following question: 
 

To the Premier: how many positions have been eliminated in 
the Executive Council’s communications, co-ordination, and 
media services office since October 1, 1999; and how much 
money has this reduction saved? 
 

Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This afternoon I give 
notice that I shall on Friday next move first reading of a Bill, The 
Crown Corporations Amendment Act, 1999 (Foreign 
Investments). And, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 8 ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the Minister of Intergovernmental and Aboriginal Affairs: 
to provide a complete list of all in-province and 
out-of-province travel undertaken by you in your capacity of 
minister; and please state which ministerial assistants 
accompanied you on each trip. 

 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice of a first 
reading of a Bill. I give notice that I shall on Friday next move the 
first reading of a Bill entitled, The Crown Corporations Rate 
Review Act, 1999. And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I 
also give notice of a written question. I shall on day no. 8 ask 
the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Post-Secondary Education: please 
explain any role your department has played in the current 
efforts to keep the Canadian Bible College in Regina; and 
has there been an offer to the Canadian Bible College and 
the Canadian Theological Seminary about taking a place in 
the Knowledge Corridor in southeast Regina. 
 

Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on Friday next move first reading of a Bill, 
The Education and Health Amendment Act, 1999. Also, Mr. 
Speaker, I wish to give notice of written question. I give notice 
that I shall on day no. 8 ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the minister responsible for Crown Corporations: why 
was the city of Moose Jaw denied the opportunity to set up 
its own enhanced 911 system, a system that would have 
cost taxpayers substantially less than what they will now 
have to pay to get emergency services routed through Swift 
Current. 
 

Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
give notice that I shall on Friday next move the first reading of 
a Bill, The Crown Corporations Disclosure Act, and further, 
Mr. Speaker, I give notice that on day no. 8 I will ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of the Crown Investments Corporation: 
how many middle management positions have been 
eliminated in Saskatchewan’s Crown corporations since 
October 1, 1999; and how much money have these 
reductions saved? Thank you. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Ms. Eagles: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you 
and through you to this Assembly a friend of mine and my 
family’s. Len Gustafson served as my Member of Parliament 



December 8, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 45 

from 1979 till 1993. He is in town today to attend the 
agricultural meetings that took place this morning in Regina. 
And so I’d like you to please join me in welcoming Senator 
Gustafson.  
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like 
to introduce to you and through you to all the members of the 
House two constituents of mine who are sitting in the west 
gallery — Brett and Sylvia Quiring. 
 
Brett is a university student at the U of R (University of Regina) 
here in Regina and he’s also my constituency association 
president. And I see he’s joined here today with his sister . . . I 
mean mother, Sylvia. And I want to welcome them here and 
hope they enjoy the proceedings. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve had so many special 
occasions in this House recently — several elections, a least a 
couple of swearing-ins, a Throne Speech, and I can’t name them 
all. 
 
I’d like to introduce today two people who’ve been on the floor 
of this House as often as I have — my wife and my daughter, 
up in the gallery, Marilyn and Brooklyn. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would simply 
like to add my words of welcome to Senator Gustafson. It was a 
pleasure last week to be able to spend considerable time with 
the senator and get to know him very well as we were both 
“sleepless in Seattle”. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Through you and to the 
members of the Assembly it’s my privilege to introduce two 
residents of southwest Saskatchewan from the Glentworth area 
— Yogi Huyghebaert and Murray Cheesman. I’d ask all hon. 
members to make them welcome in the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, it 
gives me a great deal of pleasure to introduce to all members of 
the Legislative Assembly, my father, Roy Atkinson, former 
president of the National Farmers Union and a long-time 
advocate for farm families in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I was pleased that my father was able to watch the historic 
proceedings that took place yesterday on the floor of the 
legislature. And I was reminded when I was watching him 
sitting there that he has spent over 40 years of his life 
representing farmers in the province of Saskatchewan. And I 
also thought that some things haven’t changed a lot in the last 
40 years, and in fact a lot of things have gone backwards. 
 
And so with that, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to welcome my 
father to the legislature and I hope he enjoys the legislative 

proceedings. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to have the Assembly 
welcome my nieces, Rhonda and Rebecca Knibbs. They’re 
from North Battleford. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, through you and to the 
Assembly, I would like to extend a warm welcome to a good 
friend of mine, Bill Missal from Lang, Saskatchewan. He and I 
have followed career paths for about the last 20 years, but as of 
September 16, I’ve kind of “y’d” off in a different direction. So 
I’d like to welcome Bill Missal. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Regina to Host Memorial Cup in 2001 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Mr. Speaker, on Monday our city of 
Regina, and indeed the province as a whole, received some very 
good news. Our hockey team, the Regina Pats were awarded the 
right to host the Memorial Cup in the year 2001. Regina won 
out over bids by Calgary, Lethbridge, and Kelowna. 
 
This is great news for us for a number of reasons. 
 
First of course, Mr. Speaker, our city and its attractions will be 
showcased in the national media. The tournament will provide 
an immediate boost to our economy and a longer term payoff as 
those who watch on TV will want to come and see more of the 
city. 
 
The tournament will show our excellent sport facilities as well 
as our commitment to, and support of, junior hockey. 
 
Finally, and perhaps most of all, Mr. Speaker, the 2001 
Memorial Cup will enhance once again to our nation Regina’s 
reputation as a host city for elite sporting events. After all, we 
have this decade hosted the Grey Cup, the Scott Tournament of 
Hearts, the Brier, and the Western Hockey League all-star 
game. With that kind of experience behind us this event is 
certain to be a success. 
 
We won this bid because of excellent work by a committee 
headed by Ron Clark. I congratulate the committee, also general 
manager Brent Parker, and all the Regina Pats organization, and 
express our gratitude for their hard-won success. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll be there in 2001 and I hope other members 
will be as well. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 
would like to congratulate the Regina Pat organization and the 
city of Regina on their successful bid for hosting the Memorial 
Cup in the year 2001. No doubt the bid was successful due to 
the long history of the Regina Pat organization as well as the 



46 Saskatchewan Hansard December 8, 1999 

very successful undertakings of the city of Regina on many 
events such as the Grey Cup and the Scott Tournament of 
Hearts, just two events just recently. 
 
So I too would like to congratulate them and I will be there 
also. So I hope every other member is too. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Provincial Farm Support 
 

Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As a new MLA 
(Member of the Legislative Assembly) and an urban MLA I 
want to say how interesting, how educational, and how 
motivating I found yesterday’s extended debate on the crisis 
facing Saskatchewan farmers. I knew some things, perhaps not 
as well ask I ought, and now I know more. As my colleague 
from Regina Northeast said, it was good to have a human face 
put on the troubles faced by today’s farm families. 
 
I was also pleased by the fact that all three parties put aside any 
partisan game-playing in the face of such a severe problem. 
And, Mr. Speaker, although we all agree that the solution to this 
international problem lies in the hands of the government 
appointed to deal with international affairs, the federal 
government, it was good to see the chart produced by our 
Minister of Agriculture which shows Saskatchewan 
expenditures in support of agriculture. 
 
(1400) 
 
In particular it was useful to see in plain figures that 
Saskatchewan leads the nation in per capita spending on 
agriculture by a very large margin. Mr. Speaker, we spend 
almost $300 for every man, woman, and child in this province 
to support our farm sector. Ontario by contrast spends a 
munificent $27, and Premier Harris is threatening to pull out of 
national support programs. Alberta comes in at $129, 
respectable, but not in the ballpark. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, to those who say we should do more we say, 
yes we should. But to those who say we do nothing we say, 
check the facts. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Sturgis Student Wins Poster Contest 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I want 
to recognize the achievement of a young individual from my 
constituency. Daniel Michaluk, a grade 8 student at the Sturgis 
comprehensive school is one of 13 Saskatchewan students to 
have their art work selected for the year 2000 farm safety 
calendar. 
 
Over 2,000 students from 105 schools across Saskatchewan 
submitted entries to this year’s poster contest. The contest was 
open to all students from kindergarten to grade 9. Prizes were 
awarded to three age groups in four safety categories, including 
machinery safety, yard and livestock safety, chemical and 
poisonous gas safety, and electrical and fire safety. 
 
Daniel’s entry in the machinery safety category depicted a 

farmer getting caught by the power takeoff shaft of a 
tractor-driven haybine. A very realistic drawing of a scene that 
occurs far too often on Saskatchewan’s farms. 
 
I want to commend the Sturgis comprehensive school and 
Daniel Michaluk for promoting a most important goal, the 
prevention of needless accidents on the farm. I would ask all 
members to join me in congratulating Daniel Michaluk and the 
other 2,000 participants for recognizing the importance of farm 
safety. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Economic Diversification 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In this Assembly 
members have debated for decades the need for provincial 
economic diversity. If all our eggs in one basket, the argument 
goes, everything gets scrambled if the basket drops. We must be 
doing something right, Mr. Speaker, because although we all 
recognize the seriousness of the agricultural situation, other 
sectors of our economy are performing beyond expectations. 
 
Housing is a good example. Construction of homes and 
apartments in Saskatchewan are outstripping last year’s pace. 
According to the Canada Mortgage & Housing Corporation, the 
report says that Saskatchewan in 1999 may surpass the number 
of starts in 1998, which saw the highest level of starts in a 
decade. Housing starts were up 5 per cent with 1,956 starts by 
the end of October. 
 
It pains me to say, however, Mr. Minister, the biggest advance 
was in the city of Saskatoon, although Regina and many other 
cities posted modest growth as well. 
 
But I should say that in Regina in the month of November, 
housing sales grew by 12 per cent over November a year ago. 
These numbers are all the more remarkable, Mr. Minister, 
because nationally housing starts have slipped by 2.2 per cent. 
 
We’re not completely there yet, Mr. Minister, but we are closer 
to the day when the booms and busts of the previous years can 
be smoothed out. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

New Beginnings Housing Co-operative 
 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to add to 
the comments made by the member from Regina Dewdney on 
the housing boom in Saskatchewan, particularly because there 
is a fine example of this boom in Prince Albert. 
 
The New Beginnings Housing Co-operative is only two years 
old, but already it’s a big part of the community development in 
Prince Albert. In fact this October, New Beginnings received a 
Saskatchewan co-operative enterprise award for its work in 
helping families afford their own homes — a dream that 
otherwise couldn’t have been realized. 
 
The co-op creates local jobs; it helps rejuvenate 



December 8, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 47 

neighbourhoods and creates a sense of pride for people through 
owning their own homes. 
 
I’d like to thank New Beginnings for their hard work and 
important role in the Prince Albert housing program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and members, please join me in congratulating the 
co-op on their latest achievements. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Financial Support for Farmers 
 

Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 
the Premier. Mr. Premier, yesterday farmers and farm groups 
came here to the legislature and delivered two clear messages. 
One group after another called for a billion dollars of trade 
equalization payments from Ottawa. And we agree. 
 
But one group after another also said that your government 
needs to do more. 
 
The Saskatchewan Wheat Pool challenged you to develop a 
workable, long-term safety net program. United Grain Growers 
noted that Saskatchewan farmers pay the highest fuel taxes in 
the Prairie provinces. The National Farmers Union challenged 
you to lower the education portion of property tax. 
 
Almost every group made proposals your government can and 
should be taking. The message was coming through loud and 
clear. Mr. Premier, did you get the message? What steps is your 
government going to take to address the farm crisis? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I want again to remind 
all members of the House and the public at large that I think it 
is very, very important that we keep our focus on where the 
main solution to this very complex and difficult problem lies, 
and that is at the national and at the international level. This is 
absolutely critical. 
 
We are committed to doing what we can do at the provincial 
level. The Speech from the Throne talks about such things as 
withdrawing . . . talks about withdrawing from AIDA 
(Agricultural Income Disaster Assistance) and putting the 
money into relief programs. It talks about high input costs 
facing farmers and ways to reduce them. The crop insurance — 
improving the coverage and looking at the costs. A farm input 
monitoring program. 
 
I could go on. Leasebacks for three years, inviting the federal 
government to join. Even the question of lands branch action, 
the Provincial Action Committee on the Rural Economy and the 
like. 
 
I’ll be very brief in closing by saying that we are taking all of 
these suggestions under very serious and active consideration 
and remind the members of the House, as the member from 
Saskatoon did in his member’s statement a few moments ago, in 
this province the taxpayers of this province, all the taxpayers, 

fund to the extent and support Saskatchewan farmers $300 per 
capita. That’s two and one-half times more than the nearest 
province. We will continue to do that and even more as our 
funds permit. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well let’s talk a 
bit about the focus on the billion dollars from Ottawa. Just 
yesterday members of this Assembly unanimously passed a 
motion urging the Government of Canada to immediately 
provide $1 billion to Saskatchewan farm families facing the 
worst farm crisis since the 1930s. 
 
Mr. Premier, this morning your Minister of Agriculture 
appeared to forget this motion. Your minister indicated to the 
media he would be very discouraged if there was no relief for 
farmers in the next federal budget. 
 
Mr. Premier, that budget is not expected until March. 
Saskatchewan farm families cannot wait until March or later. 
Farmers need help immediately. That means now. 
 
Mr. Premier, your Minister of Agriculture appears to be 
following the same path as your former minister of Agriculture 
— content to sit back and wait for action from the federal 
government. 
 
Mr. Premier, why is the Minister of Agriculture not repeating 
the motion passed here yesterday, unanimously, when he speaks 
on this issue? Mr. Premier, are you telling the Saskatchewan 
farmers they will now have to wait many, many more months 
for help from the federal government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the farm coalition, 
which comprises all the farm leadership that we heard — most 
of them we heard yesterday in what I thought was a very fine 
day for the Legislative Assembly and really was a great 
experiment in democracy — argues that we should have a 
billion dollars for the people of the province of Saskatchewan 
now. And the position of the provincial government is that 
money should take place now. 
 
And rather than concentrating on what the provincial Minister 
of Agriculture is reported to have said, I would say to the 
Leader of the Opposition he should be mindful of what the 
Liberal Chair of the Commons agricultural committee said. 
 
And the notation I have from a recent news report says, quote 
(this is Mr. Harvard): 
 

The Chrétien government has to do more to help struggling 
prairie farmers. He says he won’t promise an amount but 
he says it’s now clear to him that farmers need more 
assistance than the federal government is currently 
offering. 
 

Now that is a huge step forward and I’d like to think that 
working together we achieved that huge step forward. And that 
money should come forward as quickly as possible and before 
the end of the year. 



48 Saskatchewan Hansard December 8, 1999 

But I’ll close by saying this, Mr. Speaker. Members will, I 
think, acknowledge the fact, as will the journalists who 
observed the proceedings, that many speakers in their 
presentations yesterday said that if we missed that December 
deadline, the next obvious no-miss deadline has got to be that 
spring budget. That is what I’m sure the Minister of Agriculture 
of Saskatchewan is referring to. But we want the money now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’re 
underwhelmed by your resolve and determination. 
 
There’s another message coming out of the farm crisis and that 
is the growing sense of western alienation. According to media 
reports, you have been talking to the Prime Minister about a 
Quebec strategy and the Prime Minister has been asking for 
your support. The Prime Minister wants Saskatchewan’s 
support to make this country work. 
 
Now that’s a fair request, but it’s also a two-way street. When 
are we going to get something in return? 
 
Mr. Premier, you spoke to the Prime Minister about the national 
unity issue as recently as Monday of this week. Did you raise 
the farm crisis during that conversation, and if so, what was his 
response? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, on any occasion that I 
have the opportunity to speak to the Prime Minister of Canada, 
I discuss with him the urgency and the crisis of the farm 
situation in western Canada. I do so both in verbal 
communications and the meetings with had with the coalition in 
Ottawa a couple of months ago. I do so in correspondence. And 
I will continue to do so. 
 
If, however, implied in the member’s statement/question is that 
there should be a bargaining of this great country called Canada 
in exchange for . . . no matter how difficult the problems may 
be, I have to disagree with him. 
 
And I might remind the Leader of the Opposition that even his 
former colleague, the Reform Member of Parliament, Mr. 
Kerpan, who came before the members of this House and who 
so eloquently spoke on this issue — and captivated the attention 
of everybody on that side of the House — clearly and 
unequivocally said we should never bargain Canada when it 
comes to our differences as important as those differences are. 
 
The question to me is, do I speak to the Prime Minister about 
this issue? The answer? I always have and I always will. And 
I’m going to continue to fight for the farmers of Saskatchewan, 
and I’m going to repeat my plea to the people of Canada and the 
Prime Minister: we need your help now, we need your support; 
it’s the fair and just thing to do for Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, please. We’d like to hear the 

question from the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well I heard some emotion over there but I 
sure didn’t hear an answer to my question so I presume that on 
Monday the Premier didn’t raise the farm crisis here in 
Saskatchewan; that he has no good news coming out of that 
meeting whatsoever. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party supports a strong and 
united Canada. Make no doubt about that. But we also 
understand the growing sense of alienation that many 
Saskatchewan people are feeling. 
 
(1415) 
 
When Jean Chrétien needs an ally for his national unity strategy, 
he turns to his old pal, the Premier of Saskatchewan. But when the 
Premier needs support for Saskatchewan farmers, Jean Chrétien 
gives him the bum’s rush out of the door. 
 
Mr. Premier, these two issues are related. If Jean Chrétien wants 
Saskatchewan support to make Canada work, then Saskatchewan 
deserves his support to make Canada work. And that starts now 
with a billion dollar trade equalization payment from Ottawa. 
 
Mr. Premier, will you deliver that message to the Prime 
Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, if I received the bum’s 
rush when I was in Ottawa, I must say that I was in somewhat 
good company or — well depending on your point of view — 
because there were a lot of bums from over that side that got the 
same rush as we did. In fact a lot, a lot of the same bums got the 
rush in Manitoba. And so this is not a question of personality. I 
say to the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. I really would like to 
hear the answer to that question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
Unfortunately the members, the members of the so-called 
Saskatchewan Party do not want to hear the answer to the 
question. 
 
So my answer to this question is this, Mr. Speaker — we 
remain committed. And I really do appeal to the Leader of the 
Opposition to keep the eye on the ball. The eye on the ball here 
is this immediate subsidy crisis, and the need for us at a 
non-partisan, non-political level, and with as much unity of the 
farm coalition as possible, to keep pursuing this issue. 
 
I repeat again, as I said in my earlier answer, any time I get a 
chance to talk to the Prime Minister or anybody else on this 
issue, I advocate the position of the farm coalition and will 
continue to do so for our family farms. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Funding of Health Care for Patient 
 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 



December 8, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 49 

the Minister of Health. Madam Minister, it’s been almost three 
months since the election and nothing has changed. Hospital 
waiting lists are getting longer, nurses and doctors are still 
leaving, and the health care bureaucracy is still stifling any 
attempt at improving front-line services. Here’s a graphic and 
disturbing example. 
 
Edward Ens of Codette contacted me a few weeks ago to tell 
me a story that could only happen in NDP (New Democratic 
Party) Saskatchewan. Mr. Ens suffers from a rare blood disease 
called T-cell lymphoma. Since there are no facilities to 
adequately treat him in Saskatchewan, he must travel once a 
month to the Mayo Clinic in Minnesota. But now Mr. Ens has 
been informed by Sask. Health that they will no longer pay for 
this treatment. 
 
Madam Minister, you were contacted by Mr. Ens over a month 
ago about this. He still hasn’t had a response. Will you explain? 
Will Mr. Ens’s treatment be cut off by Saskatchewan Health? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, I’m reminded that the opposition health critic and 
his assistant health critic visited my office some weeks ago, and 
one of the commitments that that member made was that he 
would work through my office in order to resolve problems. So, 
Mr. Speaker, I’m a bit surprised that he is raising this issue in 
the legislature given his commitment that he made to us that he 
would work through our office in the name of co-operation to 
resolve issues, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What I can say to the member, as well, is that the information 
and privacy Act in this province does not allow me to comment 
on any individual case before the legislature. What I can say to 
the member is that we will continue to work to improve health 
services in this province. As the member knows we spend $1.95 
billion each year in the province of Saskatchewan on health 
care. We deliver millions of units of services to our province’s 
population and we will continue to improve the health status of 
Saskatchewan citizens. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, Mr. Ens wrote you over a month ago and he has so far 
not received one word back and you owe him that courtesy. 
 
Madam Minister, maybe I can help you with more specific 
information about Mr. Ens’s situation. He’s under the care of a 
specialist at Royal University Hospital. He must take treatments 
in Minnesota. Each of these monthly treatments costs about 
$11,600 US (United States). Saskatchewan Health has been 
funding these treatments for the past 20 months. That means 
that the Department of Health has spent more than $230,000 US 
for these treatments. 
 
Madam Minister, the equipment that is required to perform 
these treatments only costs about $38,000 US. That means your 
government could have purchased the equipment and offered 
the treatment in Saskatchewan at a massive savings for the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 

Can you explain, Madam Minister, why you would allow the 
expenditure of the $230,000 US to send one patient for 
treatment in the United States when you could have saved 
hundreds of thousands of dollars by purchasing the equipment 
and using it here in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
What the member should know is that when services are not 
available in the province of Saskatchewan, that as a general 
policy we are able to provide for those services outside of 
Saskatchewan. This is the kind of provision that we have under 
Canada’s Canada Health Act, Mr. Speaker, and we have 
reciprocal agreements. 
 
It’s not unlike citizens that come to Saskatchewan from Alberta 
or Manitoba or British Columbia to receive services that may 
not be available in their home provinces or may not be available 
on a timely basis. 
 
The other point I’d like to make, Mr. Speaker, is the province of 
Saskatchewan funds capital construction projects, we fund 
operating costs; but as a matter of policy, we have not funded 
equipment that is located in our various facilities. There are 
some pieces of equipment that we fund on a provincial basis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, obviously the member raises a question; and I will 
need to look into the exact details of this particular case 
regarding the equipment and I’ll be prepared to report back to 
the legislature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — And all of this information was submitted in 
the letter that Mr. Ens wrote to you over a month ago. So it’s 
really difficult to pretend you don’t know what this is all about. 
 
Madam Minister, there was a proposal that I will table with this 
Assembly and with yourself today, from Mr. Ens’s doctor to the 
Department of Health dated March 9, 1999. The proposal 
demonstrates how establishing an extracorporeal photophoresis 
unit in Saskatoon would establish a quality and accessibility of 
health services in Saskatchewan while saving hundreds of 
thousands of dollars. 
 
Dr. Peter Hull, the head of dermatology at the Royal University 
Hospital proposed that the money paid to the Mayo Clinic in 
Rochester be used instead to buy the medical equipment so the 
medical treatment could be offered to Saskatchewan residents at 
lower cost. 
 
I’m also tabling the response from the medical manager, in 
response to this proposal. According to the medical manager, 
and I quote: 
 

That would seem to make sense on the face of it. 
Regrettably that is not how things work in the real world. 
 

Madam Minister, is that how NDP health care works? Do you 
agree that even if a proposal makes sense, leads to better health 
care, and costs less money, the Department of Health shouldn’t 
take action because quote: “that’s not how things work in the 



50 Saskatchewan Hansard December 8, 1999 

real world.” 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
What I can say to the member, and one of the references that 
was made in the Throne Speech, was the need to clearly define 
roles and functions of our various partners in health care. 
 
As the opposition will know, Saskatchewan has undergone 
major health care restructuring in the last six years. Mr. 
Speaker, we believe that it’s time to clearly define roles and 
functions and to put proper accountability methods in place in 
terms of how we deliver health services. This means that we’re 
going to be reviewing roles and responsibilities of all of our 
partners in the health system, including health providers, 
including districts, including the department, and including the 
Government of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We will have these discussions. So clearly accountability and 
responsibility mechanisms will be put in place. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Madam Minister, in the world you live in 
everything seems to just get worse and worse. According to the 
medical manager of medical services . . . that the Department of 
Health, and I quote: 
 

There’s no way money assigned to physicians’ fees can be 
used to buy equipment. 

 
In other words, Madam Minister, your NDP government is so 
committed to maintaining a massive, inefficient bureaucracy — 
that is impossible to change even if that change leads to better 
health, to more people being serviced at lower cost. 
 
And finally, Madam Minister, your medical director concludes 
his letter to Dr. Hull by advising him not to hold his breath. 
Well, Madam Minister, people in Saskatchewan are tired of 
holding their breath waiting for your government to get its act 
together. Is that what you’re going to do, is tell people to hold 
their breath? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, you know we have just 
gone through an interesting process in August and September. 
And what’s interesting in that election campaign, I saw very 
little information that was coming from the Saskatchewan Party 
with regards to health care in the province of Saskatchewan. In 
fact, Mr. Speaker, what the opposition said, was that they were 
essentially going to freeze health spending in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you will recall in our last budget we increased 
health spending in this province by 1.9 . . . $2 billion. Mr. 
Speaker, in addition there have been special warrants that have 
in fact increased that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what I can tell the opposition is that we have . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order, please. Order, please. 

Even I’m having a little difficulty hearing the answer. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, what I can tell the people 
of Saskatchewan is that we have close to 5 million visits to 
family doctors in this province. We have 926,000 visits to 
specialists. We have 9,200 nursing home residents; we have 
29,000 people that receive home care services. We have over 
800,000 days — days, Mr. Speaker — of in-patient care in 
hospitals in our province. And we have over 650,000 visits to 
our emergency wards. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if you listen to the opposition you would swear 
that nothing positive happens in our health system in the 
province of Saskatchewan, and I can assure the members 
opposite that each and every day 35,000 people get service in 
this province. 
 

Funding for Highway Maintenance 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for the 
Minister of Highways this afternoon. 
 
Mr. Minister, I read the Throne Speech and reread it, the one 
that was presented in the House on Monday. It’s a well-worn 
copy, and I thought perhaps the Lieutenant Governor had 
missed a paragraph. I searched high and low through that 
document. I even looked under the corner and under the staple 
here. Maybe it’s my eyesight that’s failing me, but nowhere 
could I find mention anywhere about highways in this 
document. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I find it amazing that there would be no 
mention whatsoever of the provincial road system in the Speech 
from the Throne. Mr. Minister, all Saskatchewan people and 
especially farm families depend on highways and our rural road 
system. Would you please tell me why there was no mention of 
repairing or maintaining our roads and highways in this Throne 
Speech? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. If I 
could, first of all, just be given a wee bit of latitude in 
answering the question. I wanted to take the opportunity, since I 
may not have it again, to on behalf of my wife’s and I part, to 
be able to thank the opposition and all of the government 
members for their kind, kind remarks in the birth of our son. I 
don’t know if I’d have that opportunity again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I’ve also learned that pothole and 
slippery when wet are not terms limited solely to the 
Department of Highways. 
 
I do want to . . . I do want to, Mr. Speaker, also just point out 
for the member though a number of the things that we are 
doing. The department in its last past year has improved or 
restored 830 kilometres of road. The department has also 
recently released the winter tender schedule, I remind them, 3 
weeks earlier than we had before for a total of $44 million. 
 
And I question the opposition, I guess. All they ask us to do is 
spend, spend, spend, and they never, ever tell us where that 
money is supposed to come from. 



December 8, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 51 

Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, I thank you. I direct this question 
to the Minister of Education. Mr. Minister, since you joined the 
NDP, have you made much of the fact that you will use your 
influence to affect the policy of this government. Mr. Minister, 
in your election platform, when you were a Liberal, you 
promised to put every penny collected in fuel taxes into our 
highways, streets, and roads. You promised to freeze the 
provincial fuel tax at its current rate and you also promised to 
change government regulations and stop collecting the fuel tax 
on farm fuel. 
 
(1430) 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, rural Saskatchewan needs help. And 
repairing and maintaining our roads and highways is part of that 
help. Mr. Minister, there is no mention of spending for 
highways or roads in this Throne Speech that you say that you 
helped create. There’s no mention of the fuel tax either. 
 
Mr. Minister, I ask, if your influence is so great, why is there no 
mention of any initiative at all to repair Saskatchewan’s 
crumbling road system? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I’ve said 
many times, during the election we did place a tremendous 
priority on transportation and infrastructure. And I must note 
that you did review the Throne Speech and there is a reference 
to infrastructure. There has been a commitment to highways. 
 
But I must also admit that we have a situation in a coalition 
government where as Leader of the Liberal Party we had a 
package that was costed out. The New Democrats had a 
package that was costed out. And together we have put forward 
a coalition package, and that package talks about health care 
and education and it talks about zero — where you guys had 
zero on health, zero on education. And you know what? We 
will still maintain our Highways budget and move forward an 
agenda. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 

The Speaker: — Hon. members, before orders of the day . . . 
Order, order, please, so we can get on with the business of the 
House, please. 
 
Hon. members, before orders of the day I lay before the 
Assembly pursuant to subsection 76 of The Election Act, 1999 
a report of the Chief Electoral Officer. 
 
And in accordance of the provisions of The Members’ Conflict 
of Interest Act, I hereby table the 5th annual report of the 
Conflict of Interest Commissioner as well. 
 
And I also wish to table, in accordance with the Board of 
Internal Economy directive #22 (1) (g), the members’ 
accountability and disclosure statements for the year ended 
March 31, 1999. 

And finally, in accordance with directive #23 (1) (c), I also 
table the audited financial statements for each caucus for the 
year ended March 31, 1999. 
 
Order, order please. 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Ruling On A Point of Order 
 
The Speaker: — Yesterday, hon. colleagues, yesterday the 
Opposition House Leader raised the point of order concerning the 
language used by the Deputy Premier during oral question period. 
At the time I indicated that I would review the verbatim and return 
with a ruling today. 
 
Upon reviewing the record, I can cite two incidents in which the 
truthfulness of other members is called into question. On page 20, 
at the bottom of the first column, the Deputy Premier challenged 
the truthfulness of the Leader of the Opposition, of the Leader of 
the Opposition’s statements and actions. At the time, I did caution 
all members to choose their words judiciously. 
 
Later, on page 21, the Leader of the Opposition in his last question 
did himself use language calling into question the veracity of the 
minister’s answer. 
 
In drawing attention to these incidents, I do not want to suggest 
that these two members were alone in using perhaps questionable 
language. They are, however, veteran parliamentarians and I ask 
for their co-operation for establishing a positive example for our 
newer colleagues in this Assembly to follow. 
 
At the start of a new legislature, I want to remind all members that 
the language used in the Assembly should be tempered and 
worthy of the place in which it is spoken. Speakers have 
consistently ruled that it is not permissible to accuse or even 
suggest that another hon. member intentionally or inadvertently 
misled the House. Nor is it acceptable to impugn the character or 
motives of other members. 
 
And I direct members to Beauchesne Sixth Edition, paragraph 
484, subparagraph 3 and 491. And I encourage all members to 
conduct themselves in their words and in their actions in a 
manner that demonstrates the respect for one another and for 
this institution. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Ms. Higgins, seconded by Mr. 
Addley. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To say that it’s 
an honour to be standing here today would be a vast 
understatement. To be selected by one’s constituents to 
represent their views is a big responsibility, and one that I take 
very seriously. 
 



52 Saskatchewan Hansard December 8, 1999 

I’ve been lucky enough, fortunate enough in my political life to 
have been elected on two separate occasions by my neighbours 
in the Rosetown-Biggar area. In 1993 I was elected as a 
Member of Parliament for the constituency of 
Kindersley-Lloydminster and served one term in the House of 
Commons. Now I’ve been elected once again, this time to the 
provincial Chamber, to this historic Chamber. 
 
I stand here as the Leader of Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition, 
an honour that I did not even dream of when I first got involved 
in politics over a decade ago. It is an honour that I humbly 
accept, but I am also proud to stand before you as the Leader of 
the Opposition with people who surround me on the floor today. 
People who took a chance on a new party, a new party which 
the Premier now calls the so-called Saskatchewan Party. And 
that’s certainly a step in the right direction, but we are called the 
Saskatchewan Party. And so I appreciate from the so-called 
Premier that we are now the so-called Saskatchewan Party. 
 
On September 16, 1999 the people for Saskatchewan, the 
people of Saskatchewan elected a strong united and talented 
group that makes up the Saskatchewan Party caucus. Together 
with nine veteran members of the House who got this party off 
the ground, our 16 new members bring with them a wealth of 
talent and backgrounds. 
 
And this is something that their constituents recognized, and it 
is the reason why they were elected. So I want to salute each 
and every one of my colleagues on this side of the House today 
and say thank you to each one of them for being a part of this 
team that stunned the political world on September 16, 1999. 
 
Nobody, almost nobody predicted the results — not the pundits, 
not the pollsters, especially not the NDP. Nobody except those 
on the Saskatchewan Party team. And we knew something was 
happening because we were actually talking to the people of 
this province. 
 
We knew that the people were unhappy with the way the 
government was conducting itself. And, Mr. Speaker, we knew 
they were ready for a change. Whereas the press declared the 
election over before it was even called, the public, the voters, 
the people who count, had different thoughts. And that’s why, 
on September 16, the Saskatchewan Party received the most 
votes of any party running in the election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s worth noting that this 
was the very first election campaign for the Saskatchewan 
Party, and look at the results. Elected, 25 MLAs — largest 
opposition this House has seen in many, many, many years. 
Twenty-three Saskatchewan Party candidates received more 
votes than the Premier of the province. Ten candidates, ten of 
my colleagues received more than 4,000 votes. And, Mr. 
Speaker, two of our candidates received more than 5,000 votes 
— a little landslide. The member for Cannington and the 
member for Kelvington-Wadena received over 5,000 members. 
What an endorsement from their constituents. In 48 ridings, the 
Saskatchewan Party came either first or second. 
 
But before I continue, Mr. Speaker, I want to take this 
opportunity to thank the voters in Rosetown-Biggar for putting 

their faith in me. Fifty-nine per cent of the votes supported me, 
almost 5,000 voters. 
 
I particularly want to acknowledge my friends in the Beechy 
area. They not only supported me politically, but they have 
been friends and supporters of our family. A friendship and 
support that goes beyond politics, and we do appreciate those 
who have supported our family in our life of politics over the 
last 10 or 11 years. We feel blessed to be from a small rural 
community in Saskatchewan, and we feel very proud, not only 
of the constituents in Beechy, but of the entire 
Rosetown-Biggar riding. 
 
They are people, people that know how to work hard. Mr. 
Speaker, they are people who care. I think that was shown by 
one of my constituent’s presence here in the legislature 
yesterday. Carol Skelton, the grandmother from Harris, 
Saskatchewan, who is collecting letters from farm wives, from 
grandmothers, from young people who are living on the farm 
and telling their story about the farm crisis. 
 
That’s very indicative of the kind of people in the 
Rosetown-Biggar riding. People who not only work hard, 
people who take their politics seriously, but people who care 
about people, and people who care about Saskatchewan. 
 
Rosetown-Biggar is a large and diverse constituency. 
Agriculture continues to be a driving force behind the economy, 
making the farm income crisis a very important issue in my 
constituency as well as the issues of health care, economic 
opportunity and taxation. And like many other constituencies, 
people of Rosetown-Biggar voted for real change. 
 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, on September 16, 60 percent of the people of 
this province cast their votes against the government for 
someone else and they had good reasons for doing so. The 
highest taxes in the country, the worst health care in Canada, 
the worst highways by far, the longest welfare rolls, the worst 
job creation record. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the government says in its Speech from the 
Throne, we have changed our ways. Mr. Speaker, the 
government says we have learned our lesson, we will do better 
from now on. Well I hope that’s the case Mr. Speaker. I hope 
this government does begin to do things better, things that are 
right for the province of Saskatchewan. But frankly, I’m 
doubtful. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has had eight years. Eight years is 
a long time. Eight years to improve the lives of the people of 
our province. And by their own admission, they have been 
miserable failures. 
 
Let’s look on page 1 of the Speech from the Throne. They say, 
and I quote, “too many of our families in Saskatchewan are still 
having a hard time making ends meet.” 

 
Well why is that, Mr. Speaker? Is it because we pay nearly the 
highest taxes in the country? Is it because of ever increasing 
utility rates? Is it because of lack of opportunity in our 
province? 
 
Mr. Speaker, they go on saying, and I quote again, “Too many 



December 8, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 53 

of our young people are concerned . . . about their futures.” 
 

Why is that Mr. Speaker? Is it because the job creation rate in 
Alberta is nearly 30 times greater than it is here in 
Saskatchewan, Manitoba’s job creation record 10 times better? 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, every province in Canada has a better 
record than ours. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Prince Edward Island, Prince Edward Island, with 
just a fraction of the population — about 10 per cent of the 
population of our province — created 100 more jobs in the last 
12 months as Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, young people are concerned about their futures 
but they’re not stuck. Many young people are leaving 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speech from the Throne goes on to say: “Too many of our 
rural families are a victim of a vicious trade war.” That’s 
unfortunately true — sadly they are victims, and sadly they are 
stuck here in Saskatchewan. They are stuck with bills, banks 
and bad governments. 
 
There’s no arguing that rural Saskatchewan is in trouble, Mr. 
Speaker, except to say that it’s not only rural Saskatchewan that 
is suffering. Yes, people in urban Saskatchewan have got to 
know that this will soon begin affecting their lives as well. The 
agriculture economy is simply too intertwined in all of our lives 
to believe that anyone is immune to such a massive countdown 
— downturn, pardon me — in the provincial economy. 
 
(1445) 
 
And I was speaking to the owner of a clothing store in 
Saskatoon a few weeks ago and this proprietor told me, “none 
of my farm customers are coming through the door anymore.” 
And this is a business in downtown Saskatoon. Don’t let anyone 
tell you that this farm crisis is simply restricted to the farm or 
restricted to rural Saskatchewan. This farm crisis is affecting 
downtown Regina, downtown Saskatoon, and will spread 
beyond the borders of this province. 
 
While it’s good to see that the NDP is finally taking this issue 
seriously. Wouldn’t it have been nice if they had started this 
process about a year ago? About the time the former minister of 
Agriculture declared that the income . . . farm income crisis was 
over? 
 
The current Minister of Agriculture seems to following in Mr. 
Upshall’s footsteps. He said that immediate support was needed 
yesterday; today he says well, we’ll wait till March and see 
what’s in the federal budget. I say shame on the Minister of 
Agriculture. Obviously that doesn’t give me much confidence 
to believe the words in the Speech from the Throne. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the Throne goes on to talk about 
people’s worry in health care and the need to spend money 
wiser. It talked about the need to get our Aboriginal friends and 
neighbours more involved in the economy and back on track to 
self-sufficiency. 
 
Nobody can disagree with these statements, Mr. Speaker. They 
are obvious. They were obvious to the voters. That’s why they 

make statements saying we will change our ways. I’m 
wondering: does anyone believe them? Can we believe them, 
coming from a government who has ignored all of these 
problems for eight years? 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker — and isn’t this odd? — the Throne 
Speech talks about people’s alienation from the political 
process. This coming from a Premier and a government who 
basically used — basically used — just about every trick in the 
book to overturn the results of this election. 
 
Does the Premier realize that he is the problem? The people 
voted for a minority government but after behind-the-scene 
manipulations during this — to use his words — “the dead of 
night,” the people ended up with a majority NDP government 
again. 
 
Now the Saskatchewan Party was committed to by eight MLAs 
on a sunny afternoon. I happened to be there and watched the 
proceedings. And nine of those MLAs that formed the 
Saskatchewan Party were re-elected with large pluralities. In 
contrast, after eight years of government, 60 per cent of the 
people of this province voted against the NDP. And yet there 
they remain, a majority, intact, thanks to the deal struck with 
three Liberal MLAs. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I can’t think of anything that would alienate 
voters more than this situation. The 20 per cent of the people 
who voted for the Liberal Party . . . in their own way were 
voting for change. The Liberal leader, Mr. Speaker, the Liberal 
leader in the televised leaders’ debate, said that he wanted to 
provide a strong opposition to the NDP government. Some 
opposition — some opposition! Now those members sit among 
the same people who so angered the voters in the first place. 
 
So now it’s up to the Saskatchewan Party to speak out on behalf 
of those people and everyone else in Saskatchewan. People who 
have not liked how the NDP government has operated for the 
past eight years. They will not be fooled, Mr. Speaker, by the 
deathbed confession contained in the Throne Speech. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for eight years this government has shown no 
commitment — no commitment in finding solutions for the 
problems that face this province. They’ve only looked around 
for someone else to blame — previous governments, the federal 
government, whoever, it didn’t matter. It could have been Julius 
Caesar. If they could’ve traced a link back that far they’d have 
blamed Julius Caesar for their problems. Just as long as it got 
their government out from under any responsibility for the 
decisions that they’ve made as a government. 
 
Well, as we saw in the election campaign, Mr. Speaker, the 
people said enough is enough, and began to hold the NDP 
accountable for their own record and ask for some solutions to 
the challenges facing Saskatchewan. And when that party could 
not come up with anything beyond their usual finger pointing, 
the people turned away from the NDP in droves. And I don’t 
believe, Mr. Speaker, that the Speech from the Throne will 
bring them back. 
 
Now don’t get me wrong, Mr. Speaker, obviously much of this 
Throne Speech has been lifted directly from the election 
platform of the Saskatchewan Party. And if they actually 



54 Saskatchewan Hansard December 8, 1999 

carried through on some of the ideas, Mr. Speaker, if they 
actually delivered on some of this Throne Speech, we would 
support that. In fact, Mr. Speaker, if they really mean what they 
say, they can prove it — they can prove that they mean what 
they say by supporting Bills and motions that we have 
introduced into this legislature. Some of those Bills were 
introduced this morning. Our problem however is we can’t 
believe that they will offer that support. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will criticize the government, but we will also 
be constructive. We will do all we can to implement the 
platform that we ran on and won the popular vote on. But we 
simply don’t believe that this government will be willing and 
have the determination, the humility, if I might add, to be able 
to carry through on the commitments that they have recognized 
from the Saskatchewan Party and included in their Speech from 
the Throne. 
 
We don’t believe this government believes in greater 
accountability. We don’t believe them when they say they want 
to listen to the people of Saskatchewan more than they have in 
the past. We simply do not believe them, Mr. Speaker, because 
if they do mean these things, why would it have taken eight 
years and near extinction at the hands of the voters before they 
responded? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the words contained in the Throne Speech are all 
well and good, but I don’t believe the commitments made here 
will ever come to pass. They were promises made for political 
expediency, much like the deal they cooked up between the 
Premier and the current Minister of Education. 
 
When you can’t believe their words, Mr. Speaker, how can you 
support this Throne Speech. We believe this government is 
lacking in commitment to the people of this province. We 
believe this government will not make any major changes 
despite the election results. 
 
And for that reason I move the following amendment, seconded 
by the member for Cypress Hills, that the following words be 
added to the end of the motion: 
 

But regrets that the government has failed to make a firm 
commitment to provide meaningful tax relief to 
Saskatchewan residents; has not agreed to put in place a 
complete value-for-money audit of the deteriorating health 
care system; has not given any commitment to aid 
Saskatchewan farmers; and has not put forward a plan to 
improve Saskatchewan’s deteriorating highways in the 
Speech from the Throne; and further regrets that while the 
provincial government acknowledges its failures over the 
past eight years, it appears the NDP government’s deal 
with the three Liberal MLAs to form a coalition 
government was done to insure the NDP would not have to 
keep its promises in the future. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, it’s with a great deal of pride and 
humility that I stand and speak to the members of this venerable 
and cherished House on behalf of the people of Cypress Hills 

constituency. 
 
An initial speech is significant to both the person delivering it and 
to the persons, and people generally, on behalf of whom it’s being 
presented. And for that reason, I struggled for many hours 
deliberating the issues and approaches that needed to be presented 
in this once-in-a-lifetime opportunity. And even now, I’m not fully 
assured that I will accomplish what I . . . (inaudible) . . . intended. 
 
My act of involvement with politics is a short story having begun 
less than two years ago. The events that have transpired in that 
time frame, however, have helped transform the political 
landscape of the province. And I am pleased with the small role 
that I, personally, have had to play. 
 
I’m fully cognizant of the fact that no one achieves any 
meaningful success, though, without the help and support of many 
other people. And to that end, I would like to state publicly and for 
the record, that my wife and family have been that source of 
bedrock support in this effort. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — They have stood by me, they have encouraged 
me, and they have blessed me by their steadfast endorsement of 
my candidacy in a nomination race and two subsequent 
back-to-back elections, all in the space of less than 11 months. 
 
In addition, I owe a great debt of gratitude to the people of 
Cypress Hills constituency. I have been blessed with their support. 
People, who like most of the province last year, knew little about 
this new political party I was promoting and knew even less about 
me. 
 
Little by little, over a period of several months, I was able to see 
some of the scepticism lift from the countenance of jaded and 
untrusting voters. Now these were people who had put their faith 
in politicians before only to be disappointed in unbelievable 
measure by events and policies that followed. But the idea of a 
whole new, unsullied political entity, like the Saskatchewan Party, 
had a certain appeal. Sure, we were the new kids on the block and 
our policies were untested, but we were speaking the language of 
the common folk and they were ready to listen. 
 
The June by-election, especially if you listen to the media, was the 
first real test of the Saskatchewan Party platform. Several pundits 
even went so far as to suggest that the party that won the election 
then in Cypress Hills could go on to form the official opposition, if 
not the government. 
 
The people of Cypress Hills responded by soundly rejecting both 
of the Liberal and NDP platforms, giving us more than 50 per cent 
of the popular vote. They provided me with a personal honour by 
allowing me to become the first Saskatchewan Party candidate to 
be elected to this Assembly and to make history in the process. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Unfortunately, I was never allowed the 
privilege to sit in these chambers following that election. But 
what the Premier found so deathly afraid . . . or what he was so 
deathly afraid to do in the spring, he found the courage to do in 
the summer. He called a general election within a few short 



December 8, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 55 

weeks of our initial victory. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Cypress Hills constituency were 
truly and rightfully angered by the arrogance of that move. Bad 
enough that the people of the constituency had already 
decisively spoken and chosen their representative, only to have 
the Premier effectively overturn their choice. And it was bad 
enough that the government had wasted more than $300,000 of 
taxpayers’ money on by-elections, but the worst insult of all 
was calling an election right in the middle of harvest. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that backfired. Despite the Premier’s best 
efforts, rural people did take time out from harvest to vote and, 
just as he had rightfully feared, rural Saskatchewan voted 
solidly to remove the NDP from office. 
 
One thing about it though, it was very easy to campaign the 
second time around. There was no worry about how folks were 
going to vote — we just had to be sure to get them to the polls. 
Everyone in my constituency was upset with this government 
for one thing or another, and the outcome was never in 
question. 
 
Besides the obvious timing of the election, there were other 
serious issues affecting the Cypress Hills constituency. We 
talked about those issues at length and offered real alternatives 
for their solution. 
 
When you live as close to the Alberta and Montana borders as I 
do, and the rest of my constituency, you’re ready to hear about 
significant tax reduction. We talked about that a lot. We talked 
about the effect of high rates of PST, sending consumers in 
great numbers and on a daily basis across the border to do their 
shopping. We talked about the impact taxation was having on 
small town businesses, the larger effect on community viability, 
and the resultant depopulation of the towns and countryside. 
 
We talked about income tax and the fact that rates in 
Saskatchewan are significantly higher than our neighbour to the 
west. We talked about the fact that high rates of taxation are 
helping to export economic development, jobs, and people to 
other jurisdictions faster than anything this province has done to 
bring them in. And we talked about the young people, educated 
at our expense, only to lose them and their potential to other 
provinces — primarily Alberta. 
 
We even talked about the loss of farm families who, because of 
the tax saving, decided to retire in Alberta and take three 
generations of accumulated wealth with them. And every so 
often we’d talk about farm families who weren’t ready to retire 
yet, but they still moved to Medicine Hat and they just 
commuted to their Saskatchewan-based operation. 
 
When it came to tax reduction, I didn’t have to work hard to 
convince people of its necessity. In the Cypress Hills region, it 
was self-evident. The impact and reality of high tax policies on 
the part of the Government of Saskatchewan were everywhere 
to be seen and every person had their own story to tell. 
 
Now while I was talking taxes with the people, what were the 
parties opposite saying? Well the candidate for the NDP was 
saying that things were pretty good as they were, and that the 
government was on the right track with its balanced approach 

and all that. 
 
And the Liberals were saying that taxation wasn’t a factor and 
they couldn’t find anyone who even thought it was. A sound 
thrashing at the hands of a disbelieving public in last June’s 
by-election changed the minds behind both of those expressed 
points of view. 
 
By general election time, the NDP and the Liberals had 
discovered tax relief as a key issue but neither party had any 
credibility in that area. And the end result was the narrowest of 
wins for the government, having snatched near defeat from the 
jaws of victory. 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. Speaker, let’s hope that the lessons learned in the near miss 
of last September will bring about real tax relief for the people 
of Cypress Hills and all of Saskatchewan. It is no longer an 
option but a necessity. We can no longer afford not to bring 
significant tax relief to this province if we hope to compete in 
any real way for new business opportunities, new projects in the 
area of economic development, new people and ideas or the 
energies they have to expend. 
 
What else did I talk about with the people during the election 
campaign? I talked repeatedly about the disastrous state of our 
rural highways, and the unending erosion of health care services 
in the province as a whole. I talked about the debilitating effect 
of the current agricultural financial crisis. 
 
Several times I was asked about the nurses’ strike and the 
government’s inept and divisive handling of that situation. 
Education funding and the impact it was having on property 
taxes, especially on farmland, received more than its fair share 
of attention. The list goes on to considerable length. 
 
The bottom line for the people of Cypress Hills was that they 
wanted change and they wanted it badly. They saw a 
government that was tired of the battle, bereft of new ideas, and 
unopen to change. They saw the myriad of challenges, and the 
prospect of having someone new at the helm was both 
appealing and convincing. And the Saskatchewan Party was 
speaking their language, talking about their issues and concerns, 
and providing the best opportunity for change. The 
Saskatchewan Party became the party of the people — a 
populist party if you will, a party with a future. 
 
Now that opportunity for change was stolen from the people of 
Cypress Hills by an unexpected change in circumstances. 
Another deal done more or less in the dead of the night. The 
coalition struck between a party in decline and another near 
extinction had the effect of undoing the express will of the 
people. 
 
While a minority government may not have served the Premier 
well, it could have produced some of the best government this 
province has ever seen. The people were willing to live with the 
result. The powers that be were not. And it’s as simple as that. 
 
And so today we respond to a Throne Speech from a 
government that is just slightly more whole than the proverbial 
lame duck. On behalf of the people I represent, I sincerely hope 



56 Saskatchewan Hansard December 8, 1999 

that we’ll get more than duck soup out of this arrangement. 
 
I want to state for the record, Mr. Speaker, that I have great 
respect for the Liberal candidate who ran in the Cypress Hills 
elections. He’s truly an honourable gentleman and he conducted 
his campaigns accordingly. I also believe that had he been 
elected he wouldn’t have been found sitting among the 
members opposite. 
 
I seem to recall that in the 1986 general election, the NDP 
received more popular vote than the government of the day. The 
members opposite cried foul. They publicly decried the fact that 
a government could be elected when the majority of the voters 
had rejected its platform and vowed that such would never be 
the case if they were the government. 
 
Well it’s funny how things change, Mr. Speaker. In September 
when the overwhelming majority of voters decided that they 
wanted a new government, this government clings to power by 
any means available. 
 
I would like to ask the Premier, his coalition partner, the 
Minister of Education, what answer should I give the person 
who asks me in the future why should I vote or what does it 
matter who you vote for? They’re just going to do what they 
want anyway. 
 
Arrangements such as the one crafted by the two of you do little 
to enhance the appeal of the democratic process. Instead they 
vote just a little more cynicism in an already jaded and apathetic 
populace, and for good reason. There’s no sense decrying the 
image of politicians if by your very actions we’re going to bring 
ourselves into disrepute. Respect for the voting public begins by 
putting their interests ahead of our own whether we’re seeking 
or retaining power. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Cypress Hills constituency are as 
disappointed and put off by this turn of events as anyone. But 
the people, in true form, are willing to give you, Mr. Premier, 
and your government the benefit of the doubt. It’s now time for 
you to perform — put up or get out of the way. We are a 
generous people but we don’t take our generosity for granted. 
We wouldn’t want you to do that either. 
 
We are looking for real leadership at a time when issues are 
difficult and solutions require creativity. We’re not prepared to 
accept anymore of the same, especially when we came within 
an ace of something different and more to our liking. And we’re 
not prepared to sit back and take what’s dished out if it’s not in 
our best interests. 
 
The people of Cypress Hills are honest, they’re down to earth, 
they’re hard-working people, and we have a history of 
heartiness and survival and a habit of holding people 
accountable for their actions. And maybe just as importantly, 
we have a long memory too. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when the Premier said on election night he 
was listening, we were listening too. From now on we want to 
be shown. 
 
In preparation for this speech, I reviewed the maiden speeches 
of most of my predecessors. Invariably the former MLAs spoke 

about the great people of Cypress Hills, the tremendous open 
spaces, the unique natural features of the region, and the history 
that is so closely tied to the opening of the West. All of these 
facets are still of significance, but there is one thing that begs 
for recognition as I conclude my remarks here today. 
 
Except for the two ridings in the Far North, the Cypress Hills 
constituency is the largest and most sparsely populated region 
of the province. A large riding in area, a small population, and a 
great distance from Regina, which is the apparent seat of all 
wisdom west of Toronto, those factors have conspired to make 
us feel under-represented and ignored in the larger scheme of 
things. 
 
To underscore my point, Mr. Speaker, let me illustrate by 
saying this. We have approximately one voter for every square 
mile in the constituency of Cypress Hills. We have provided 
literally hundreds of millions of dollars in oil royalties and 
revenue over the past several years, yet we suffer from some of 
the worst roads and health care infrastructure in the province. 
We are losing population numbers daily to the economic 
magnet of Alberta, yet the provincial government policies with 
regard to taxation seem impervious to the problem. 
 
The impact of successive NDP governments on rural 
Saskatchewan, and the southwest in particular, has had a 
particularly debilitating effect. Our towns are dying, our farms 
are struggling, and our people are leaving. Only hardiest of 
people and communities will survive the continued ignoring 
handed to us by this government. 
 
We’re not prepared to take it anymore. We want our due, we 
want our attention. We want your attention and we want it now. 
We want to be heard, we want to be taken seriously, and we 
intend to start that process today. With this speech the people of 
Cypress Hills constituency have served notice. 
 
It’s my great pleasure, Mr. Speaker, to second the amendment 
put forward by the Leader of the Official Opposition, the 
member from Rosetown-Biggar. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you. Thank you very much, 
Mr. Speaker. It is with great pride and humility I rise in these 
chambers today as the MLA for Saskatoon Northwest to deliver 
the Liberal Party reply to the Speech from the Throne. 
 
I would like to congratulate all members, new and returning, on 
their election this past September. It is no easy feat to win the 
support of your constituents. It requires hard work, dedication, 
and the faith of your convictions to put yourself under public 
scrutiny. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am proud to stand before you as the 
representative of Saskatoon Northwest, a constituency I am 
proud to call home. A constituency whose boundaries include 
major businesses, independent businesses, schools, working 
men and women, and amenities which nourish not only the 
body but also the spirit. 
 
Saskatoon Northwest is a diverse constituency consisting 
primarily of two suburbs — Lawson Heights and Silverwood — 



December 8, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 57 

that I have had the privilege of living in both of these areas. 
 
The constituency is served by a variety of schools, including 
Marian Graham Collegiate and Bishop Mahoney High School. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Very good schools. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Very good schools. The constituency 
is close to the downtown core and the airport, and the vitality of 
the constituency is evident in its community spirit and the 
number of active community groups. 
 
The constituency is bordered by the South Saskatchewan River, 
the Silverwood Golf Course, and the Saskatoon North Industrial 
park. Harvey and Umea parks are centres of community 
activities, and you can follow the South Saskatchewan River 
along the Meewasin Trail to reach the downtown core. 
 
The Saskatoon Henk Ruys Soccer Centre has been the hub of 
social and athletic activity in this constituency over the last two 
years. It provides excellent opportunities for young people, 
which we saw last weekend with a soccer tournament, the 
under-15 boys, including a game where a team my son played 
on played a team from Brandon. And every weekend there was 
a soccer tournament that brings teams from all over western 
Canada. 
 
The commercial vitality of the constituency has been amazing 
with manufacturing, lumber, high technology, commercial and 
retail development. The hub of the retail sector is the Lawson 
Heights Mall which has not had a vacant space in close to four 
years. 
 
The Saskatoon chemical plant is also located in the constituency 
and the rural polls in the constituency are home to various niche 
farm businesses along valley road, which show the vitality of 
this area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I must admit to not just being a proud 
representative of Saskatoon Northwest, but I also have roots 
right here in Regina. My father, Samuel Melenchuk, was raised 
on a farm near Dysart and returned to farming after serving 
overseas in France, Holland, and Germany in the Second World 
War. 
 
My mother, Elizabeth Melenchuk, nee Toth, was raised on a 
farm near Lestock where she met my father. They married 
shortly thereafterwards and moved to Regina where I was raised 
and where my father began a long career as a federal public 
employee in the Department of National Defence. 
 
My mother ran a rooming house while staying at home to raise 
their eight children, and together my parents instilled in us the 
importance of education and the independence we needed to 
grow as individuals. All of my brothers and sisters have taken 
post-secondary education and have collectively received 15 
degrees and diplomas in the sciences, arts, education, 
administration, and medicine. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — I am proud to have graduated from 
Campion high school right here in Regina and attended the 

University of Regina in Campion College where I completed 
degrees in biology and psychology. 
 
I went on to medical school at the University of Saskatchewan 
and received my MD (Doctor of Medicine). 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — I went into private medical practice 
where I had a special interest in obstetrics, pediatrics, and 
long-term care, and have delivered over a thousand babies right 
here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I was elected to the representative assembly of the 
Saskatchewan Medical Association and was elected to their 
board of directors in 1991. I then served as the treasurer, 
vice-president, and chaired the board as president in 1994-95. 
 
During this time I helped to negotiate the framework agreement 
with the Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations and 
the provincial government that allows for bi-level bargaining on 
wages and working conditions, and also chaired the committees 
on long-term care and health system regionalization — areas of 
keen interest to me. 
 
So what would prompt me to give up a medical practice to enter 
politics? I’ve thought about this a lot over the last three years. 
The answer is the same now as it was then. As a doctor and 
having been raised in the province of Saskatchewan, I care 
about our health care system and have worked to improve it 
both outside and inside of politics. Watching my children grow 
up, I care about making sure that they and all Saskatchewan 
students get the best possible education so they can make their 
way in this world and contribute to our society. 
 
I would be remiss if I did not thank my family, which is the 
backbone and strength of any politician, starting with my wife, 
Donna; my daughter, Jennifer, who is in her second year arts 
and science at the University of Saskatchewan; my sons David 
and Jared who are in grade 11 and grade 9 at Bishop Mahoney 
High School and who are active in soccer, computers, and 
Nintendo, and often need to be prompted to do their homework. 
 
This Throne Speech reflects this coalition government’s goal of 
listening to Saskatchewan people and acting on their concerns. 
This speech reflects many of the concerns that we, as 
Saskatchewan Liberals, identified during the election campaign 
and now have an opportunity to implement in this coalition 
government. 
 
In the area of education our commitment to improve financial 
accessibility for post-secondary education has been heard and 
will be acted on. Saskatchewan’s post-secondary students will 
get the help they need to get the education they need and, in the 
process, make this province more competitive on the world 
stage. 
 
(1515) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — In addition, our commitment to have 
the provincial government assume greater direct responsibility 



58 Saskatchewan Hansard December 8, 1999 

for financing education K to 12 has been heard and will be 
acted on. With our coalition government delivering more 
provincial education funding, this will allow school boards to 
give all property owners an opportunity to have their education 
property taxes reduced and help to reduce the burden on farmers 
facing a high tax bill that adds to their input costs. 
 
In health, our commitment to regional hospitals has been heard 
and we will reduce waiting lists in Regina and Saskatoon, 
improve health care in rural Saskatchewan with our ongoing 
commitment to less administration and more support for front 
line health care workers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — In addition, our joint commitment to 
expanded funding for home care has been heard and will be 
acted on. We have highlighted our commitment to agriculture. 
We have had Saskatchewan representation at the World Trade 
Organization talks. We are delivering on our promise to get 
money into the hands of farmers as quickly as possible through 
the redirection of provincial AIDA funds characterized in our 
platform. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — We are working together hard — all 
parties in this Assembly — to get our federal government to 
deal with export enhancements for Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — We promised and we will pursue our 
commitment for long-term income stabilization for our farmers, 
the third-line of defence. 
 
Saskatchewan Liberals have talked about, and now we’re in a 
position to deliver on our promise to help reduce input costs for 
farmers, to make it easier for them to stay on the land they love 
and where they belong. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the importance of dealing with agriculture cannot 
be overstated for all of Saskatchewan. Especially after the farm 
delegation returned from Ottawa, there has been growing talk of 
western separation. Separatism always stems from alienation; 
the feeling that the central government is insensitive to the 
feelings of those located far from the central power. The 
manner how the federal government has treated the farm 
delegation has added to the sense of alienation that exists in 
Western Canada. 
 
Western alienation is not new. It has existed since 
Confederation. If you look back at things like the Riel Rebellion 
or the feelings towards railways in their treatment of farmers. In 
the last 30 years the federal government has drawn fire for how 
it has treated western farmers with the national energy program 
and how it seems western votes count for little in federal 
elections. The best way to deal with alienation and separatism is 
not just to listen to western concerns but to act on them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — The federal government must listen 

and must act on western concerns. I’m a federalist. I believe we 
have a national government which is supposed to listen to the 
concerns of everyone in this country, not just those areas which 
have elected government MPs (Member of Parliament). Let’s 
not forget that other parts of this country share the same 
frustrations as we do at various times. The Maritimes feel that 
they are not being heard by the federal government. British 
Columbia has always felt cut off from the rest of Canada. The 
North, including the Yukon, the Northwest and Nunavut 
territories feel excluded from having any meaningful say or 
input into major decisions which affect them. And let’s not 
forget Quebec which has used these feelings of alienation to 
negotiate for a greater say in various areas of jurisdiction. 
 
However, will the threat of western separatism really solve 
anything? Looking at the bottom line, we need to keep more of 
our people in western Canada, providing them with 
opportunities instead of watching them move to either the 
United States, Ontario, or anywhere but here. It is interesting to 
me that Canadians share a bond of feeling alienated from 
central power, but a national government, a provincial 
government, or a municipal government must work to address 
these feelings. 
 
If we share other values, but it seems to me if we listen to each 
other, work on what we have in common, and fully develop our 
own potential, then the alienation we feel today will start to ebb 
away tomorrow and we’ll have a true federation that works. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — The Throne Speech has addressed 
issues with regard to taxation, and when it comes to issues such 
as taxes, Liberals have always believed in a theme of tax 
fairness. We will have tax relief over the next four years that 
will benefit all people, not just the rich. 
 
We will deliver on our Liberal commitment to provide for more 
funding to school boards to help them reduce property taxes. 
We will deliver on our commitment to continue paying down 
our debt — our joint commitment. And we will deliver on our 
commitment — our joint commitment — to continue giving the 
people of Saskatchewan the balanced budgets they demand as 
proof of our fiscal responsibility. 
 
Saskatchewan Liberals have long called for open and 
accountable government, and this coalition government is in a 
position to deliver on these promises. Our commitment to a 
permanent body to review utility rates has been delivered and is 
in the process of being implemented. 
 
The Liberal commitment to deal with the sexual abuse of 
children has been heard. I’m especially proud to see this 
initiative since it was initially brought up and discussed in the 
Liberal caucus before going public. I’m also pleased to see the 
Saskatchewan Party has seen the wisdom of our stand and 
adopted it as their policy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — There are many who wondered if this 
coalition government might be just smoke and mirrors or if it 
would be a real change for Saskatchewan people. We have seen 



December 8, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 59 

this week the start of real change for the people of 
Saskatchewan — a brand new day. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — And the proof that we can work 
together in a true partnership to make this great province even 
better and maintain Saskatchewan as a place where political 
innovation works to the betterment of all Saskatchewan people. 
 
I’m happy to see the Leader of the Opposition support the idea 
of coalition governments. The 1997 electoral reform task force 
report by the Reform Party noted coalition governments provide 
stability and ensure . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — I see that the part that I’m about to 
quote may have been thrown away by the opposition leader, but 
I quote: 
 

Continuity of public policy and policy based not on 
short-term political gain, but on long-term public good. 

 
Your quote. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — I’m happy to see the Leader of the 
Opposition saw the sensibility of a coalition government back 
then as opposed to, and I quote again from the Reform Party 
report: 

 
Extremism, wild swings in policy, and abuse of political 
power is more likely when power is concentrated in the 
hands of the few rather than in the hands of the many. 

 
Mr. Speaker, as Leader of the Liberal Party, I am happy to 
endorse the Throne Speech. We are in this coalition for the 
people of Saskatchewan and this Throne Speech shows 
Saskatchewan people a government that doesn’t just listen to 
one portion of the population but is genuinely interested in 
listening to what all people have to say and using what 
Saskatchewan people have to say to give them the government 
they deserve. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the Throne Speech and I will 
not be supporting the Tories-in-disguise amendment. Thank you 
very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order please. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My colleagues who have 
been in this place before I arrived, they informed me that when 
we give our maiden speech the convention of the House is that 
we’re not heckled. However, I fear that my colleagues may 
have perhaps taken that privilege away from me with their 
actions of the last speaker. Nonetheless, this of course is my 
maiden speech in the Assembly and the privilege of the 
occasion has not escaped me, Mr. Speaker. 
 

I can recall wondering how it would feel on election night 
should I be successful in the campaign. To say the experience 
of receiving a majority of the support of my neighbours and 
family and friends was overwhelming would be an 
understatement. 
 
I enjoyed the campaign, Mr. Speaker. We worked hard but we 
also tried to have a little fun. The first night of the election I 
helped put up some lawn signs. And, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you 
that throughout that four-week campaign we put up a lot of 
lawn signs. 
 
My job that first night was to fasten the signs with the help of a 
cordless drill. I also knocked on the doors of the supporters 
when we went to the homes who wanted a sign to let them 
know that we were there. And I can recall after ringing the 
doorbell at one home and hearing the people inside, I was 
wondering why they wouldn’t answer the door. I could even see 
them through the screen door, Mr. Speaker, but they wouldn’t 
answer. 
 
The next day my campaign manager got a call from those same 
supporters advising him that should I do that sort of 
campaigning again I should refrain from brandishing the 
cordless drill on the steps of the homes. Evidently they were 
convinced that someone was on their front step with a gun, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I hesitate to tell that story with Liberals in 
the House. And although I lack the political experience here to 
differentiate between the Liberals and NDP members on the 
government side of the House, I have been assured by my 
veteran colleagues that they are sitting over there, to be sure. 
And so I tell this story with trepidation because if too many 
Liberals hear this story, Mr. Speaker, we may all soon be forced 
to register our cordless drills in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the events of September 16 
represent the fulfillment of one of my long-standing hopes and 
aspirations. Politics has been a burning interest of mine for an 
admittedly disturbingly long period of time. Indeed my first 
recollection of wanting to represent my home community in a 
democratic institution of some sort stretches back to grade 6. 
 
To fully understand just how long I have thought seriously 
about the honour of the duties that I now have, Mr. Speaker, 
consider that when I was in grade 6 first harbouring these 
thoughts, Ron Lancaster was still the quarterback for the 
Riders; Elvis was still alive, although apparently just barely; the 
provincial government of the day had not yet nationalized 
everything with a financial statement and a heartbeat; and the 
Premier himself was a relative rookie MLA of only nine years 
experience. 
 
And even despite the plummeting popularity of politicians in 
general since that time, Mr. Speaker, I have been just warped 
enough to never waiver in this personal desire to fulfill these 
goals. The fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, that I firmly 
believe that this is truly an honourable calling, and a wonderful 
opportunity to contribute in some small way to the community 
that has given me and my family so much. 



60 Saskatchewan Hansard December 8, 1999 

And I am comforted by the fact that the popularity of the 
profession has maybe not changed that much over the decades 
after all. In fact when Abraham Lincoln was asked about his 
thoughts on public office, he likened it to being tarred, 
feathered, and run out of town on a rail. He said, if it wasn’t for 
the honour of the thing, I’d just as soon walk. 
 
(1530) 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, if you know Swift Current and the immediate 
area, it is not hard to understand why I feel so honoured 
regarding my new role. My own bias notwithstanding, I believe 
Swift Current and indeed southwest Saskatchewan have been 
constant sources of innovation, ideas, pioneering thought for the 
province and in many instances for the entire country. 
 
Our agriculture research station has developed countless cereal 
breeds now in use across the prairies and around the world. 
Swift Current is the home of Saskatchewan’s first real foray 
into the energy sector, home of Fosterton No. 1, one of the first 
rigs drilled in the province just outside of the city. 
 
It is the cradle of medicare, Mr. Speaker, the home of health 
region no. 1. It is the smallest city in Canada to have a major 
junior hockey franchise, the mighty Swift Current Broncos. 
 
Three years ago Swift Current became home to yet another 
grassroots-driven experiment that established the province’s 
first centre for entrepreneurial development. It has already 
received provincial and national attention and it is serving as a 
model for similar centres in other locations in the province and 
across Canada. 
 
And only two and a half months ago, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 
constituency of Swift Current claimed another first that I am 
sure will also be copied in the cities of our province — it sent 
the first of many urban Saskatchewan Party MLAs to this 
legislature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Behind all of these attributes and history, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, are the people of Swift Current and district. To 
their indomitable spirit, Swift Current owes all of its 
achievements and all of its prosperity. It was that spirit and 
more than a little sweat and individual initiative that allowed 
them to bravely ignore the advice of the explorer, Mr. John 
Palliser, who warned in the mid-19th century that no one should 
even attempt to farm in the Swift Current area, much less build 
a community and a life there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not only did we ignore Mr. Palliser, but we 
actually named buildings and community centres after the man 
that said we were crazy to live there — the Palliser Regional 
Care Centre, and the Palliser Pavilion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are countless examples of Swift Current and 
district people whose life stories could eloquently and more 
than sufficiently illustrate my point. I should like to share one 
of those this afternoon. It’s the story of a Swift Current couple. 
 
They were born and raised not far from each other, one on a 
farm just 1 mile south of the city limits, the other in Rhineland, 

also in my constituency — a small town 20 minutes south of 
Swift Current. 
 
She was raised on a farm. Her father never owned an inch of the 
land he worked most of his life, but somehow through hard 
work, some beef cattle, a milker, some pigs, a pen full of 
chickens, and a garden of biblical proportion, her folks raised 
five kids and built a life. 
 
His father was a preacher and a farmer and an inventor and an 
entrepreneur. And his father taught him very simple and basic 
life truths — hard work, honesty, integrity, the power of prayer, 
and of amazing grace. 
 
The two fell in love; they were married, both in their teens. 
They raised two boys and passed on the same values they’d 
been taught. And he started his first business, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, with his brothers when he was 16. 
 
He had a lot of dreams and a lot less money, but his 
entrepreneurial spirit and his belief in hard work and the free 
enterprise system were his foundation. And on that foundation, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, a life was built. On that foundation, food 
and shelter for the family were provided. On that foundation, 
Mr. Speaker, jobs were created for others and their families. On 
that foundation, tithes were brought and charity was provided. 
On that foundation, their children were educated. And yes, on 
that foundation taxes were paid. 
 
All along she supported him. She raised two sons and took a job 
to help with the bills. She continued her own pursuit of 
education, and through diligence and hard work progressed in 
her own career and in the start-up of her own business. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these two people were my parents, Alice and John 
Wall. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — They typify the kind of people I now have the 
great privilege of representing. I owe them most everything I 
count as a blessing today, and it’s my abiding hope that I can be 
to my children what they’ve been to me. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s an unqualified honour to be a part of this team 
that makes up this side of the House, for you see I believe that 
the men and women who constitute the official opposition have 
a long-term vision and a dream for the province that will fortify 
the entrepreneurial free enterprise foundation my father used to 
realize his own dreams and that those of us who follow need to 
build ours. 
 
Unfortunately we on this side of the aisle, and a growing 
majority of Saskatchewan people, fear that this foundation has 
been crumbling of late, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It has been shaken 
at its forms by a centrist, paternalistic approach to government. 
It is cracking under the weight of big government. It lacks that 
entrepreneurial vision. It is sagging under the weight of the 
second highest taxes in the Dominion. 
 
Oh, but there is good news, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In fact the 
good news started to be broadcast around the province at about 
9 p.m. on September 16, but strangely enough it wasn’t 



December 8, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 61 

broadcast by our provincial media. They were so busy telling 
the same old story, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they almost missed the 
rest of the story. 
 
No, this good news story was methodically broadcast by no less 
an authority than the voters of the province of Saskatchewan. 
Slowly, gradually, village by village, town by town, RM (rural 
municipality) by RM, and yes, city by city, they sent their 
positive message until the din from the country became a roar in 
the city and in the ears of the pundits and the media experts. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — They sent their good news message that boldly 
affirmed that we could cut taxes for Saskatchewan families; that 
we could get out of the way of our small-business people and 
let them create jobs and grow our economy; that we could and 
should review our health care system, district by district; to 
spend valuable health care dollars more wisely with patients, 
not administration and health care politics as the number one 
priority. 
 
They sent a message that goat trails will never pass for 
highways in our province; that our social assistance system 
desperately needs reform to restore the dignity of work to 
Saskatchewan men and women who clearly want to work. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, they sent a message of good news that said 
we can have a different style of politics in our province. A 
different style of politics including a new political party that is 
the only one in the province with the courage to give its 
members a free vote in this place, so that we are free to 
represent our constituents and not simply toe the party line. A 
different style of politics that would introduce set elections in 
our province so that never again could a premier play games 
with the calling of an election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, their message took form on the 
evening of September 16 in the persons of 25 men and women 
elected under the banner of the Saskatchewan Party. I am very 
proud to be part of that number, Mr. Speaker, and very 
encouraged by the fact that this group of men and women, led 
by the Leader of the Official Opposition, have a long-term 
vision for our province. 
 
That vision includes lower taxes and better health care, 
improved highways, and a long-term safety net for our farmers. 
It is a vision that calls for us to place a higher priority on 
providing a place to work and live for our young people when 
they graduate. 
 
Too many of my friends live in Alberta, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And I don’t care much that e-mail allows me cheap and easy 
contact with them. I would like them to be here, raising their 
families here, enrolling their kids in our schools, paying taxes 
— lower taxes, mind you — but taxes to our treasury 
nonetheless. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the recent election proved that we 

are so close to realizing the opportunity to implement that 
vision, and I’m speaking of course of the next general election 
in the province of Saskatchewan. In the meantime, there is no 
reason we cannot start preparing for that day now. 
 
That is why the official opposition has seemingly been the 
source — the only source — of new ideas before and certainly 
since the provincial election. And apparently going against its 
own character, the government has recognized some of those 
good ideas when they’ve seen them as was evidenced by at least 
parts of the Throne Speech, proving once again, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that even a blind squirrel finds a nut every now and 
then. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — They seem to have taken some pages from our 
book. And while the proof will be in their implementation, we 
don’t mind. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in elementary school we can all remember 
that there were good students and sometimes there were those 
students who simply didn’t have the answers or who were 
unwilling to do the work. We were told by our teachers to not 
let other classmates peer over our shoulders for the answers, to 
cover our work and not let them see. 
 
But we on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, are breaking with those time-honoured 
admonishments. Maybe we feel sorry for our slower classmates 
in the place or maybe . . . who are maybe unwilling to do the 
work or, Mr. Deputy Speaker, who maybe just don’t get the 
question. We are prepared to let them copy from our 
homework, Mr. Speaker, in the interests of our province and of 
our constituents. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I look forward with great anticipation to 
representing my constituents in this legislature and to working 
with such a dynamic and idea-generating group of people that 
sits to your left hand. 
 
I also want to thank my wife Tami for her amazing support and 
inspiration which I pledge never to take for granted. Despite the 
newness of the role and the unknown of its future demands on 
me, my number one priority will remain with Tami and our 
children, Megan, Colter, and Faith. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, my commitment to my constituents 
is solemn. I will employ the values that have been instilled in 
me while I grew up in Swift Current. Honesty, integrity, hard 
work, family, faith, common sense, and hopefully a sense of 
humour, will be the values I strive for in representing the 
constituency of Swift Current. 
 
To a large extent I’ll be able to draw on my own heritage to 
help me remember those values. I can conclude with a true 
story of my father’s father to help underscore the point. 
 
Well into his senior years my grandpa, Peter Wall, drove 
downtown one day to pick up some things he needed at a store. 
I’m sure he was working on some carpentry project in his shop. 



62 Saskatchewan Hansard December 8, 1999 

He parked his car and plugged the meter and headed for the 
store. And when he returned he noticed his meter had expired. 
 
He got in his car, drove straight to city hall, and stood in line at 
the cashier’s wicket. And when he got to the cashier he asked 
how much he had to pay. They asked to see his ticket and he 
said he didn’t get a ticket. And so they said, well in that case 
you’re free to go. You don’t have to pay. But he insisted on 
paying. He believed he had broken the law and his sense of pure 
honesty told him he needed to admit to his violation and pay the 
fine. 
 
If I could somehow practise my grandpa’s sense of right and 
wrong, of honesty and basic human goodness, I know I will 
have at least a slim chance of doing a justice to the great honour 
that the people of Swift Current and Wymark and Rhineland 
and Blumenhof and Stewart Valley have given to me. I’ll be 
supporting the amendment. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I would 
like leave to introduce guests before I begin my remarks. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Wartman: — We’ll get this system down yet. I would like 
to introduce my wife Gail who is seated in the gallery opposite. 
Gail has been a tremendous support throughout the years that 
we have spent together, and I’m thankful for that support and 
for the relationship and the wonderful children that we have — 
Alaina, who is in grade 12 at Winston Knoll Collegiate here in 
the city; and son Daniel, who is in grade 10 and just got his 
learner’s licence. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Ms. Higgins, seconded by Mr. 
Addley, and the proposed amendment thereto moved by Mr. 
Hermanson. 
 
Mr. Wartman: — It is with a sense of awe that I stand in this 
Chamber to respond to the Speech from the Throne. So much of 
great historical significance has taken place in this Chamber. So 
many of this province’s great leaders have brought their hopes, 
their visions, and their dreams to this place. Working together 
with other committed women and men, they have turned those 
hopes and dreams and visions into reality. Medicare was bought 
to birth in this place. It took incredible vision, courage, to 
develop that system which has since been adopted by the whole 
nation. 
 

Child poverty and the number of people needing social welfare 
have been reduced because people with a commitment to 
compassionate social justice work together here to make it 
happen. 
 
Workplaces are safer because people who cared made sure that 
there was good occupational health and safety legislation. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, despite the economic ravages wrecked upon 
this province by the former Tory government, our Premier, a 
leader with strength, courage and wisdom, along with a team of 
deeply committed colleagues, led us safely through the valley 
of the shadow of death. They took us back from the edge of 
disaster by balancing the budget. Not only did they put the 
province back on safer ground by balancing the budget, they 
have continued to successfully work for the good of this 
province in the areas of economic development and social 
justice. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Because of their hard work, we now have a 
province with a more widely diversified economic base. That 
broad, diversified economic base has helped and will continue to 
help carry us through times like these when one sector of the 
economy is hurting so deeply. 
 
New and innovative developments like the Synchrotron in 
Saskatoon and the petroleum technology research centre here in 
Regina and new operations like Farm-Gro, just outside the city, 
have helped give us hope for a truly bright future for this province. 
Still, we have much to do and the Throne Speech sets before us a 
vision and a goal towards which we will work with courage and 
with commitment. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I feel deeply honoured by the fact that the 
people of Regina Qu’Appelle Valley elected me to be their MLA. 
I have lived and served in the northwest of this city for many 
years, though in a slightly different capacity. 
 
I have appreciated the work of my predecessors, Suzanne Murray, 
who is always such a bright and compassionate person, and John 
Solomon, who continues to work hard as a Member of Parliament 
for the Regina Lumsden constituency and for this nation. Both 
John and Suzanne served with diligence and with care for many 
years. I hope to build upon their work. 
 
Regina Qu’Appelle Valley is a real bridging constituency. It is a 
wonderful mix of urban and rural, residential, agricultural, and 
industrial. Within the constituency are a significant number of 
this region’s major industries, including one of our largest 
employers, IPSCO. 
 
Regina Qu’Appelle Valley covers much of northwest Regina. It 
stretches from No. 1 Highway just east of the city, north to the 
south side of the Qu’Appelle Valley. It follows that scenic 
valley over to the junction of the Regina Beach road and the 
Lumsden Beach road and then heads straight south between 
Pense and Grand Coulee, and it includes the communities of 
Grand Coulee and the beautiful town of Lumsden. 
 



December 8, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 63 

I am deeply honoured to serve Regina Qu’Appelle Valley. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, the Throne Speech spoke of our government’s 
commitment to do everything within our power and within our 
means to support the farmers of this province. The farmers of 
Saskatchewan are, for the most part, in desperate circumstances 
caused by factors far beyond their control. 
 
The federal government has undermined the economy of prairie 
grain farmers. Over a period of years, they have arbitrarily cut 
back on programs that were vital to a successful agricultural 
economy on the prairies. They removed the Crow rate, an 
agreement that was to have been in place for perpetuity. Despite 
their words, they have not made the railroads operate fairly. 
They have not placed caps on profits for hauling grain nor have 
they made the railroads share their excess profits equitably. 
 
The farmers of Saskatchewan deserve this treatment — a better 
treatment. The primary producers of this province should not be 
treated with such disdain by our federal government. While 
railroad companies have prospered, farmers have continued to 
suffer financial setbacks. 
 
On top of that, in some misguided attempt at righteousness in 
trade issues, the federal government unilaterally reduced 
subsidies on export grains. This action has given the farmers of 
the US and the European Union an incredible advantage, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. How can our farmers be expected to survive 
and make a decent living with a staggering 30 per cent trade 
differential? 
 
How can any safety net cover that kind of loss? It is certainly 
beyond the means of any provincial government, especially one 
whose taxpayers are feeling the squeeze caused by the 
economic shortfall in agriculture. Still I am proud of our 
government’s work on the agricultural issue today. And I am 
inspired when I hear the tone of the Throne Speech on issues 
important to farmers, indeed to all the people of this province. 
 
From the very beginning of the discussions on support for 
Saskatchewan farmers, our former minister of Agriculture, Eric 
Upshall, pushed the federal government. He told them 
repeatedly that AIDA would not work for western grain 
farmers. Indeed in the end, our government only signed onto 
AIDA under great duress, including pressure from our 
colleagues in the official opposition. 
 
I am proud of the fact that this government has heard the voice 
of the people — yes, including the voice of our friends in the 
official opposition — calling for a delegation to Ottawa and 
calling for an open meeting such as we had in this Chamber 
yesterday where farm groups could come, tell their story, and 
tell us what they hoped might happen for them. And I am proud 
of the actions that we have taken so far. 
 
Despite the fact that we have not yet got Ottawa to make the 
minimum $1 billion trade equalization payment, the delegation 
was a courageous and in some ways successful intervention. 
Despite all the differences, members of the delegation stayed 
focused on a clear need for a $1 billion trade equalization 
payment. And they spoke with a consistent and a clear voice. 
 
Giving credit where credit is due, I must say that along with our 
own members and with the other representatives from 

agricultural communities from SARM (Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities) and SUMA (Saskatchewan 
Urban Municipalities Association), along with these others, the 
Leader of the Official Opposition and the member from 
Kindersley spoke very well and gave clear challenges to the 
federal government to live up to its responsibility. 
 
It was an honour and an inspiration to be a part of the 
delegation called together and led so ably by our Premier and 
by our Minister of Agriculture. I am thankful for the 
opportunity to serve our beloved province. 
 
As I listened to His Honour the Lieutenant Governor read this 
visionary Throne Speech, I found myself saying yes — yes, I 
think we can do this. Though our accumulated debt is 
staggering, and our resources are severely taxed — no pun 
intended — we will over the course of these next four years 
scale this mountain and reach these visionary goals. We will do 
it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wartman: — We will. We will work our way through this 
agricultural crisis. We will make our health care system the 
most effective and efficient system that is possible. We will 
decrease the tax burden and make the system more fair for all 
people. One-income families will no longer be penalized and 
there will be relief for the poor. The tax burden will be shared 
as equitably as possible. And we will build this province. 
 
Working together with our communities, with school boards, 
with teachers, post-secondary institutions, First Nations and 
Metis peoples, we will develop and implement plans to provide 
the best, most accessible education possible in order to prepare 
all Saskatchewan’s people for the future. 
 
Working together with stakeholders, we will continue to build 
and diversify the economy so all our children will have the 
possibility of good jobs and a prosperous future right here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Am I dreaming? Am I dreaming? 
 
An Hon. Member: — No. 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Yes, yes, I am. I’m dreaming. I’m dreaming 
of how wonderful this province will be. I’m dreaming of how 
wonderful it will be. Our future is built on the hopes and the 
visions and the dreams of today. I think we can; I think we can; 
I think we can. 
 
Working together with commitment, courage, and compassion, 
we will climb the mountain of today; we will make this 
visionary Throne Speech a reality; and we will roll into the 
future with joy and celebration. Am I dreaming? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Yes, you bet I am. And together we will 
make this dream a reality. Together we’ll make it a reality. 
Thank you very much. 



64 Saskatchewan Hansard December 8, 1999 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s good to be 
back again. Not long ago we had an election and I guess when 
we go into an election all of us kind of wonder how it’s going to 
turn out. 
 
On this one I think there were quite a number of us, at least 25, 
that didn’t have that much of a concern how it was going to turn 
out. We had a fairly good feeling for what was going on in our 
constituencies. 
 
We knew what the people of the province were thinking. The 
media didn’t. The people across the floor didn’t, but the rest of 
us, we knew what they were thinking. And it showed up as the 
election progressed. When you would see signs out there that 
were usually up, no signs were there. You couldn’t get people 
to debate the issues; they were out somewheres hiding. And 
anyways, it was just an excellent, an excellent time out there, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And we rolled through that election. And the results were much 
better than what we had hoped — much better than we had 
hoped. We knew it would be good, but to go ahead and win 
more public support than any other party in Saskatchewan, and 
that being our first election as a full party, was exceptional and 
it was exciting. 
 
And there are a few people I need to thank. And I guess as most 
people that have been elected to this House realize, that the 
groups that sacrifice the most are your families. Because you 
expect them to help you, and they do. You expect them to come 
out to some of the rallies, and they do. You expect them to put 
out some signs, and they do. And then you’re gone for awhile to 
Regina and you’re gone to all sorts of meetings and they have 
to do without you. And for most of us, they wish we were 
home. And for my family as well, I have to express sincere 
gratitude on my part for the support that they’ve given. 
 
And there’s an individual that I thanked the first time I was 
elected. And it sounded rather odd because we make a lot of 
jokes about our mother-in-laws — mothers-in-law. I have to get 
that right or I’ll be corrected when I get home. 
 
And I have to do the same for my mother-in-law because she’s 
a big support in my life. Last time when I mentioned her in my 
speech, it got stuck to the fridge and I think it’s still there. So 
she can remove that one after four years and put the new one on 
there. 
 
But I do want to thank her for her support, for her prayers; 
they’re always there. I keep getting cards from her, and phone 
calls. And it’s that kind of support I think that each one of us 
has from our families and it means so very much to us. 
 
The election was interesting, as I said. The government, as our 
leader has expressed, had a very near-death experience — a 
very near-death experience. In fact it must have come as much 
of a shock because I’m sure they listened to the media declaring 
the victories out there, landslides pretty well, and then to wake 
up a few minutes or an hour or two later to find out it wasn’t 
that way. That victory we thought would be so strong and so 
solid was not there. 

The phrase that was used very often before the election and 
during and election and after, was that the NDP had become 
arrogant. And I think the public realized that, and they’re still 
realizing it. There was a moment or two, just a moment or two 
after the election where we heard the Premier say something 
about he might have to listen. Maybe there was a lesson to be 
taught. I don’t think that he learned the lesson but it was there 
to be taught. 
 
(1600) 
 
If we look at the Speech from the Throne, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
there’s a phrase that has been brought to your attention numbers 
of times but I think it needs to be done again. We often talk 
about four-letter words, but there’s a three-letter word in this 
one which is repeated many times. And I’m really rather 
surprised that it would show up in the NDP Speech from the 
Throne. 
 
The three-letter word is “too”. Because too many of our 
families in Saskatchewan are still having a hard time making 
ends meet, and don’t we all know it. And why do they find that 
hard at times to make ends meet? Well probably the key one is 
taxes, because the money that each one of us has to spend are 
after tax dollars. And we seem to have a few of those around, 
very few, and that’s because the tax takes too many of those 
dollars away from us. Too many of our families in 
Saskatchewan are still having a hard time making ends meet. 
 
It’s interesting, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That’s written after the 
NDP had eight years to change things, eight years, and this 
document is full of the “toos”. Too many of our young people 
still concerned about their futures. Not only concerned, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, about their futures, but concerned where those 
futures are going to be because too many of our young people 
know that their futures are not going to be in Saskatchewan. 
 
Each one of us as MLAs in this House, regardless what our 
political stripe is, are proud of Saskatchewan. We love 
Saskatchewan. It means a lot to us. 
 
I love this province. It has a beauty that you can’t find any other 
place. Yes, maybe you have to learn to understand the beauty of 
vast spaces and some of the things that we have. But it is there, 
and I love it. 
 
But our young people love it as well, but they’re not sure if 
they’ll be able to stay here. And they leave this province in 
droves. They must be leaving in droves, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
because why are your population still very nearly what it was in 
the 1930s? 
 
It’s not that we don’t have prolific people in this province, but 
they leave one after another — dozens, busloads, trainloads 
leaving this particular province. They must, because our 
population doesn’t seem to grow. 
 
Another too. Too many of our rural families are victims of a 
vicious trade war, and I’ll say a bit more about that later on. 
And the fact is I would say there are really no rural families that 
are not victims, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of that vicious trade war. 
And as this is progressing and the situation getting more 
serious, it’s moving into our towns and into our cities where 



December 8, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 65 

businesses and employees and jobs are being lost and lessened 
because of what’s happening in this province. 
 
Not only do we have one page full of too’s, we turn the page 
and it continues, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Too many seniors and 
too many families are still worried that our health care system 
will not be there when they need it, and I’ll say something more 
about that. 
 
We had in question period today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a 
situation that was mentioned, and I think what was frightening 
there was the fact that the dollars that are being put into our 
health care are being so badly misused. A situation where we 
spent close to a quarter million dollars of health care money for 
something we could have done for between 30 and $40,000, 
had the people had the care given to them here in Saskatchewan 
instead of going across the border and having some Americans 
make some money on our sick people. 
 
Not only that, but we could have had that equipment left here to 
be used by other people needing the same care, and it wouldn’t 
have cost any more in labour, any more people to operate that. 
It could have been there. We could have saved, as I said, 
hundreds of thousands of dollars on one person’s situation, but 
this government decided to squander that money as they’ve 
squandered so much money. 
 
Yes, you could probably solve health care by just throwing 
more money into it. But when you got a bucket with a hole in it, 
how much water do you have to keep pouring in before you’re 
gaining instead of losing? This NDP government is not 
prepared to check for the holes in the bucket, and this province 
doesn’t have enough money to keep pouring enough into the 
top of it. And that’s the problem. That’s the problem, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party, during the election, made a 
commitment. It wasn’t a flashy commitment, but it was a solid 
commitment. A commitment that the people of this province 
understood even though the people across the floor over here 
didn’t seem to understand it. That commitment was that we 
were going to do an audit of the health care system and find out 
if there were holes in the bucket. And from time to time where 
we’ve used that example people have sort of sat back and said: 
well, really? This morning in question period, one individual; 
we saw the big hole in the bucket the NDP system has. And 
they weren’t prepared to fix it. All they said is, don’t hold your 
breath. 
 
Well people of Saskatchewan we’ll have to hold our breath a 
little longer, but after the next election that group will not be 
sitting on that side. And we will be able to fix some of that 
health care by fixing the holes that are in that bucket. Then 
when we put some dollars into the top of it, they’ll have some 
effect for the people that are looking for health care in this 
province. 
 
Continuing, too many citizens alienated from our province’s 
public life. It says the doors of the legislature are to be opened 
and their voices are to be heard within. Well, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, we did something very unusual yesterday when we 
had people from rural Saskatchewan come in and state their 
situations. And that was an exciting time I think for this House, 

for MLAs of all stripes, and for the people who were watching. 
Just to see that the ordinary people, the people who operate our 
farms, the farm families could come in, talk to us directly, 
instead of as so often the case where we’re being accused of 
being the ones that talk to them. However the statement still is, 
too many citizens alienated from the province’s public life. 
 
There’s a commitment that I made during this election to the 
people of my constituency, that I made in the previous election, 
and if I’m around for the next election — and I hope to be — 
I’ll make the same commitment. And they seem to appreciate it. 
And that is, that on issues in this House I will vote on my 
conscience first; and I’m fortunate enough to have a small 
enough constituency physically that the people know us. And I 
said next we’ll take into consideration the wishes of the 
constituency and then we’ll move on to the party politics. 
 
And the people of my constituency want to know that when I 
come here, that it’s this individual they elected that is voting on 
the issues based on the what the people of that constituency 
want, and they support me for that. And I think that’s one of the 
things this government needs to learn, to give their people that 
opportunity. The lemming mentality may be great for running 
government, but it’s not great for representation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The last too that’s on this particular page is too many of our 
Aboriginal citizens remain excluded from our social and 
economic and civil life . . . civic life. And why is that again, Mr. 
Speaker? It’s because this government sees itself still in a 
paternalistic and a maternalistic attitude toward our Aboriginal 
community. Instead of giving them some of the possibilities and 
the responsibilities that I think would take them a long way 
toward the self-sufficiency that is much desired, but this 
government seems to feel they want the control of it all. 
 
I am proud to be part of my constituency. And I just mention 
that geographically it’s the smallest rural constituency in 
Saskatchewan, probably about 40 miles by about 40 miles, 
compared to my colleague here who mentioned that he has 
about one citizen per square mile. I haven’t figured that out in 
my constituency but it would probably end up being a dozen to 
two or three dozen per square mile, which makes it very easy 
for me to know a lot of the people in my constituency and to 
know the communities very well. 
 
I have a great group of people in my constituency. A group of 
people that cares for one another. Not that that’s unique to 
Saskatchewan, but I think it’s probably stronger in my 
constituency than it is in most. 
 
In my community we have a store called The Clothes Basket, 
and what they do . . . it’s run by voluntary people, and they take 
goods that people bring there on a voluntary basis and give that, 
turn that into a store, and all the money that’s made from that 
— and it’s literally tens of thousands of dollars in every single 
year — is given to charity sources. 
 
People in my constituency are well-known for their 
organizations, and MCC (Mennonite Central Committee) is one 
of those, where they’ll go throughout the world literally where 
there are disasters have taken place and help in those situations. 
That’s the kind of constituency that Rosthern constituency is, 
and I’m proud to be part of it. 



66 Saskatchewan Hansard December 8, 1999 

Rosthern constituency is also an independent group. It shows up 
in different sorts of ways, and one of them seems to be if I talk 
with members from all sides of the House and ask how many 
people are calling your office for help and I compare it to what 
the history of that is in my constituency — fewer people calling 
for help. The people who call for help need it and they get it. 
But there’s a real sense of independence and doing things on 
your own. 
 
The people of my constituency are a creative group, and I need 
to talk here to some extent about the rural group, the farm 
community. We probably have a larger variety of crops grown 
in the Rosthern constituency than any other single area of that 
size throughout the province. We’ve been blessed with the land 
and the weather that we can do that. 
 
And so we’re on the leading edge in agriculture — not just in 
growing different sorts of crops — working with the 
universities in the development. Our beef and dairy industry in 
the area are leaders. And I’ll say something more later on about 
the dairy industry and what this government could and should 
be doing to help that. 
 
Birds and pork. Special ideas from canary seed to elk, from 
bison to sheep dairies. Leadership in all areas of agriculture. 
 
But it isn’t only an agricultural area. There’s also a lot of 
fabrication that takes place. Construction companies that exist 
there and work within the area and in the cities that are near to 
that. It is a good area to be part of. 
 
We have as a rural constituency probably the only rural 
constituency in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, in which every 
single town is growing. There’s not a town in the Rosthern 
constituency that is dying. They’re all growing — every one of 
them. 
 
And there’s an interesting reason for that . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . And I hear a chirp from across the other side 
trying to take credit for it. But no, there may be a good reason if 
we want to look at politics. It happens to be one of the few 
constituencies in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, that has never 
voted NDP. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — And I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, it’s one 
of the key things — one of the key things that has kept that 
particular constituency growing as it has. Because the people in 
that constituency are prepared to go ahead and dig in and do it 
and work hard, and not look for government for help every time 
they turn around, as is the way of this socialist system. 
 
But let me take you around the constituency and deal with a few 
of it. Every single community, as I said, is a growing 
community. Whether we look to the communities at the one 
corner, which would be Laird and Waldheim — smaller 
communities, but they’ve had some amazing growth. New 
houses, numbers of new houses built in each one of those this 
year. 
 
My town of Rosthern, a growing town. Martensville and 
Dalmeny with their proximity to Saskatoon, growing very 

rapidly. And the other communities of Rosthern and Hague and 
Hepburn, very fast growing communities. And it’s exciting to 
be part of that constituency. 
 
That’s not to say, Mr. Speaker, that there aren’t some 
difficulties that the people in my constituency have to face. And 
that’s probably because this government, Mr. Speaker, is out of 
touch with rural communities that are growing. They have the 
mentality that rural Saskatchewan is dead and dying, and let’s 
just turn away and let it happen. 
 
And we’ll look at the agricultural policies and we’ll see that 
happening. We had the people that were in here from rural 
Saskatchewan yesterday. And they told this government very 
specifically, Mr. Speaker, that there were things they could do. 
Yes, if we’re looking for big cash dollars in the short term, that 
is a federal responsibility and they’re looking there. But this 
government has done things that has hurt rural Saskatchewan in 
a major way. 
 
They have dumped a tax load on them through the education 
system. The off-loading that is unbelievable. Every single 
farmer in Saskatchewan when they look at their tax bill, it used 
to be that most of their taxes on their land went to the upkeep of 
their rural community for roads, for rodents, for taking care of 
weed control — all the things that are done in rural 
Saskatchewan. That’s what the money went for. 
 
And then there was another component — not that large — that 
for decades stayed at about the same amount that went for 
education. And yes, they said, it was a little bit unfair the 
percentages, but they would take their share of the load. This 
government, Mr. Speaker, has off-loaded onto the education 
system to the extent that now the major portion of that tax ticket 
when they look at it is the education portion. And the people 
know that is unfair. 
 
They’re prepared to pay their share, but why should they pay a 
percentage that is so out of touch with the rest of Saskatchewan. 
This government is responsible for that. This government can 
deal with it. This government, in eight years, has not dealt with 
it. They have made it worse year by year by year. There’s been 
a shortfall on a regular basis from this government when it 
comes to funding for education. And the people in my 
constituency know that. 
 
(1615) 
 
The areas that we look at and the other things that were 
mentioned by the rural people that were in here, that this 
government could deal with, is fuel tax which has sort of been 
considered a bit like a road tax. Now why should a person 
driving around with his tractor on his field pulling a piece of 
equipment, growing food for the world, have to pay a tax on 
that fuel? There is no earthly reason on it. There are no roads 
he’s using for that. He’s driving around on his own property — 
for which he’s being overtaxed as we just mentioned — and this 
government taxes him for that. No excuse for that whatsoever, 
and this government was told this yesterday but they don’t seem 
to have been listening so far. 
 
They were also told there were other areas they could work 
with, the safety net that needs to be worked on. Now AIDA was 



December 8, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 67 

supposed to be a safety net. It’s been a disaster, no one argues 
that. But, Mr. Speaker, where was our Agriculture minister 
when AIDA was being created, when people were sitting 
around and deciding how should AIDA work? He wasn’t there. 
 
He should have been there, looked at that, and said, this is not 
going to work in rural Saskatchewan. This may work in 
Ontario, it may work in British Columbia, but it’s not going to 
work in Saskatchewan. It’s just a plan that is bad. He wasn’t 
even there. He was on holidays. 
 
Had he been there and not caught on, we would have said well 
at least he tried but he’s a member of the NDP government so 
not catching on has happened before. But he was gone, just 
colour him gone. 
 
So then when they get the plan, they wonder why it’s so bad. 
Saskatchewan did not have any input into it. We should have. 
 
One other thing this government could do and that is reduce red 
tape for farmers. And I know business often complains about it 
— farmers have it. 
 
There is in my area a real opportunity for growth, Mr. Speaker, 
in the dairy industry. We have many dairies. At just about any 
spot in my constituency you could probably count between a 
dozen to two dozen silos, all for dairies. 
 
We do have people moving in from Europe into our dairy 
industry; we have people coming in from out of province, from 
Alberta and from British Columbia, to try and set up for the 
dairy industry in Saskatchewan. Why do they come? Our land 
costs are less and the opportunity is there. But the one thing 
they complain about is, not the opportunity that’s out here for 
the dairy industry, what they complain about is the red tape. Not 
only is there an unbelievable amount of red tape that’s there, 
but it changes as they go through it. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I do have examples and they have made 
contact with the present Agriculture minister to meet with him 
and just explain some of those concerns to him so we that can 
reduce some of that red tape and give that opportunity for 
growth in this province that could be there. So far the Minister 
of Agriculture for Saskatchewan hasn’t responded. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Those are the government ties that bind. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Those, as my colleague says, are the 
government ties that bind. And it’s fortunate in spite of my 
namesake that I can’t sing it or I might try to. And I’m getting 
much support from this House on that conclusion. 
 
The other thing that this government needs to pay some 
attention to, and particularly in my area where the communities 
are growing, is the infrastructure, where the things that supplied 
enough water for communities 10 years ago aren’t satisfactory 
anymore because the demands have gone up. That’s unique in 
rural Saskatchewan unfortunately, but it’s there in my 
constituency and needs to be dealt with. 
 
We have schools, almost all of them packed, full, overflowing. 
We need some major building programs in schools in my 
constituency . . . 

An Hon. Member: — All across this province. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — And all across this province. But right at this 
point, I’ll probably stay with representing my constituency. 
 
Martensville, rapidly growing, those schools are full. They’re 
literally full and running over and we need some, we need some 
building there. They’re full. 
 
The town of Hepburn hasn’t had a building program in 
probably 20 years. There’s actually floors that kids are falling 
through because they’re so bad because they have a whole 
group of portables that literally rotted away over the years. And 
we need a building program there. 
 
The community of Osler has a gym that’s crumbling — no 
money coming from this government. 
 
The town of Rosthern’s elementary school doesn’t have a gym. 
So we’ve contacted one Minister of Education after another 
one. Now we have this Liberal/NDP Minister of Education who 
knows not whether he’s a Liberal or an NDP, so it’s hard to 
know whether he’ll understand a need when he sees it. 
 
So the community of Rosthern has largely given up on the NDP 
government for getting a lot of help for their gymnasium so 
they’ve brought in sports personalities. Last year they brought 
in Ken Dryden, had a big supper, had an auction, raised money. 
 
This year they brought in Gordie Howe. Now the only 
unfortunate thing is that we couldn’t get the present Minister of 
Education and Gordie Howe in a corner somewheres, because 
from what I hear of Gordie Howe and his history in the corners, 
we would have probably had all the money we need for our 
gymnasium in Rosthern very quickly. 
 
And before I conclude, Mr. Speaker, I must say a word or two 
about highways in my area. I’m going to make a statement that 
may surprise a few people, at least at the start, and that is that 
we have some of the better highways in the province in my 
constituency. I’m aware of that. My colleagues are very jealous 
of that. 
 
But there’s a reason for that, Mr. Speaker. It’s because the 
highways that run through my constituency, Highway 11 and 
12, are among the busiest highways in the province and getting 
much busier very quickly. The tourist trade in summer literally 
plugs those highways as people from almost all of 
Saskatchewan funnel through Saskatoon and then out to The 
North. 
 
The trucking traffic, the commercial traffic going up to the 
uranium mines, going down both those highways to different 
parts of northern Saskatchewan. Those highways are very busy 
and for that reason there has been some upgrading, there has 
been some twinning. It was necessary. It was necessary. 
 
And there’s some more twinning needed because the accident 
rate on those highways is increasing. There is no one living in 
my constituency that hasn’t lost someone, an acquaintance that 
they’re aware of, on those highways through a highway 
accident and that is a disaster. So there is more work needed. 
There is much more work needed there. 



68 Saskatchewan Hansard December 8, 1999 

Now I will be speaking personally with the Minister of 
Highways hopefully sometime this week about a situation that 
was created near Martensville. They built a beautiful section of 
twinned highway, Mr. Speaker. They made it so smooth it’s 
become treacherous. And there’s a look of awe and the mouths 
are open around this House that I said that. It is so smooth that 
they’ve actually put up warning signs for about a four- or 
five-mile stretch of highway, warning signs that have flags and 
flashing lights saying 60 kilometres per hour on a divided 
highway that is perfectly smooth. It is like glass — it is 
treacherous. 
 
Now I will have a question for the Minister of Highways — and 
he’s here right now, so it will give him a chance to prepare an 
answer — and that is did they sign off on the contract and then 
find out, oops, we said everything was okay and the contractor 
is off the hook and now we have a stretch of highway that in the 
best of conditions we have to have a 60 kilometre speed limit? 
Sixty kilometre speed limit on the smoothest highway in 
Saskatchewan — not because it has, not because it has holes 
like most of the rest of Saskatchewan but because it’s that 
smooth. 
 
The other question is, that I’m going to have for the Minister of 
Highway, is who’s responsible for an accident that happens on 
that stretch due to the slickness on that highway? Is it the 
Department of Highways? 
 
The 60-kilometre sign in there, Mr. Speaker, is an advisory. 
Now you have a real interesting situation, Mr. Speaker. It’s an 
advisory which says: we think it’s probably a good idea to go 
60 kilometres but you can go a hundred if you wish. 
 
So all the cautious drivers in Saskatchewan that go down that 
stretch, about half of them, are driving 60 kilometres, all people 
who drive like the other half are going 100 kilometres, so you 
got two drastically different speeds going down this stretch of 
highway, which is treacherously slippery. 
 
This government creates one hazard after another even on their 
new stretches of roadway, which means that all the rest of the 
people in Saskatchewan have a good understanding why their 
highways are as bad as they are when they leave them in 
disrepair and don’t even work on those. But, as I said, I will be 
talking with the Minister of Highways on that and we will get 
that straightened out. 
 
The Speech from the Throne, Mr. Speaker, had a lot of 
concerns. It raised concerns about all the too many this and too 
many of everything else. But there are some answers in here, 
some answers. There’s a hint at a tax cut. 
 
Mr. Speaker, who during the election spoke of tax cuts? Only 
one party, only one party. Those people said no, no, nobody 
wants tax cuts. The Liberals didn’t know what a tax cut was. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure you’re aware of that. Only one 
party that spoke of tax cuts. There’s a hint of it in here. 
 
Now maybe the NDP have vaguely caught that the people of 
Saskatchewan, because remember, Mr. Speaker, more people of 
Saskatchewan voted for the Saskatchewan Party than any other 
one — maybe the NDP have caught on that there was 
something good in the Saskatchewan Party. There is a hint of 

tax cuts in here, but we’re going to want to see how good those 
are. 
 
This government set out its own tour, its own group, its own 
investigation about tax cuts. The reply came back, and I’m sure 
the Minister of Finance has it. It said very specifically what it 
should be. The taxpayers, the electors of this province, Mr. 
Speaker, had said very specifically during the election what 
they thought of tax cuts. Strong support. The major issue in 
Saskatchewan during the election. They suffered because they 
didn’t listen. 
 
He sends out the request from this tax report. It says a tax cut all 
the way across. Let’s take some seniors, let’s take some poor 
people off the income tax roll altogether. It’s amazing, Mr. 
Speaker. This government that will stand up and try to bring 
tears to the eyes of Saskatchewan citizens about how they have 
this social conscience taxes people when they start making a 
little over $6,000 a year. That is a mile away from a poverty 
line. 
 
This government, when the people of Saskatchewan get barely 
over $6,000 a year, they start dubbing them with income tax. 
That’s supposed to be a tax on those people who can afford to 
pay it. Truly amazing. 
 
So as we see more speeches in response to the Speech from the 
Throne coming from the NDP over there and as they try to 
bring out these tears with their social conscience, I would 
advise the people of Saskatchewan to look at what they do 
when it comes to tax structure and we’ll know there is no social 
conscience there. None whatsoever. 
 
But there is a hint, there’s a hint of it in here, and we’ll like to 
see what happens with it. There’s a few other little hints in here 
and we’ll like to see what happens in that. 
 
If they are substantial, if they make sense, if they’re practical, if 
they’re what the people of Saskatchewan in the election 
indicated they wanted, the Saskatchewan Party is quite prepared 
to support them — quite prepared to support them. 
 
Now will that happen? There is a chance. It is slim. It is slim. 
But there is a chance and we’ll be watching, and watching very 
closely. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I could spend a lot of time talking about job 
creation and these people with a social conscience having the 
worst job record in Canada — the worst job record — and they 
think they have a social conscience. 
 
I’ve said something about taxes. I’ve said something about 
health care. And the one line that I do have to make sure that I 
have on record today is that the longest lineups in the health 
care system in Canada exist, Mr. Speaker, in the home of 
Tommy Douglas — in his province. What a shame. The people 
who want to maintain health care, who feel it’s their 
responsibility that without the NDP health care would fall, with 
them it has fallen in Saskatchewan. 
 
We have the longest lineups; we have two-tier health care. Why 
do people have to go down to Minnesota to get their health care 
when for a fraction of the cost we could have had it here in 



December 8, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 69 

Saskatchewan? Two-tier health care under this government. 
 
I could have spent a lot of time on the welfare numbers — the 
worst in Canada from an NDP government that claims to have a 
social conscience. 
 
I’ve said something about highways. I’ve said something about 
population growth, retail sales. Just a word or two about crime; 
just a word or two about crime. 
 
This particular government has not been able to put any teeth 
into any of the laws of this particular province to be able to 
lessen crime in this province, because why are some of our 
cities, from time to time, the number one car thief capital of 
Canada? That should be an honour that belongs to Vancouver 
or Hamilton, not here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, where we 
pride ourselves on being a province of people who help one 
another, who are neighbourly. 
 
(1630) 
 
It’s this government and their record that have been in 
government for most of the years of the last 40 years that has 
brought that about. They take pride in that record; they have to 
take responsibility for it. 
 
Why do we have cities in this particular province, Mr. Speaker, 
that are the break-in capital of the world? They have no 
answers. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party has the answers. We have answers for 
all of these. The people of Saskatchewan showed that in this 
election. And for that reason, Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting 
the amendment. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it gives 
me a great deal of pleasure to arise in the Assembly today and 
enter into the Throne Speech. I want to set out a, Mr. Speaker, 
by a . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . and it’s nice to be back too, 
Dan, thank you. 
 
I want to start out, Mr. Speaker, by congratulating you on your 
election to the position of Speaker of the House. I know and I’m 
sure, Mr. Speaker, if all the members of this House were able to 
and allowed to speak from their heart, they would acknowledge 
the fact that you are definitely the best person to fill the role. 
Congratulations, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: — I also want to take this opportunity to 
congratulate my colleague, the member from Regina 
Coronation Park upon his election as the Deputy Speaker for 
this House. I hope that our path that we have going right now 
will fulfill itself and will continue to bear fruit for many, many 
years to come. Thank you. 
 
I also want to take this opportunity to congratulate the member 
from Moose Jaw Wakamow, my seatmate, for the excellent, 
excellent, excellent job of moving the Throne Speech. It was a 
pleasure to have the opportunity to not only hear her in the 

House, but to be able to share many of the wise thoughts here as 
my seatmate, and I really appreciate that — congratulations. 
 
I also want to take this opportunity to congratulate the member 
from Regina . . . Saskatoon — pardon me — Sutherland, for his 
moving the Throne Speech and it was a pleasure to hear both of 
my colleagues rise in the House and first move and second the 
Throne Speech because it made it very, very clear to me upon 
listening to them why the people of their constituency recognize 
that they were the best people to represent them in this House 
and voted for them overwhelmingly — congratulations. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: — I also at this time want to congratulate the 
Premier. I think that the Premier has achieved something that is 
very rare in Saskatchewan politics and that is a third-term 
government. In fact, it’s only happened four times in our history 
since 1905. The other previous times was the very first Premier 
of Saskatchewan, Walter Scott, and I don’t know what the 
economic conditions were around those times, probably in 
1915-16 somewhere around that would have been his third term 
of government. 
 
But in the 1950’s when Tommy Douglas was able to achieve 
third-term government and in the 1970’s when Allan Blakeney 
was able to achieve third-term government, they were done at 
times of strong economy and a time when the agricultural 
economy was strong. And I find I take a great deal of pride and, 
as I said, want to congratulate the Premier on achieving it in a 
time when the agricultural economy in this province was not 
strong. In fact our producers in Saskatchewan are facing some 
of the toughest times since the 1930s. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to take this opportunity to 
acknowledge the many times the question has been asked me by 
my colleagues on this side of the House and my many friends 
on the opposition side, is that yes, Mr. Speaker, I am very 
happy to be back in this Assembly. And I’m very proud, Mr. 
Speaker, that I am honoured to have the opportunity to 
represent the fine people of Regina Northeast. 
 
Regina Northeast, Mr. Speaker, is a unique constituency, I 
suppose, because I think it represents a complete cross-section 
of our city of Regina. The boundaries of the fine constituency is 
Albert Street to the west side, Victoria Avenue to the south, 
Quebec Street to the east and then it follows Saskatchewan 
Drive up to Winnipeg Street; up Winnipeg Street to 6th Avenue 
North; and then it takes in all the industrial section including 
Uplands area and to the city limits on the north. So it 
encompasses some of the core area, some of the old Churchill 
Downs area, and the Uplands area. So I find it quite unique 
when I’m out door knocking and canvassing in the constituency 
because I think we have the opportunity to represent a whole 
cross-section of our community. 
 
And I had the — I guess use distinct — pleasure to be 
nominated as the NDP candidate back in January 23 of last 
year. And soon after that, in fact the first week in February, we 
started to get out and door knock because I’m a new candidate 
and a new constituency and I’m from the old school of politics, 
I guess, Mr. Speaker, and I believe that if you’re going to ask 
people to support you and to entrust you with their vote, it’s 



70 Saskatchewan Hansard December 8, 1999 

incumbent upon you to get out and talk to people and get to 
know them and visit with them for a few moments. 
 
So we started door knocking and I found that a very, very 
interesting, very interesting experience because what I found — 
a number of things, I suppose, quite interesting — but one of 
the things that stand out most in my mind was the fact that on a 
number of doors I had knocked on, the couple or the individual 
answering the door in the conversation soon related to me that 
they had been in Regina here and in Saskatchewan here for 
perhaps a year, 18 months, maybe even two years. So I’d ask 
them, obviously you weren’t born or raised here, so where did 
you move from? And the answers I got — B.C. (British 
Columbia), from Alberta, Manitoba, Ontario, and even one 
from Quebec. 
 
In fact, my next door neighbour, a couple which just moved 
here from Quebec, about three or four months ago. 
 
So each one of these folks, I would ask them what was it that 
prompted them to move to Saskatchewan, what reason did they 
come here and leave BC, Alberta, Ontario, as the case may be. 
And I was surprised, Mr. Speaker, at how many of them said 
the cost of living. Job opportunity and the cost of living. 
 
It became very evident to them that the job opportunities were 
in Saskatchewan. But what became also very evident to them 
was that Saskatchewan was the cheapest province in Canada to 
live in. They fully realized that when they brought their 
paycheque home and when they made . . . paid the utility bills 
and made all the payments and paid all the bills that were 
required for day-to-day living, they had more disposable 
income here in Saskatchewan than any other province in 
Canada. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I just found that out door knocking in 
my constituency was quite enlightening. 
 
And I suppose in some ways, Mr. Speaker, I had a bit of an 
edge here because the constituency boundaries of Regina 
Northeast, for the most part, not all of it but for the most part, 
lie in the same federal boundaries of the federal constituency of 
Regina Qu’Appelle. And, Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity of 
working with two MPs that have served that federal riding. 
 
First, I had the opportunity of working with Simon de Jong who 
was the MP for Regina Qu’Appelle for a number of years. And 
I had the opportunity of working with Simon for his last two 
years as he served as a Member of Parliament. And then in 
1997, with the federal election that took place at that time, Mr. 
De Jong did not seek re-election. 
 
Mr. Nystrom ran in his place for the New Democrats and I was 
asked by Mr. Nystrom, soon after the election, to join his team 
and to be his chief of staff and executive assistant. And that, 
Mr. Speaker, was certainly an experience and I think a very 
positive experience because it gave me personally the 
opportunity to view politics from both sides, both the federal 
aspect of politics and the provincial aspect of politics in my past 
life and now as a member here. So I find that, hopefully in some 
ways, has enabled me to be even a better representative for the 
fine people of Regina Northeast. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, I will admit I have my work cut out for me. 
As you know, Regina Northeast was formerly represented by 
Mr. Ned Shillington, who I had the privilege of being a 
colleague with from 1991 and ’95 but who I am very proud to 
be able to call a friend. And I know that all the people in this 
House who had the opportunity to know Ned know him for the 
fine gentleman that he certainly is. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: — And all the people who had the opportunity to 
serve with Ned in this Assembly over the 24 years of his career 
certainly recognize the true legislator that he was. 
 
It is my opinion, Mr. Speaker, that Ned Shillington in his 
experience, in his dedication to the public office has set a 
standard for anyone in public office to try to measure up to. He 
has set that scale very, very high, Mr. Speaker. And I will be the 
first to admit that I will probably not be able to reach that scale 
but I will promise the people of Regina Qu’Appelle and the 
Assembly here that I will do my best to reach as far up that 
scale as possible. 
 
I had many experiences I suppose, Mr. Speaker, out door 
knocking in my constituency and I enjoyed those experiences 
because I think it pointed out some things to me that I wasn’t, 
you know, I wasn’t aware of before, in that in the boundary . . . 
lies within the boundaries of Regina Northeast is a large, large 
business community. In fact Regina Northeast has more 
businesses in its constituency, or in our boundaries, than any 
other constituency in Regina. We have in excess of 900 
businesses in the constituency. 
 
So it’s a . . . it’s a rather unique constituency and I’ve certainly 
enjoyed the opportunity to be out there. I’m looking forward to 
getting back out there again and meeting with folks, because as 
I said earlier I’m from the old school. And I believe if you’re 
going to represent people you have to get out and visit with 
them, meet them, get to hear their concerns in order to be able 
to represent them fairly here in the legislature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: — And, Mr. Speaker, it is with a great deal of 
pride and joy that I enter into this debate on the Throne Speech. 
I have in my very short political career had the opportunity of 
hearing and reading a number of Throne Speeches, but this is 
by far the best one I have been able to participate in. The 
Throne Speech certainly is visionary, certainly is 
forward-looking, and, Mr. Speaker, it is certainly a Throne 
Speech that is embarking Saskatchewan on a brand new day. 
 
There’s no doubt about that, Mr. Speaker. There’s no doubt that 
in this brand new day we are going to face many, many 
challenges. And, Mr. Speaker, sometimes in this legislature the 
easiest place to face challenges is from the opposition benches, 
because the opposition can criticize knowing that they are never 
going to have the responsibility of government and never going 
to have to implement any of their policies. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, I would suggest to the opposition members 
that they should enjoy, enjoy their numbers that they’re 
enjoying in this term because that is the highest numbers that 



December 8, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 71 

the history of Saskatchewan will ever show the Saskatchewan 
Party achieving in Saskatchewan. 
 
But there are, as I said, Mr. Speaker, many challenges that are 
facing our government, facing the province of Saskatchewan. I 
think that was fairly, fairly evident and fairly well demonstrated 
yesterday and yesterday evening when we had a number of farm 
delegations come in here and put forward the plight of 
agriculture in our province. 
 
I, Mr. Speaker, have I think a reference to agriculture, having 
enjoyed a career in farming for nearly 20 years before entering 
the world of politics and getting misled, I guess you would say, 
in the way of life. 
 
But many of our farmers, many of our farmers are facing 
difficulty, Mr. Speaker. They’re facing difficulty not through 
any fault of their own, but facing difficulty because of unfair 
trading practices. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1645) 
 
Mr. Harper: — We’re seeing in the European Common Market 
subsidies that clearly distort the agricultural markets. We’re 
seeing in the United States, subsidies that clearly distort the 
world trading balance. And we’re seeing a federal government 
has turned a blind eye to that real happening. It’s turned a blind 
eye to the plight of Canadian and Saskatchewan farmers, and 
that, Mr. Speaker, I personally find unacceptable. 
 
And I want to acknowledge the fine efforts of the coalition 
group that has gone to Ottawa from Saskatchewan here and 
placed squarely on their shoulders the responsibility of the 
agricultural crisis where it belongs, is on the shoulders of the 
federal government. 
 
And I encourage the many farm groups, I encourage the 
members on this side of the House, and yes, the members on the 
other side of the House, to continue to work together 
co-operatively in an effort to find financial relief for our 
farmers. Because the questions that are facing Saskatchewan 
farmers is much, much bigger than the world of politics. It’s a 
question of survival. It’s a question of being a human being. 
 
I think I can say that, Mr. Speaker, because I have a number of 
relatives, friends, and former neighbours who are today still 
making their livelihood on the farm. And I’ve had the 
opportunity over the last three or four months to sit down with 
many of them and discuss with them their plight. 
 
Some of the stories are really sad, Mr. Speaker. Really, really 
sad. In fact, I know of some families out there who are not 
going to enjoy a very merry Christmas this year, Mr. Speaker, 
because I have just in the last couple of weeks assisted them to 
find some assistance in Social Services. 
 
These are proud people, Mr. Speaker, who have not enjoyed the 
benefits, I guess you would say, of the same as their colleagues, 
their farmer counterparts in Europe and the United States. And 
it is not a pleasant sight, Mr. Speaker. 
 

But despite the farm economy and despite the fact that 
Saskatchewan is facing the worst times in agriculture since the 
1930s and probably some of the lowest commodity prices since 
then, the Saskatchewan economy as a whole has stayed strong. 
 
And I think that augurs well for what has been achieved in this 
province under this administration, under this government since 
1991. Particularly taking into account, Mr. Speaker, that in 
1991 — and I had the opportunity of being a member of this 
House at that time — we took over a province that had just been 
ravished with debt, a province that was soon discovered had 
nearly a $15 billion debt. 
 
And I know the opposition members are going to say, oh yes 
this is old rhetoric, we’ve heard it before. But I think we must 
be reminded of this from time to time because this is the basis 
of the recovery of the economy of Saskatchewan, is to dealing 
with that debt. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’ll be very honest with you. I have no idea 
how big a pile a billion loonies would be. In fact, Mr. Speaker, 
unlike some of the members opposite who may, I have no idea 
how big a pile a million loonies would make. 
 
So I will share with you a secret and I will share with my 
colleagues and the members in this House here a secret. In 
1992, I believe it was, I was enjoying the company of my 
family at the Thanksgiving table. And my youngest daughter 
who was in university at that time, was home, and we were 
discussing the economy of Saskatchewan and the debt situation 
of this province and so on. And I shared with her the thoughts 
that I couldn’t in my mind imagine how big a pile a billion 
loonies would be, let alone a million loonies. 
 
So she sat there for a few moments and then she said, dad, she 
said, did you ever think to relate it to something perhaps that 
you can understand or visualize, and that is time. I said no, I 
didn’t. So she got out her calculator and a pencil and she 
punched out the numbers and she said, do you have any idea 
how long a million seconds is? I said, well no, I know how long 
one second is. I can visualize more or less how long a minute is 
or even how long an hour is, but a million seconds, no. 
 
She said, well for your information, a million seconds is equal 
to twelve and a half days. Whoa, I said, that’s a pretty big pile 
of loonies then. If a million seconds is twelve and a half days, 
it’d make a pretty big pile of loonies there. 
 
So a few more moments later she said, dad, have you any idea 
how long a billion seconds is? And I said, well, let’s see. 
Twelve and a half days, twelve and a half days — oh, probably 
a month and a half, something like that. She said no, no. A 
billion seconds is equal to 32 years — 32 years. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, now we can understand, at least I hopefully 
can understand a little better, the debt situation that this 
province was facing in 1991. And if you take a look at that 
enormous debt on a population of a million people in 1991 to 
where it is today in 1999, reduced to 11.5 billion, thusly 
reducing the interest payments, thusly leaving more surplus 
money for programs that benefit people, that, Mr. Speaker, is no 
small accomplishment. That is no small accomplishment. 
 



72 Saskatchewan Hansard December 8, 1999 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: — And a credit for that accomplishment, Mr. 
Speaker, has to go to the Premier and the fine group that has 
served this province as government since 1991. 
 
An Hon. Member: — 1999. 
 
Mr. Harper: — Since 1991. And my colleague here, Mr. 
Speaker, just brought to my attention that this is a new day, that 
there are new things dawning, and I have to agree with my 
colleague that there is no doubt that this is probably the finest 
group of individuals on this side of the House ever to lead this 
province in government. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: — We know, Mr. Speaker, that there are many 
challenges facing government. We know that we have to work 
towards a partnership to build prosperity in Saskatchewan 
because we want Saskatchewan to be the province that we 
know it can be, and that is a province of opportunity and a 
province of prosperity. That can be achieved, Mr. Speaker, by 
government working together with business, working people, 
communities, co-operatives, and government pulling it all 
together, making it work because we know it can be done in 
Saskatchewan and it will be done in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: — I don’t suppose, Mr. Speaker, there’s ever been 
a time when education wasn’t important. It’s always been 
important, but never a time more important than now. As the 
world has changed, and changed very dramatically in the last 
number of years. Particularly in the last couple of decades we 
are seeing the need for education much, much greater because if 
we’re going to maintain a strong economy we have to have an 
educated workforce. 
 
We have to have the ability to give to the young people the 
tools to meet the challenges of tomorrow because the challenges 
today are not like they were 20, or dare I say, 30 years ago 
when I entered the workforce. Then the competition was local, 
the competition was perhaps provincial. But in today’s world 
the competition for jobs, the competition in the business 
community, is global. Today we don’t compete with just our 
friends and our neighbours, we compete with people halfways 
around the world. 
 
And I’m not sure who said this, Mr. Speaker, but an economic 
professor of a few years back said that the amount of change 
that we’ve seen in our society in the last 100 years, we are 
going to see that much change again in the next 10. Now that 
seems very dramatic, Mr. Speaker, and sometimes I even 
question the wisdom of it. 
 
But if you stop to think that just not all that many years ago you 
would have not been able to watch a sporting event happening 
half way around the world in Japan, where today you can see it 
instantaneously. The marvels of modern technology are beyond 
my wildest imagination and I think we may be just seeing the 
tip of the iceberg. 
 

So I think, Mr. Speaker, for the well-being of our provincial 
economy, for the well-being of Canada, we must pursue a 
strong — with all vigour.— a strong educational program to 
ensure that our young people have the tools to meet the 
challenges of the future. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, just before I conclude, I would like to bring 
to your attention an issue that I also see was addressed in the 
Throne Speech but an issue also that I’d run into on a number of 
occasions on a doorstep when I was out campaigning, both 
before the election and during the election campaign itself. 
 
And that was the subject of health care. And, of course, each 
and every one of us have our own opinions on the different 
mechanisms of health care, the different ways it should be 
delivered. Perhaps it could be better here, perhaps it could be 
better there. And there’s no double that many of these thoughts 
and opinions probably have a fair amount of merit. 
 
But I want to share something with you, Mr. Speaker, that I 
found extremely interesting as I went door to door and started 
keeping track of the issues as they were coming forward. 
 
I would run into a scary story in health care that somebody said 
that they were in the waiting . . . waited in emergency rooms for 
16 hours or 13 hours or whatever the magic number happened 
to have been or somebody else has been waiting for surgery for 
months and months and months. 
 
But when I’d ask these folks to identify who this magic person 
was, they failed to be able to identify the person simply because 
they were, in a lot of cases, Mr. Speaker, figments of people’s 
imagination — mostly from the opposition benches might I say. 
 
But what I did find interesting, Mr. Speaker, what I did find 
interesting, Mr. Speaker, is when I had the opportunity of 
knocking on the door of Mr. John . . . he was John Smith on 
Cornwall Street, second block Cornwall Street, who had just 
come through a very unpleasant experience, and that is he had a 
kidney stone removed. He’d spent the required time in the 
hospital and he was full of praise for our health care system. He 
had just experienced the system. He had nothing negative to say 
about the system. He only had praise for the system, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
A few days later I was over on McDonald Street — I believe it 
was second, second or third block McDonald Street — and I 
run into a lady there who receives dialysis three times a week at 
the General Hospital. And, Mr. Speaker, she had been receiving 
this for two or three months and she had nothing but praise to 
say about our health care system. She is experiencing it 
first-hand — first-hand knowledge, Mr. Speaker — and she had 
nothing but praise to say about it. 
 
And right, in fact it was the day before election day, I was 
knocking on doors on Lorne Street — and I can even remember 
the apartment building; it was 411 Lorne Street — and the lady 
— I can’t remember her name right offhand but it seems to me 
it was Granding or Grundy or something along that line, and 
she lives at apartment no. 7. I knocked on her door. She invited 
me in. She asked me to because she wanted to talk to me a few 
minutes about health care, and she said I’ve never supported 
one political party over the other and she said I voted for them 



December 8, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 73 

all at some point in time. 
 
She said this time I’m going to be voting New Democrat 
because, Mr. Speaker, of her experience with her daughter and 
the health care system. Her daughter had gone . . . had been 
bothered with her knee for a period of time. She went to her 
family doctor. The family doctor examined the knee, said I’m 
going to refer you to a specialist — 30 days to the day she had 
her appointment with a specialist. The specialist said in my 
opinion you need surgery and 38 days from the date she seen 
her specialist she had her surgery. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, was, I think, a reasonable turnaround time in 
our health care system. Mrs. Grundy thinks it’s a reasonable 
time turnaround time in the health care system and that’s one of 
the primary reasons that she supported me in the last election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it has been a pleasure to rise in this House and 
offer my support to the Throne Speech. I will be supporting the 
Throne Speech and certainly not the amendment. Thank you 
very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I realize 
that the members in the Assembly are just looking forward to 
listening to me debate and present my speech in regard to the 
reply from the Speech of the Throne. I certainly would love to 
get into some of the debate regarding taxation or regarding the 
direction that this government is getting into, but in view of the 
fact that it’s reaching that time of the day, I would suggest we 
adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 
 



 

 


