





























































Hansard: December 15, 1999


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 207 
 December 15, 1999 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise today 
to present a petition regarding the crumbling state of our 
highways and the need for twinning and more specifically the 
need to commit more of our fuel tax revenue to highway 
maintenance and construction. And the petition . . . prayer is as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call on federal and provincial 
governments to dedicate a significantly greater portion of 
fuel tax revenues toward road maintenance and 
construction so Saskatchewan residents may have a safe 
highway system that meets their needs. 

 
This petition was provided to the office of the Liberal 
opposition but they’re . . . (inaudible) . . . Mr. Speaker, we’re 
pleased to present it today. There are people who have signed 
this petition from Shaunavon, Gull Lake, Rush Lake, Vanguard, 
as well as Hazenmore. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, I too would like to present a 
petition to this House in large parts similar to the one just 
presented. The Saskatchewan highways are crumbling and in 
need of twinning and recognizes that governments have reaped 
hundreds of millions of dollars in revenue from fuel taxes and 
motor vehicle fees. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I would just remind the hon. 
member that debate on the issue; just go right to the prayer, 
please, and the petition, thank you. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Lots of lessons to be learned in the House, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call on federal and provincial 
governments to dedicate a significantly greater portion of 
fuel tax revenues toward road maintenance and 
construction so Saskatchewan residents may have a safe 
highway system that meets their needs. 

 
And this petition your . . . Mr. Speaker, was signed by the good 
residents of the constituencies of Wood River and Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I have a petition to present on behalf of many people 
in Saskatchewan, both urban and rural, very concerned about 
the agriculture crisis that we’re in today. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to assist Saskatchewan farmers by 
withdrawing from the failing AIDA (Agricultural Income 
Disaster Assistance) program and using the remaining 
provincial AIDA funding to rebate the education portion of 
the 1999 property taxes on agriculture lands for one year, 
whereby providing farm families with $133 million tax 
reduction in 1999. 
 
And as in duty bound your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the signatures on these petitions come from the 
communities of Imperial, Liberty, Eyebrow, Nokomis, Leroy, 
and Simpson. And I’m proud to present on their behalf. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Mr. Speaker, it is with great 
responsibility I rise to present two petitions today, both 
respecting the automobile insurance Act. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to repeal the provision of the 
personal injury benefits contained in the automobile 
insurance Act and adopt a return to an add-on insurance 
system that would provide benefits on a no-fault basis to 
all victims without taking away the innocent victim’s right 
to seek compensation from the person responsible for the 
accident, but with appropriate modifications to reduce 
overall personal injury costs. 
 

The petition is signed by the good folks of Regina and 
Weyburn. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 
have petitions from citizens throughout this wonderful 
province of Saskatchewan. And the petition reads as follows, 
Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to assist Saskatchewan farmers by 
withdrawing from the failing AIDA (Agricultural Income 
Disaster Assistance) program and using the remaining 
provincial AIDA funding to rebate the education portion of 
the 1999 property taxes on agriculture lands for one year, 
whereby providing farm families with $133 million in tax 
reduction in 1999. 

 
And the petitioners, Mr. Speaker, are from Wiseton, Elrose, 
Simpson, Young, and Saltcoats. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present today. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to repeal the provision of the 
personal injuries benefits contained in the automobile 
insurance Act and adopt a return to the add-on insurance 
system that would provide benefits on a no-fault basis to 
all victims without taking away the innocent victim’s right 



208 Saskatchewan Hansard December 15, 1999 

to seek compensation from the person responsible for the 
accident, but with appropriate modifications to reduce 
overall personal injury costs. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from the Wolseley, 
Sintaluta, Indian Head area; from Regina, and from Saskatoon. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I too stand today to present a 
petition regarding just another school closure in this province. 
The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the Minister of 
Education to do everything in his power to maintain the 
quality of education of students attending the schools in 
Qu’Appelle and to stop the unwanted closure of classes in 
Qu’Appelle. 
 

I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the petitions presented at the last 
sitting have been reviewed and found to be in order and they are 
therefore thereby read and received. 
 

The petitions are for petitioning the Assembly to call on 
federal and provincial governments to dedicate a greater 
portion of fuel tax revenues toward road maintenance. 

 
And petitions asking the Assembly to repeal the personal 
injury benefits contained in the automobile insurance Act. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice 
that I shall on day no. 13 ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the Minister of CIC: (1) during 1999 how many times 
has the Sympatico e-mail system been out of service and 
what was the reason for each of those outages; (2) for each 
outage occurred by this system in 1999, how many users 
were affected? 

 
I so present. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to introduce to you and through you, to the members of the 
Assembly, a number of guests that we have in the House today. 
 
On the floor, Mr. Speaker, we have Terri and Ken Sleeva of 
Regina, Kent and Laurel Brace of Saskatoon, Norbert Kossman 
of Lumsden, Anita Powless of Regina, Paul Jarbeau of Regina, 
Carmen Trimble of Regina, Diana Rempel and Darvin Appell 
of Regina, and Ed Nemeth; Mr. Speaker. And these people are 
all either involved with or affected by the disease multiple 

sclerosis. 
 
In your gallery, as well, Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce 
Tracy Kuhtz who is the executive director of the Alzheimer’s 
Society, Mr. Speaker. And as well, while I’m on my feet, I 
would like to take this opportunity to introduce to all members, 
and particularly to new members, my wife Carole. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to 
the legislature one of my constituents, Mr. Emmett Reidy, who 
is in your gallery. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — If I may, hon. members, I would like to add 
my welcome to Mr. Reidy who as you all know, a former judge 
of the Court of Canadian Citizenship, and a gentleman with a 
long-time interest in the political affairs of Saskatchewan. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Humboldt to Host Scott Tournament of Hearts 
 

Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, in January 2000, the Humboldt 
curling club will be hosting the first Scott Tournament of Hearts 
of the new millennium. Saskatchewan’s top eight women’s 
curling teams will be in Humboldt on January 26th through to 
the 30th to compete for top honours in the province. 
 
Organizers of this upcoming event gathered at the Humboldt 
curling club for the Scott launch luncheon on November 24th. 
And I was very pleased to be there, Mr. Speaker, to bring 
greetings on behalf of the people of the Humboldt constituency 
and to applaud the many volunteers working on the project. 
 
The Humboldt curling club bid to host the event five years ago 
and then waited two years before learning the bid was 
successful. In the words of Madeline Pelzer, chairperson of the 
organizing committee, “I am so very happy that we get it this 
year.” 
 
If the size of the luncheon, Mr. Speaker, is any indication, 
Humboldt will be an enthusiastic and hospitable host for the 
Scott Tournament of Hearts. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

New Doctor for Esterhazy and Langenburg 
 

Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, as my colleague from 
Saskatoon Meewasin acknowledged yesterday, that recruiting 
doctors for rural areas anywhere in North America is difficult. But 
she also said that we are doing a reasonably good job at finding 
and replacing doctors for our rural communities. And she 
mentioned two doctors yesterday. 
 
And I am pleased today to welcome yet another doctor that’s 
coming to my part of the province, Mr. Speaker, Dr. Taryl 
Felhaber is now opening her medical practice at the Langenburg 
Health Centre, where she provides general practice service five 
days a week. Also, Mr. Speaker, Dr. Felhaber is now a member of 



December 15, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 209 

the Kaposvar clinic in Esterhazy where she will work weekends 
and evenings with a team of physicians in treating patients at the 
St. Anthony’s Hospital. 
 
Dr. Felhaber comes to Saskatchewan from Minnesota where she 
was raised and educated, then to South Africa where she was 
trained as a medical doctor and now to east central 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Dr. Felhaber has an extensive background in environmental 
science, geochemistry, and, Mr. Speaker, in sports medicine 
which will come in handy, I’m sure, when the member from 
Saltcoats injures himself while he’s playing right wing. 
 
I want to take this opportunity to welcome her and her husband 
and family to Saskatchewan. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

Providence Place for Holistic Health Resolution  
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like 
to read a letter that I received from Providence Place in Moose 
Jaw in support of our farmers in crisis. The letter reads: 
 

The Board of Trustees of Providence Place for Holistic 
Health, sponsored by the Sisters of Providence of St. 
Vincent de Paul of Kingston, Ontario, a Long Term Health 
Care facility in Moose Jaw, Saskatchewan, unanimously 
approved a resolution at their November 23rd board 
meeting; the resolution asks that a strong message be 
forwarded to you, expressing our grave concern for the 
“farm crisis” in the Prairies, and more specifically in 
Saskatchewan. Many farm families are suffering mental 
and physical anguish because of the stresses caused by the 
economic woes in the farm community. Some are even 
resorting to suicide. 
 
We are people of Mission in health care, so we urge you to 
seriously consider assistance to our farmers and their 
families, relative to improving their health, and support 
programs to alleviate their problems. 
 
We value our agricultural communities, who are a lifeline 
to Canadians, and are responsible, dedicated citizens in our 
rural and urban communities. 
 
We request your positive response to rectify this matter. 
 

The letter’s signed: 
 

Respectively, Mr. Henri O’Reilly, Chairperson, Board of 
Trustees (and) Mr. Raymond E. Mulaire, Chief Executive 
Officer. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Regina Film Company Producing Movie 
 
Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I bring good 
news, Mr. Speaker, for Regina, Moose Jaw, and in turn for the 
whole province. Right now the feature film, Borderline Normal 
is being shot in Regina. Stephen Onda’s company, Heartland 
Motion Pictures of Regina is shooting the project, and Jeff 

Beesley, a 26-year-old from Moose Jaw and a graduate of the 
University of Regina is directing the film. 
 
This is the only the second film that Jeff has directed but he’s 
jumping at the chance. Some of the stars of the film have been 
seen on L.A. Law, Dawson’s Creek, and Top Gun. The story is 
about a 16-year-old boy who goes through his parent’s divorce 
and a custody battle over himself. This is a very different story, 
Mr. Speaker, from the glitz usually coming out of Hollywood. 
 
Besides the fame and fortune, this film is also touching the lives 
of our communities. Two hundred people will find full-time 
work during the filming of Borderline Normal. Local unions, 
art guilds, film associations, and our provincial government can 
take credit for helping the industry in our film friendly 
province. In fact, some of the film was shot at the Sportsplex, 
the exhibition grounds, and even right here in the legislature. 
 
I would like to wish Stephen Onda, Jeff Beesley, and the rest of 
the people working on Borderline Normal the best of luck. The 
film will be shown on CBC (Canadian Broadcasting 
Corporation), Superchannel and the Movie Network, and I look 
forward to seeing it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Private Member’s Bill on Dealer Purity 
 

Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, the member’s statement I would 
like to make today will be more or less a continuation of my 
efforts yesterday until I was caught short by a speeding clock. 
You might call this dealer purity part two. 
 
I wish to reiterate my personal concern with dealer purity issue 
and its significance to the farmers, machinery dealers, 
manufacturers — indeed the whole economy of this province. 
Now being a farm partner currently and the owner of 
equipment, designed and built in Saskatchewan, and having 
worked in the area of agricultural machinery sales, I can speak 
from personal experience on this issue. 
 
Giving equipment dealers some modicum of protection from 
over-restrictive contractual agreements on the part of 
multinational giants will be an advantage and safeguard for all 
parties directly affected. 
 
Honey Bee Manufacturing, my constituency’s largest private 
employer, is one of those companies that will be positively 
affected by such legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we in the official opposition have offered our 
co-operation on this issue and we look forward to supporting 
any government initiative in this regard if similar to our own 
private members' Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we anticipate a timely and positive response by 
the government on the issue of dealer purity. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Writers Promote Their Work 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, as you know, I’m proud of 



210 Saskatchewan Hansard December 15, 1999 

boasting in this Assembly that my constituency of Regina 
Lakeview has more accomplished writers per square inch than 
any other in Saskatchewan, and possibly any constituency in 
Canada. 
 
They write many books to get us through our long winter 
nights. They also do much to promote our province, making it 
better known far beyond our borders. They do this directly 
through their work and they do it by travelling the country, 
spreading the word about who we are, where we come from, 
and what are our stories. 
 
Two writers who are not in my constituency but who would be 
more than welcome, have just returned from the mysterious 
East of Canada where they did just that. 
 
Jo Bannatyne-Cugnet from Weyburn, author of the best selling 
children’s book, A Prairie Alphabet, has just returned from 
several stops in northern Ontario and Toronto. Her tour was 
sponsored by the Canadian Children’s Book Centre, as was one 
by Alison Lohans of Regina, who took the good news of her 
work and of Saskatchewan to Prince Edward Island. Alison has 
published 12 books including her latest, Skateboard Kids. 
 
I thank the Children’s Book Centre for sponsoring these 
journeys. The more we share our writers and artists with the 
world, the more Saskatchewan writers there will be for all of us. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Victim Impact Statement Program 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Today I 
rise, Mr. Speaker, to speak about a new initiative by our 
government, the victim impact statement program, which was 
just introduced on December 1. This program gives the victims 
of crime a stronger voice in court. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the victim impact statement program provides 
victims with the opportunity to tell the court how a crime has 
affected them. Every victim of a reported crime will have the 
opportunity to complete a victim impact statement. This process 
will ensure a victim’s voice is heard, and is a further step the 
provincial government is taking to ensure victims are treated 
with dignity, respect, and sympathy for their ordeal. 
 
What is particularly important about this program is that it gives 
victims a chance to talk about every way a crime has affected 
them. Not just the evidence or the incident itself, but how it’s 
impacted on their personal lives, on their family, on their jobs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, victim service personnel are there for victims if 
they need help with their statements. Studies have indicated that 
where victim impact statement programs are in place, victims 
express greater feelings of being dealt with justly. Victims feel 
valued and empowered by the process and feel a greater sense 
of satisfaction with the justice system. 
 
Please join me in my support for this new initiative. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Financial Support for Farmers 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This morning the 
Premier was asked if he thought farmers were becoming 
frustrated at the length of time it was taking . . . that they were 
frustrated, the length of time it was taking to get some help. 
Now brace yourself, Mr. Speaker, here’s what he said: 
 

I don’t believe that they are frustrated. This is not really a 
very long process. Keep in mind that we’ve been a month 
and a half out of Ottawa only. That’s not all that long. I’m 
prepared to sacrifice a little more time. 

 
Mr. Premier, you don’t have the slightest idea what’s going on 
in rural Saskatchewan. Farmers are extremely frustrated. 
They’re holding tax revolts. They’re dumping grain at post 
offices and at a minister’s office. But worst of all, Mr. Premier, 
every day they are quietly losing hope. 
 
Mr. Premier, wake up. For Saskatchewan’s sake, wake up. 
What are you going to do to address the farm crisis now? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I believe if the hon. 
member was completely factual in the report that he prefaced 
his question, he will have told the House that at the symposium 
sponsored by the Minister of Agriculture and the Deputy 
Premier this morning, two-day symposium looking into the 
future, 10, 15 years into agriculture, one of the questioners 
asked me in effect — I don’t have the exact transcript — asked 
me in effect whether or not the level of frustration was so high 
that this would prohibit them discussing the future. 
 
My answer was that their level of frustration was high, but it 
was not so high that it would prevent farmers from trying to 
look to the future and develop policy for the future, and that that 
debate of the future would provide them the necessary hope. So 
we continue to take . . . position. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, that sounds like quite a 
stretch to me. But I would say to the Premier that the rural 
voters sent him a wake-up call on September 16. It’s now clear 
that he hit the snooze button, rolled over, and went back to 
sleep. 
 
Mr. Premier, how can you say that farmers aren’t frustrated. If 
anything, they are beyond frustrated — they’re angry, they’re 
desperate, and they’re despairing. And you just don’t seem to 
get it. You don’t have a clue what’s going on out there; and you 
don’t have a clue what kind of terrible Christmas many farm 
families are going to experience. 
 
You’ve forgotten the resolution that we passed right on the 
floor of this Assembly calling for immediate assistance. Mr. 
Premier — immediate. Where have you been? How can you be 
so out of touch with farm families? 



December 15, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 211 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I will say with the 
greatest of respect to the Leader of the Opposition, I don’t think 
anybody in this House needs to lecture any other member in this 
House — regardless of political party — on the issue, on the 
issue, Mr. Speaker, of the gravity of the farm crisis. 
 
We heard it. We heard it in the floor of this House. We have 
heard it before the election. We’ve spoken to it before the 
election. I don’t only mean this side; all party members have 
done it. We are working on this, I still hope, in a bipartisan 
fashion. And I think it does not advance the debate at all to 
frame the question in that issue. 
 
We know exactly how difficult it is out there. And that’s why 
we are urging the Leader of the Opposition and the farm 
coalition members — SARM (Saskatchewan Association of 
Rural Municipalities), SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association), Wheat Pool, the NFU (National 
Farmers Union) — to continue in a united voice in fighting for 
the family farms. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, it would have helped if the Leader of 
the Opposition, himself, had earlier not advocated the 
abandonment of the Crow rate rather than changing his position 
now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, there is a coalition; it’s 
fighting very hard. But the Premier doesn’t seem to be there 
fighting with us any more. 
 
This morning, Mr. Speaker, in a prepared statement, the 
Premier admitted he has no plan for dealing with the farm 
crisis. He told farm leaders that he is looking for them to 
provide him with a road map. After eight years of driving 
Saskatchewan agriculture into the ground, the Premier decides 
now he wants to look at a road map. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this morning the Premier said he’s prepared to 
sacrifice a little more time. What he really means is he’s 
prepared to sacrifice farm families. 
 
Mr. Premier, where is your road map? Where is your plan for a 
long-term safety net? Where is your plan for cutting education 
tax? Where is your plan for saving farm families? Mr. Premier, 
after eight years — that is quite a bit of time — why are we still 
waiting for your plan from your government for farm families? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, again I say to — with 
the greatest respect — to the Leader of the Opposition, he is 
going to fast lose what credibility he has left by continuing to 
misrepresent — misrepresent — the position of what this 
government is doing. 
 
Now the Leader of the Opposition and the agricultural critic 
were asked to the beginning of a two-day symposium sponsored 
by the provincial agricultural department which is designed to 
have a futuristic 10, 15, 20-year look. 

I acknowledged in my address that there’s an urgent immediate 
problem on the $1.3 billion and the action we have taken by 
going to Ottawa together in a joint way. I will not repeat again 
the seven or eight points raised on page 5 of the Speech from 
the Throne. 
 
The Speech from the Throne, which the Leader of the 
Opposition himself said, stole or took many of the ideas of the 
Saskatchewan Party itself, and I don’t deny the fact that we 
took from the good ideas that they advanced, we’ve advocated 
in specific terms. 
 
So what we are trying to do in this conference is ask the farmers 
to look to that future in the midst of difficulty and continue to 
fight for $1.3 billion. That’s our position; it remains our 
position. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Plains Health Centre Closure Costs 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today the 
Premier’s performance has been woefully inadequate. 
Yesterday it was his Minister of Health who performed badly. 
All of this shows that the government has learned nothing. Even 
after the Provincial Auditor clearly showed that the Plains 
closure is $50 million over budget, the Health minister 
continues to make excuses. She refuses to accept responsibility. 
She refuses to admit that the project is a disaster. 
 
Mr. Premier, you have gutted health care in Regina and in the 
process you have squandered $50 million. And worst of all — 
worst of all — Mr. Premier, you tried to hide it from the people 
of Saskatchewan. Mr. Premier, you got caught yesterday. Will 
you admit that you have mismanaged this project from start to 
finish? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, as the member will know, a decision was made by 
the health district and the Government of Saskatchewan to 
consolidate services that were located at the Plains Health 
Centre into the Regina General and the Pasqua. Mr. Speaker, 
I’d just like to remind the leader of the SPs(Saskatchewan 
Party) that he, on February 15, 1994, said that we had 
governments that built . . . like to build monuments, that like to 
build hospitals. We probably have more hospitals per capita in 
our province than in any other part of Canada. 
 
Our priorities were wrong; in fact I know they were wrong, Mr. 
Speaker. Now, Mr. Speaker, here’s a member that 
acknowledges that we had too many hospitals in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the new consolidated services at the Plains and the 
Pasqua mean that we have a new dialysis. It means we have a 
brand new mental health unit; we have a new burn unit; we 
have native healing centres; and we have an MRI (magnetic 
resonance imaging) along with all kinds of other services, Mr. 
Speaker. Health care in Regina is better today. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister 
can keep on repeating her phony-baloney explanation, but the 
auditor spells it out in black and white. He says, and I quote: 



212 Saskatchewan Hansard December 15, 1999 

The actual cost was $133.4 million. The change in name of 
this construction project was a change in name only. 
 

A change in name only, Mr. Premier. Mr. Premier, you can run 
but you cannot hide. You mismanaged this project from start to 
finish. You blew $50 million, and then you tried to cover it up. 
 
Mr. Premier, when are you going to take responsibility, 
shoulder responsibility, for your mismanagement of the health 
care system? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — What I can say to the member is that 
we disagree with the Provincial Auditor that what we have 
today is what was intended. Now, Mr. Speaker, I go back to the 
Fyke report which was authored in July 1995, and I quote from 
page 12, and he says: 
 
(1400) 
 

It’s unfortunate that the current Toward 2000 capital 
project has become an all-encompassing project 
endeavouring to not only address the facility requirements 
for the move of programs and services from the Plains, but 
also meet the other hospital capital requirements within the 
district. 
 

Then he says: 
 

It’s suggested that this project could be more readily 
managed if we were considered as six, more or less, 
separate projects. 
 

Mr. Minister, we continue to . . . Or, Mr. Speaker, we continue 
to hold the view that in order to consolidate the programs and 
close the Plains and add some enhancements that this project 
went from $83 million to $96 million. All of the other costs 
were enhancements well beyond the scope of the original 
project and intention, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s very disheartening to hear ministers dodge the 
questions that we’ve been asking. The NDP (New Democratic 
Party) has learned nothing over the past time except for one 
thing — they’ve learned how to keep a tight muzzle on the 
Leader of the Liberal Party; might as well have duct tape over 
his mouth. 
 
Two years ago the Liberals raised the Plains hospital every 
single day in this House. They tabled petitions; they held rallies; 
they called for the minister’s resignation. I remember it. The 
Liberal Leader had his face plastered on the side of buses. He 
promised to chain himself to the Plains hospital, and yesterday 
the auditor revealed this disastrous project was $50 million over 
budget. What did we hear from the Liberal Leader? Not one 
word, not a word, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Minister, you are now a minister of the Crown, and you are 
part of the NDP government that closed the Plains hospital. 
Recognize that. Will you stand in your place now and defend 
the government’s mismanagement of this project? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, as the members know — 
and I know they can’t stand the fact — but we have a coalition 
government made up of partners in the Liberal Party and the 
NDP. I know they can’t stand it; in fact, it drives them crazy. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, Liberals in this country and New Democrats 
in this country agree on one thing: we are not interested in a 
two-tier health care system as the Reform Party is and as that 
member has talked about. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, we are not interested in 
freezing health care spending in time for five years, as that 
member is. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, it was a CCF-NDP 
(Co-operative Commonwealth Federation-New Democratic 
Party) government that brought medicare to this province and a 
Liberal government that brought medicare to this country; and 
we will continue to hold to those principles, not as the Reform 
Party and the SPers do, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Hospital Facilities in Regina 
 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for the 
Minister of Health. The Minister of Health often talks, Mr. 
Speaker, about a choice that their cabinet had to make between the 
Plains hospital and the NDP plan to restructure the hospital system 
in Regina. Well, Mr. Speaker, just for the record, the 
Saskatchewan Party and Saskatchewan people will choose the 
Plains hospital over that NDP plan for Regina hospitals ten times 
out of ten. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the fact of the matter is that now we are down to two 
hospitals in Regina, and apparently things aren’t going very well 
there either. Madam Minister, here’s what one nurse who works at 
the Regina General thinks of your handiwork. She writes: 
 

All of the equipment is old and rarely works. Anything sent 
to get fixed takes weeks to return and there is no guarantee 
that it will continue working. The rooms are cramped with 
garbage cans and curtains getting in the way of our work, and 
this makes for a very frustrating workday. 
 

Madam Minister, is that what we got for $133 million? How do 
you explain the deplorable working conditions this nurse describes 
in one of the hospitals you just spent $133 million renovating? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — With all due respect to the member from 
Swift Current, who I understand was a former ministerial assistant 
to the previous Grant Devine government and cabinet ministers. 
I would make this comment: it was not an NDP-Liberal 
coalition that made the decision to put some $18 million in new 
capital construction into the Pasqua and the Regina General, 
Mr. Speaker. That was made by the Devine administration. 
 
Consequently the General and the Pasqua were more up to date 
than the Regina General . . . or than the Plains. That decision 
was made by the former Conservative government, Mr. 
Speaker. There was a report commissioned by George McLeod. 



December 15, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 213 

That report was rendered in the early 1990s, that indicated that 
those two hospitals were the newest and we need to consolidate 
services, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, another question for the minister. 
Mr. Speaker, she might want to talk about people’s past 
activities and what they did 10 years ago; we want to talk about 
health care in Saskatchewan in 1999. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — The letter I just quoted from is from a nurse, Mr. 
Speaker, who has worked in the maternity ward at Regina 
General. She goes on to describe what she thinks is the most 
disturbing problem in the maternity ward. She writes: 
 

The most disturbing situation occurred when the latest 
renovation project was underway for the new ambulatory 
care area, the bats came out. We received a memo that 
these were rabid bats and we were no longer allowed to 
catch them. 
 

Madam Minister, I’m not sure what’s more disturbing: the fact 
that nurses in 1999 in a hospital in Regina, in the birthplace of 
medicare, spend any part of their day catching bats; or the fact 
that they were advised not to catch these particular bats because 
they might be rabid. 
 
Madam Minister, will you confirm the maternity ward at 
Regina General is infested with rabid bats? And will you table 
the memo that was sent to the nurses with the rabid bat 
warning? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I believe that history is an 
important lesson, Mr. Speaker, because if you don’t know your 
history, if you don’t remember your history, you have no idea 
where you’re going. And that may be a lesson for the member 
from Swift Current, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, he talks about bats. What I can tell the 
member is that bats have happened to have occurred in the 
Regina General as a result of opening up the old part of the 
Regina General while under construction, Mr. Speaker. As a 
matter of safety — and I happen to live in an old 
neighbourhood in Saskatoon and we regularly have bats come 
to visit. As a matter of safety you do not handle bats, Mr. 
Speaker, because you may not know whether they’re rabid or 
not, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there have been bats in various older facilities 
across the province for some time and I understand that the 
Regina General is attempting to get the bats out of the area of 
concern, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Another question to the 
minister responsible. He doesn’t seem to be very concerned 
about the fact that rabid bats are in a maternity ward in a 

Saskatchewan hospital in 1999. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, our third child was born in Swift Current 
about a year ago and I can recall how busy the nurses were 
attending to my wife and I can recall that they certainly 
wouldn’t have had any time to go catch bats, rabid or otherwise, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
She writes . . . the nurse finishes her letter, Mr. Speaker, by 
pleading with the government to open their eyes. She writes that 
“no one should have to bring another human being into this 
world in this kind of area.” Madam Minister, I’m guessing she 
is referring to the rabid bat area of Regina General Hospital. 
The nurse ends the letter with this, “It is a disgusting situation 
that needs to be rectified immediately.” 
 
Madam Minister, we agree. Having rabid bats flying around the 
maternity ward at the Regina General Hospital is a disgusting 
situation. Madam Minister, how is it possible to spend $133 
million and end up with a hospital maternity ward infested with 
rabid bats? What are you doing to rectify this disgusting 
situation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, obviously we are 
concerned when there are bats in health facilities in 1999 — 
obviously we are. But I think one of the things that we all 
understand, Mr. Speaker, is that when you are under 
construction and you open up older parts of buildings and attach 
them to the new construction that there will be moments when 
this kind of thing may occur, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now we are not aware that there is a rabid bat that has been 
found. But what I can say is that the staff have been asked to 
take extraordinary precautions because we don’t always know 
whether or not certain animals have the rabies disease, Mr. 
Speaker. So I guess we would caution people to make sure that 
they are prudent when dealing with this situation. 
 
And I understand that the Regina Health District is attempting 
to get this situation under control. The situation, I’m told, has 
happened two or three times and they’re hoping to remedy the 
situation very shortly, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Process for Approval of Pharmaceuticals 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is also for the Minister of Health. Mr. Minister, 
multiple sclerosis is a terrible disease that many Saskatchewan 
residents suffer from. Betaseron is now covered under the 
provincial drug plan for remitting MS (multiple sclerosis), 
however, there is another stage of the disease called 
secondary-progressive MS. 
 
This stage of the disease often means more progressive 
disability for the victims. Betaseron has been proven to be very 
effective for the treatment of MS. It’s been approved by the 
federal Department of Health. Madam Minister, there should be 
no discrimination between the various types of MS or the stages 
of the disease. 
 
Will you commit today to have Betaseron approved for people 



214 Saskatchewan Hansard December 15, 1999 

with secondary progressive MS? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d also like to 
add my welcome to the guests representing people affected with 
MS. As with all the drugs this new use for Betaseron has been 
submitted to the review committees. That’s the two committees, 
the Saskatchewan Drug Quality Assessment Committee and the 
Saskatchewan Formulary Committee, and we’re looking 
forward to their recommendations which will be coming to me 
as soon as possible. 
 
I also want to add that I received an invitation last week in my 
office to meet with the Multiple Sclerosis Society of 
Saskatchewan . . . or of Canada, the Saskatchewan division, and 
I look forward to meeting with you as soon as we can possible 
arrange that meeting. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again to the 
Minister of Health. Alzheimer’s disease steals the life of its 
victims. Madam Minister, there is a drug called Aricept which 
specifically treats Alzheimer disease. It is again approved by 
Health Canada and reduces the symptoms of the early stages of 
the disease. This drug keeps Alzheimer sufferers out of 
long-term care facilities. It gives hope, it gives the gift of time. 
Madam Minister, this drug is already available in Alberta, 
Manitoba, and Ontario. Why the delay for Saskatchewan? 
 
And I know you’re going to say it’s going to the review 
committee. The question is can you speed up this process 
because time is of the essence. Why will you . . . will you 
commit to having this drug approved quickly for Alzheimer’s 
disease sufferers in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d also like to 
add my welcome to Tracy Kuhtz, who’s still up in the gallery, 
from the Alzheimer’s Society, and we’ve also met. 
 
I recognize that many people in the province are anxiously 
waiting for a decision on this drug. And we’ve also . . . it is at 
the committee review stage and the committee has made their 
recommendation but we need other information. And Ontario 
has had this drug in use since June ’99 and we’re waiting for 
information from Ontario so we can make a more informed 
decision. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, again my question to the 
Minister of Health. Madam Minister, why does this process take 
so long? Why do you have to delay and delay and delay while 
people suffering with MS and Alzheimer’s disease wait for your 
government to get into the game and get things done for these 
people? 
 
Madam Minister, will you review the process that is used to 
approve drugs in the Formulary? Will you get this process 
happening quicker? Will you commit to getting this done in a 

timely fashion so people like those suffering here today will not 
have to wait for your ineptitude? 
 
(1415) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Although 
Aricept has been under consideration for more than a year, on 
more than one occasion the drug’s manufacturer has submitted 
new information so that alone delays the process. 
 
Other provinces have used our review process and have found it 
to be exemplary. We’ve also reviewed that process and have 
reinforced that it is the best process that we can have to 
determine the benefit of any new drug to the health system. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Financial Support for Farmers 
 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for the 
Minister of Agriculture. Mr. Minister, this morning in the 
agriculture symposium that you have put in place over at the 
Delta Hotel here in Regina, your deputy minister of Agriculture 
made a presentation to the group and I think everyone expected 
that he would be laying out your plan — indeed, that was what 
the agenda suggested that he would be laying out. 
 
Mr. Minister, that certainly was not the case. The minister . . . 
or the deputy minister reiterated what his department does on a 
daily basis and gave no plan whatsoever for agriculture. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you give the farm community of 
Saskatchewan some indication, some indication of where your 
department is headed with respect to a long-term safety net? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to make it clear 
to the member opposite, and I’m going to table a chart here that 
shows net farm income by province in Canada which shows the 
net farm income in Ontario and Quebec up nicely from the 
five-year average and Saskatchewan’s down from almost 700 
million to minus 48 million. 
 
I want to say to the member opposite that he knows full well 
that what is needed here, as the motion indicated, first and 
foremost is a billion dollar payment immediately to the farmers 
of this province. 
 
As it would relate to what’s the responsibility of the provincial 
government, the Throne Speech deals clearly with that — 
improvements to crop insurance, looking at the proposal from 
SARM as it would relate to property taxation. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I want to say clearly to the members opposite 
what would have helped a great deal was when the Crow rate 
was being dismantled, was being dismantled . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . No you didn’t. No you didn’t. I say to the 
member opposite that his party sat idly by while the Crow 
benefit dismantled. And I say to the member, here’s what he 
said . . . 



December 15, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 215 

The Speaker: — Order, order, order. My colleagues that brings 
to an end question period, oral question period. Order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 202  The Respect for Constituents Act 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
move Bill . . . pardon me, Mr. Speaker. I would like to move 
first reading of Bill No. 202, The Respect for Constituents Act. 
I believe it’s 202, The Respect for Constituents Act. I would 
like it to be introduced and read a first time. 
 
And furthermore while I’m on my feet I would like to move 
first reading of Bill No. 203, The Legislative Assembly And 
Executive Council Amendment Act, 1999. I’d like to move 
introduction and first . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. I just want to remind the 
hon. Leader of the Opposition that each Bill needs to be 
introduced individually please. Each Bill introduced 
individually, one at a time, with leave. 
 

Bill No. 201 — The Four-year Taxation Plan Act 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — With leave, Mr. Speaker, I would like to 
move first reading of Bill No. 201, The Four-year Taxation Plan 
Act and move introduction of first reading, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 202 — The Respect for Constituents Act 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll try and get it 
right this time. It’s a little different than the House of 
Commons. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to move first reading of Bill 
No. 202, The Respect for Constituents Act. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 211 — The Health-care Funding Audit Act 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I would move first reading of 
the Bill No. 211, The Health-care Funding Audit Act. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to ask 
leave of the Assembly to move first reading of a Bill that deals 
with agricultural equipment dealerships and issues surrounding 
the sale of equipment in the province. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

Bill No. 12 — Agricultural Equipment Dealerships Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move that — where 
am I at here — I move first reading of this Bill. 

The Speaker: — I would ask the Hon. Agriculture minister for 
a title of the Bill, if he would have one. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the Bill that we will 
be introducing is The Agricultural Equipment Dealerships Act. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, by leave, now. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — By leave, Mr. Speaker, to introduce a 
guest. 
 
The Speaker: — Thank you for your patience, hon. members. 
Before I recognize the next member, I’d like to just let the 
Assembly know that the Assembly’s agreed to proceed with the 
second reading of this Bill immediately. And there are some 
procedural matters to follow. 
 
I must advise members that second reading debate may proceed 
on the proviso that the Bill has yet to be reviewed as to proper 
format and as to the requirement for a money recommendation. 
So we may require some time to review that — some brief time. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce a guest in your gallery, Dr. Stirling McDowell, who 
as many of you would know, is the former general secretary of 
the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation. He is also a recipient 
of the Saskatchewan Order of Merit. And he is also the man 
who the Stirling McDowell foundation is named after, and 
please join with me in welcoming Dr. McDowell to the 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to introduce a 
guest. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you, and 
through you to the members of this House, a constituent of 
mine and a former member of this House and a minister of 
Finance, Mr. Elwood Cowley. So would you please welcome 
him. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, with leave for the introduction of 
guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in your 
gallery there are three very important guests that are interested 
in the piece of legislation that the Minister of Agriculture 
presented here a few moments ago. 



216 Saskatchewan Hansard December 15, 1999 

I see Mr. Gerry Bourgault, the president and CEO (chief 
executive officer) of Bourgault Industries; Mr. John Schmeiser, 
the executive officer of the Canada West Equipment Dealers 
Association; and I see Mr. Larry Schneider, the executive 
director of the Prairie Implement Manufacturers Association. 
 
I’d ask all members to join with me in welcoming them here to 
the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Request leave to introduce guests, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to introduce to 
you and through you to all members of this Assembly, seated in 
the east gallery, Mr. Lorne Ridgway, a friend of mine and a fine 
young farmer and worker from my constituency. Mr. Ridgway 
farms at Avonlea. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 12  The Agricultural Equipment 
Dealerships Act 

 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, please. Order. Perhaps 
the Minister of Agriculture could speak to the Bill at this point 
in time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of a very, very important Bill, a Bill known as 
The Agriculture Equipment Dealerships Act. And I want to say 
to members opposite and to all members of the Assembly that I 
urge them to support unanimously this Bill and to do it as 
quickly as we can, hopefully today. 
 
And I say to the members opposite, if they need time to read it, 
take time. We can adjourn the debate, but let’s come back to it 
later today to get it passed so that the dealers of this province 
are protected and we’re not waiting. Let’s do that. Let’s not 
hold it up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say as well that at stake here are . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well the members opposite yell from their seat 
when we have a Bill before the Assembly that deals with a very 
important issue of thousands of jobs in the province, the 
manufacturers in this province. 
 
And I say that Saskatchewan has built a reputation dealing with 
the issue of machinery manufacturing, dealing with the issue of 
people manufacturing and processing things in this province. 
 
And I say to the members opposite, on Monday, or when they 
introduced the Bill, they were demanding that we dealt with the 
Bill immediately. They wanted to do it that day. But the 
problem was the Bill they had, actually would have done harm 
to many farmers in this province . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Well look at it, read it, and you will find your Bill did not meet, 
did not meet the needs of the farmers of the province. I 

challenge you. 
 
And we’ll look at that Bill if you like, but it does not meet the 
needs that are needed to be met. This Bill does. 
 
Well I say to you, read it in the next few hours, and before we 
adjourn today, let’s get the Bill passed. That’s all I ask. And 
that’s a reasonable request. 
 
(1430) 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan stands behind a vision of fair, free 
trade. And I say to members opposite, we believe in a 
competitive market. And the issue of dealer purity is the worst 
example, is the worst example of abuse of that power that we 
could imagine. 
 
Well I say to the member opposite . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, please. Order. Order, 
please. I would like to . . . I’m sure everybody would like to 
hear the hon. minister’s response. There will be ample 
opportunity for the appropriate debates. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I say to the members 
opposite that small business is what drives innovation in this 
province. And there are a number of manufacturers of 
machinery in this province that started out in a back shop or the 
Quonset, that have gone on to become very, very successful 
manufacturers. And a number of them have appealed to the 
government and to members of the opposition to get this kind of 
legislation completed and passed as soon as possible. 
 
And I say that we have an edge in the world market as it would 
relate to a number of different products. One need only look, 
one need only look at things like air seeders and realize that it 
was Saskatchewan innovation that led us to being and being 
able to compete in the world markets. 
 
I say, why is this legislation needed? Mr. Speaker, many of the 
mainline manufacturers have asked dealers to sign contracts that 
would restrict them selling short-line equipment from 
manufacturers here in the province. This is not good for dealers. 
It’s not good for our manufacturers. And, Mr. Speaker, it is 
certainly not good for our farmers who would be restricted in 
what products they could buy at main dealers in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say that on the issue of dealer purity, we 
are sure that the industry will support this Bill. There’s been a 
lot of consulting even as late as this morning to get this Bill 
here. The words are correct. They’re drafted with the help of a 
number of individuals and groups. This Bill is supported by the 
Prairie Implement Manufacturers Association, the Canada West 
Equipment Dealers Association, the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, 
the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities, and they 
have letters supporting it that I will share with the members 
opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask members of the Assembly to support this 
legislation and move it along as quickly as humanly possible, 
and I move second reading of The Agricultural Equipment 
Dealerships Act. 
 



December 15, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 217 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, we have just seen an example that the gall of the 
government opposite has no bounds whatsoever. The Deputy 
Premier stands in this House and demonstrates his own 
inabilities and his ineptitude. 
 
We presented our legislative package the second day this House 
was open. We have been talking to him ever since this House 
opened, begging him to come forward with this piece of 
legislation. His whole response at that time was, no, I haven’t 
got time for that right now, call me later, talk to me about it 
some other time. We haven’t got it ready together yet. We don’t 
know what we’re going to do. That has been day after day after 
day, Mr. Speaker. This minister doesn’t know what he’s doing 
and hasn’t got the ability to bring one piece of legislation to this 
Assembly in a proper manner. 
 
He talks about co-operation, Mr. Speaker. Co-operation, the 
need to work together. The Premier even talked about it in his 
Speech from the Throne that the people said we have to work 
together. And this minister walks in today. We haven’t even 
seen the legislation. He didn’t have the courtesy to even show it 
to us beforehand, a draft. And he wants us to pass it sight 
unseen. That minister, Mr. Speaker, does not represent the 
people of Saskatchewan in any way, shape or form. 
 
His total disregard, Mr. Speaker, for the traditions of this House 
are . . . bring disrepute on the members, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a very, very important Bill to the people of 
this province, to the business dealers, to the agricultural 
implement manufacturers and dealers of this province, to the 
farmers of this province. And it is extremely important that this 
piece of legislation provide those dealers with the security that 
they need. 
 
The large manufacturing companies are putting a lot of pressure 
on these dealers to sign a contract, Mr. Speaker, that will tie 
them completely to that particular brand; and to the disregard of 
the needs of the people of Saskatchewan, the dealers, the 
farmers, and the manufacturers in this province. And, Mr. 
Speaker, to put it plainly, we don’t trust that minister to do the 
job right. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move that we adjourn this debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

TABLING OF COMMUNICATION 
 
The Speaker: — Hon. members, before orders of the day I 
wish to inform the House that I have a message from His Hon. 
the Lieutenant Governor. 
 

The letter dated December 13, 1999, Dear Mr. Speaker, 
pursuant to Section 68.7 of the Legislative Assembly and 
Executive Council Act, I hereby inform the Assembly of 
the membership of the Board of Internal Economy, 
effective December 9, 1999. 

 
Hon. Ron Osika, Chairperson; the Hon. Eldon 

Lautermilch, the Hon. Jack Hillson, Mr. Myron Kowalsky, 
Ms. Carolyn Jones, Mr. Dan D’Autremont, and Mr. Bob 
Bjornerud. 

 
Yours Sincerely, J.E.N. Wiebe, Lieutenant Governor, 
Province of Saskatchewan 

 
Thank you. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Kowalsky: — I have the response for question one here. I 
might mention, Mr. Speaker, that there have been 35 questions 
submitted altogether. I think the members opposite have been 
busy as beavers generating questions. And as a result, Mr. 
Speaker, the government departments have been scurrying to 
come up with the answers. And today we will be submitting the 
answers to 30 out of 35 of these questions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some of the questions require a little more research just to get 
them all together. The answers aren’t quite as easy to get; you 
can’t just simply pluck them out of some book. I’m sure if you 
could, the members would already have the answers, so if you 
. . . I would hereby submit the response to question 1. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a response for question 2. Mr. Speaker, I have the 
written response to question 3. Mr. Speaker, I ask that question 
4 be converted to order for return (debatable); also with the 
leave of the Assembly to convert 5, 6, and 7 to order for return 
(debatable). 
 
The Speaker: — Item numbers 4, 5, 6 and 7 converted to 
notices of motion for return. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Response to question 8. Mr. Speaker, I have 
here the answer for question 9, and by leave of the Assembly, I 
also submit the responses to question 9 through to 27. I request 
that question 28 be converted. 
 
The Speaker: — Item no. 28 is converted to notice of motion 
for return. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, I have the response for 
question 29, and by leave of the Assembly, also the responses 
for questions 30, 31, 32, 33, 34 and 35. And that makes the . . . 
that completes the list, Mr. Speaker, 30 out of 35 questions 
answered, and putting the floodlights on what is happening in 
government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I thank the members for their questions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Those responses are tabled. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 



218 Saskatchewan Hansard December 15, 1999 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Ms. Higgins, seconded by Mr. 
Addley. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I 
want to begin my address this afternoon by first recognizing 
and congratulating the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow and 
the seconder from Saskatoon Sutherland for the excellent 
moving and seconding of this Speech from the Throne, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I also want to extend my congratulations 
this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, to all of the members of the 
Assembly who have been either returned or are new members. 
And often that we hear that this is clearly one of the highest 
honours that we have when we’re sent here by our constituents 
to represent their views and to make legislation and to ensure 
that the Saskatchewan people are well served. So I want, Mr. 
Speaker, on this occasion, to congratulate all of the members of 
the Assembly who have been either elected or re-elected. 
 
Further, Mr. Speaker, I also want to recognize the election of 
the Deputy Speaker, the member from Regina Coronation Park. 
As you well know, Mr. Speaker, this member has been elected 
now for the fourth time, and I think it’s a tremendous reflection 
of the confidence and respect that the constituents have of the 
member from Coronation Park, Regina Coronation Park, and I 
want to recognize his . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to take a moment this 
afternoon to also congratulate you, sir. Because in 1995, I was 
most disappointed, I must say, that I lost my good friends from 
east central Saskatchewan in the election of 1995 to the Liberal 
Party which were all around me, I must say, Mr. Speaker, those 
days. And truly the area of east central Saskatchewan was very 
much red with Liberal red. 
 
And it was difficult to watch what happened and the work that 
was developing around me. But through the course of the first 
two or three months, I had an opportunity to develop an 
extremely important and, I would suggest, significant working 
relationship with the opposition. But over that period of four 
years, I very much came to know you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Although I would have had preferred to have a NDP party 
colleague sharing my newspapers and my television time and 
my radio time, and would have preferred to have a colleague 
from the NDP Party standing on the steps of my constituency 
office doing a press release, as opposed to you, sir, I did in fact 
gain a very respectful insight into your work as a member. 
 
And today I want to say that this is an extremely important 
occasion for me to recognize you, sir, in the chair. Your cordial, 
polite, and gracious manner made it easy to speak with you on 
any occasion that we did business. And your commitment to try 
and work out issues, when political expedience in many cases 
could have been the course, but rather getting the job done and 
the task solved was more important than political credit. 
 

And that was, I have to say to you, sir, greatly appreciated. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I want to say, Mr. Speaker, your fair and 
non-personal performance on issues in debate was admired by 
us on this side of the House, and I know we all felt that way 
about it. And finally, your outstanding respect for this 
institution was ever present in your daily work. 
 
And so it is with high standards that you assume your new 
responsibility of Speaker, irrespective of your party politics 
which are different than mine. But your integrity, sir, precedes 
you and I look forward to serving the people of Saskatchewan 
in this Assembly with you as the Speaker in our chair. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1445) 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I am very grateful and 
humble to stand today in the Legislative Assembly and to thank 
the people of my constituency of Yorkton who have placed trust 
in me in serving them again in this Legislative Assembly. Mr. 
Speaker, this is now the third term for me representing the 
riding, and it is an unprecedented tribute. And I want to thank 
the people of Yorkton for that opportunity. 
 
Further, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the Premier for giving me 
the opportunity to serve on Executive Council. Because in the 
history of the riding of Yorkton, I am the first New Democratic 
member elected from the constituency of Yorkton to ever sit as 
a cabinet minister in a government. And so I am greatly pleased 
and appreciative of the opportunity that the Premier has given 
me to serve as a cabinet member of this fine government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, it is often said that few know 
that the constituency of Yorkton is really . . . and the city of 
Yorkton is really the third largest trading centre of this very 
great province, only third to Regina and Saskatoon. And in the 
past nine years we’ve had phenomenal growth in our city, 
which has been vibrant and bustling and really is in a boom 
period in our part of eastern Saskatchewan. 
 
And recently there was an article that was published by the 
Saskatchewan Trends Monitor which says that Yorkton is the 
fastest growing and the most progressive community to do 
business in. And, Mr. Speaker, that is clearly the case. 
 
Just to highlight for you a few things that have been happening 
in our constituency over the last couple of years, I want to say, 
Mr. Speaker, that we’ve had huge retail growth. Just recently 
we’ve seen the expansion — first the coming and now the 
expansion — of the new Canadian Tire store and recently the 
growth in the new Superstore. 
 
And just this year, in August of this year, we opened the new 
Wal-Mart. And recently an expansion of the retail restaurant 
business in that of the Melrose Place. 
 
And at the same time, Mr. Speaker, this government has been 



December 15, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 219 

active in promoting some of the value added in our part of 
Saskatchewan. Just recently we made a commitment this 
summer to the Harvest Meats-Fletcher consortium which are 
now going to be processing a larger amount of Saskatchewan 
pork right in our community. And they retail and wholesale it 
all across North America, Mr. Speaker. And I’m proud to say 
that our government has been able to provide financial 
assistance to the Harvest Meats-Fletcher consortium so that 
they might be able to proceed down that path. 
 
And further, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about how 
we’ve been able to assist the Popowich Milling, which today is 
milling oats in our part of Saskatchewan and selling milled oats 
and oats product all over the world. And this government has 
been involved in helping to provide some financial assistance 
for that to occur. 
 
And I want to give credit today to the people of Popowich 
Milling and the economic development committee and the 
chamber of commerce who’ve helped us grow this particular 
industry not only for our part of Saskatchewan, but for the 
province, and certainly across North America. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m also pleased with the kinds of 
accomplishments that we’ve been able to achieve in our small 
community over the last couple of years. As you know, Mr. 
Speaker, we had the opening of the renal dialysis in our health 
care centre, which is only the second location in the province 
where we had an extended renal dialysis services. 
 
And it was through the work that we did with the Regina Health 
District and with the Regina tertiary centre that we were able to 
develop this kind of a facility in our part of the province. And 
I’m really pleased that we are able to now provide services for 
renal dialysis patients closer to home. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in our part of the province we were able to initiate 
the first ever project of a joint school facility between the 
Catholic system and the public system, where we brought the K 
to 12 education program in under one roof, where we have a 
common library; where we have a common gymnasium; where 
we have the city involved in that process with some of their 
facilities — the very first joint project in K to 12 education in 
the province. 
 
And we’d look at doing more, Mr. Speaker, across the province 
in which this school and this project will be a model. 
 
Thirdly, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about the 
integration of the SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) 
property and the Highways building, where we’ve used again, a 
state-of-the-art facility, and integrated two programs within that 
particular complex. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, we have in our part of the province today 
the very first integration of a post-secondary program offered 
by the Parkland Regional College, where the Parkland Regional 
College joined with the regional high school some 25 years ago 
and developed the strategy in which we can use two facilities, 
not only to educate students between K to 12, but to do adult 
education. 
 
That model over the years, Mr. Speaker, has been adopted in 

other parts of the province, but we’re very pleased to have been 
one of the first communities in which we have been able to 
apply that kind of a model. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to also say this afternoon how proud I am 
to be associated with the administration of this government, 
because over the past nine years we’ve come a long way — a 
long, long way in spite of all of the criticisms that we’ve heard 
from across the way or from other folks. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today we have in this province got our financial 
footing stabilized. One that was a difficult task for us over a 
period of time, and not easy, and required a great deal of careful 
planning, sacrifice, and hardship. But when we look around the 
province today we see that Saskatchewan is very much on the 
move. 
 
At the same time, Mr. Speaker, we never reduced the 
expenditures in this province to the areas of social services, at 
the same time that we were making adjustments, Mr. Speaker, 
to cut the taxes. And we cut taxes in this province not only 
during election periods, but cut taxes in this province during 
periods between elections. 
 
At the same time, Mr. Speaker, we were able to adjust royalty 
structures in this province so that we could be competitive with 
our Alberta friends, as it relates to the oil and gas industry. 
 
But today, Mr. Speaker, in this province we have a new 
mandate, we have a new arrangement, and we have a new 
environment. And it amazes me, Mr. Speaker, from time to time 
when I listen over the last eight or nine days, of how critical the 
Saskatchewan Party is of this new coalition. 
 
And I ask, Mr. Speaker, why it is that I hear this kind of 
criticism. And while I think, Mr. Speaker, that some of the 
reasons exist in the fact that today the Saskatchewan Party, and 
in the past year and a half or two years, have been mainly 
driven by the idea of adopting or accepting or trying to achieve 
power. And what really seems to be at the craw of this whole 
issue, Mr. Speaker, is that they see that they have to now be in 
opposition for four more years. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I believe that this is a commentary to the 
Liberal Party in their decision to form the coalition party. 
Because the Liberal Party and the NDP Party have been said on 
a number of occasions today, that they now make up 60 per cent 
of the electorate, and that’s in fact what the electorate wants to 
see. The electorate wants to see a coalition that chose to make 
government work, Mr. Speaker, and not to defeat government. 
This is what . . . this is the thinking of the coalition, Mr. 
Speaker. And that’s what Saskatchewan wanted, Mr. Speaker 
— they want to see a working government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve been intrigued by the 
comments of the member from Cypress Hills because a few 
days ago the member stood up and he talked about how, in fact, 
he was the very first member elected to the Legislative 
Assembly as a Saskatchewan Party member, and I want, Mr. 
Speaker, to congratulate the member from Cypress Hills for 
being the very first member to be elected for the Saskatchewan 



220 Saskatchewan Hansard December 15, 1999 

Party. 
 
But he’s been critical of the . . . but there’s been criticism, Mr. 
Speaker, of the democratic process of which the coalition has 
come about. And those comments, Mr. Speaker, are reflected in 
all of the speeches that I’ve heard from across the way over the 
last couple of days. 
 
And what particularly struck me was the past members when 
they talked about the question of how in fact this arrangement 
came about. And I want to say to the member from Cypress, 
you should have not been number one. You should have been 
number 10 or number 11 in the election process if you in fact 
believe in democracy in the way in which this institution and 
members of this side of the House believe. 
 
Why is it, Mr. Speaker, that when the Saskatchewan Party was 
formed, that 10 of those members who made up this party 
didn’t exercise the democratic process and do what the member 
from Cypress did and get elected in each of their 
constituencies? 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think about my friend and colleague from 
the riding of Athabasca because he was in the same situation as 
many of the Saskatchewan Party members were. But the 
member from Athabasca took the high road, Mr. Speaker, and 
what he did is he went to the electorate. First he resigned his 
seat, and then the member went and said that he is going to run 
for the New Democratic Party. He sought the nomination and 
he canvassed and campaigned and won the nomination. 
 
And then he went, Mr. Speaker, to an election process and won 
his seat as the new member from Athabasca representing the 
New Democratic Party unlike the member, Mr. Speaker . . . 
unlike what happened with the Saskatchewan Party, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think some of the answer lies in the 
question of why it is that the members opposite didn’t proceed 
down this path? And I say, Mr. Speaker, that they were afraid 
during those early days that they might not be sitting in this 
Assembly and that’s the reason, Mr. Speaker, why they weren’t 
in fact running . . . exercising democratic process during that 
period of time. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, during the period of 1991 to today, in 1991 
the Saskatchewan Party, those members over there were in 
opposition in 1991. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1995 those members over there were in 
opposition. And in 1997, Mr. Speaker, those members changed 
their name. And Mr. Speaker, in 1999 they’re still in 
opposition, Mr. Speaker, and I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, 
come the election of 2002 or 2003, those members will still be 
in opposition, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I want to take a moment, Mr. Speaker, to 
talk a little bit about the agricultural issue, Mr. Speaker. The 
agricultural issue, Mr. Speaker, I have been committed to for all 
of my life, Mr. Speaker, and I’ve been a farmer, Mr. Speaker, 
for all of my life. 

Today, I’m still very much involved with the farming industry, 
Mr. Speaker. I’m still the guy who goes out and helps seed the 
crop and I’m still the guy who goes out and helps take the crop 
off, Mr. Speaker. And I’m still the guy who does some of the 
marketing of my crop as well, unlike what some of the 
members on that side of the House are able to say. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I know what it means, I know what it takes, 
Mr. Speaker, and the sweat that it takes today to make ends 
meet. And for 25 years in this province, Mr. Speaker, for 25 
years in this province, Mr. Speaker, I’ve watched farmers get 
bigger, Mr. Speaker, watched farms get bigger, and rural 
communities shrink in this province and across Canada, Mr. 
Speaker. And the number of farms over the last 25 years going 
from 80,000, Mr. Speaker, to today 56,000 farms. 
 
And I want to use my own experience, Mr. Speaker, to 
highlight some of what has happened in this province. 
 
My little community of Theodore, Saskatchewan from where I 
come from and the community from which the member from 
Canora, whose wife comes from, which is a wonderful 
community today. The community of Theodore is where his 
wife comes from. I don’t think she comes from Pelly, Mr. 
Speaker, but maybe there’s something I don’t know about. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I want to tell you that in 1968, Mr. Speaker, 
when I graduated from the high school in our little community 
of Theodore, we had three grocery stores and we had a 
lumberyard and we had two great big fuel bulk stations, Mr. 
Speaker. And we had a theatre and we had three service stations 
and we had five elevators in our community, Mr. Speaker, in 
1968. 
 
In our school we never . . . but in our school, .Mr. Speaker, we 
never had a gymnasium. We had an old hospital, Mr. Speaker, 
and we had an old rink that never had artificial ice and an old 
curling rink. And we had an old town hall, Mr. Speaker, and an 
old curling rink but in the ’80s, Mr. Speaker, we did a whole lot 
of things. 
 
In the ’80s, Mr. Speaker, we built a brand new health centre in 
1980 and we built a brand new complex and incorporated the 
rink and the skating rink and curling rink. And we also built the 
new gymnasium in the ’80s; the Tory administration built a new 
gymnasium onto the school. And, Mr. Speaker, today, 25 years 
later, in this little community of Theodore, our elevators are 
gone except for one. And the Pool has just indicated that they’re 
going to be closing it as well. It’s one of the 50 . . . one of the 
250 that they’re going to be closing down. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we now have artificial ice in our rinks, and a 
beautiful hall complex. But last year, Mr. Speaker, we couldn’t 
find a senior curling team any more in our community, in that 
little community of Theodore. 
 
And our hockey team was on the edge of not being able to play 
because they couldn’t find enough people to play in that 
community. And, Mr. Speaker, on a Sunday, Mr. Speaker, 
today in our little town of Theodore, I can’t buy a gallon of gas, 
Mr. Speaker. We have no more theatre in our small town of 
Theodore, Mr. Speaker, and we have no more lumber yard. 
 



December 15, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 221 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that throughout the past 25 years, 
Mr. Speaker, as politicians of this Assembly irrespective of 
which political party, Mr. Speaker, we’ve built a huge 
infrastructure in this province — a huge infrastructure. 
 
In the ’70s this government and this administration was 
involved in building some of that new infrastructure, Mr. 
Speaker. And in the ’80s, the members opposite built a lot of 
that infrastructure as well. And the member from Moosomin 
would be, if the member from Moosomin were able to stand up 
in the House, he’d tell you the kinds of expenditures that the 
Conservative government of the ’80s built. 
 
(1500) 
 
But today, Mr. Speaker, when we look around Saskatchewan 
we can’t support all of that infrastructure, Mr. Speaker, and not 
just in Saskatchewan but all across Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last summer I had the opportunity of travelling to 
British Columbia. And as I travelled on the edge of the town of 
Swift Current and the little city of Waldeck, I forgot to put gas 
in my vehicle, and as we were travelling along we needed to get 
some gas so we turned into the little town of Waldeck. And, Mr. 
Speaker, in the middle of the day, at 1 o’clock in the afternoon, 
I couldn’t buy a gallon of gas in the little town of Waldeck. 
 
And as we drove on, Mr. Speaker, and travelled to British 
Columbia, on the Highway No. 1 which we’ve never travelled 
for many years, Mr. Speaker, and over a period of 15 years 
many of the shops along the No. 1 in some of those small 
communities no longer exist. And, Mr. Speaker, I want to say to 
you that this trend has been happening now in this province and 
this country and in North America for better than 25 years. 
 
And what’s the case, Mr. Speaker, the rationale for this, Mr. 
Speaker? Because when we look at our farming community, we 
used to have a farm, and farms used to be a quarter section 
farms, Mr. Speaker, of 1965. And today those farms, Mr. 
Speaker, are half a township, of which people own. 
 
Equipment is huge today, Mr. Speaker, huge. And, Mr. 
Speaker, there are 300 or 400 . . . 30 or 40 . . . 300 or 400 
horsepower equipment today that’s used to work these fields, 
Mr. Speaker. And 50- and 60- and 70-foot equipment that they 
pull, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the Saskatchewan landscape, Mr. Speaker, has changed in 
a major way. Today in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, it’s hard to 
find, soon, a wooden elevator. Most of our elevators are going 
to be concrete with high throughput. 
 
And many of our branch lines are gone, Mr. Speaker. And when 
you look at the transportation of the grain system today, in a 
farmyard you find the B-train or a large semi-trailer, as opposed 
to the old half-ton or the old one-tons that used to haul the grain 
from our farmyards . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . On the cost in 
hopper boxes, what the member from Canora says, which 
Canora-Pelly says — which is absolutely true. 
 
And the cost, Mr. Speaker, of the farming operation today is 
astronomical. Because today, Mr. Speaker, this is big business. 
It’s a million dollar business to operate our farms today. 

And that’s why, in the last couple of months and the other day, 
last Monday, in this Assembly, the discussion and the debate as 
it rages across Saskatchewan today, is the most important 
debate that we’re going to have in terms of the future of the 
agricultural industry. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this debate is about the future of the 
agricultural industry. It’s about emphasizing that 450,000 
Saskatchewan taxpayers, Mr. Speaker, cannot support the 
industry in which I have made a living in as well for the last 25, 
30 years. And, Mr. Speaker, this is an important discussion 
today about how the agricultural industry is going to survive 
today in Canada. 
 
And let there not be any mistake that this issue requires full 
commitment, Mr. Speaker, of all Saskatchewan political parties. 
And, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party should not believe 
in fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that they’re the champions of 
agriculture, Mr. Speaker. They should not believe that they’re 
the champions of agriculture. Because last session in this 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker, it was that very — Mr. Deputy Speaker 
— it was that very party who talked about how we should not 
be involved in AIDA. And they were emphatic about how we 
should not be involved in AIDA. And then they pressed us and 
said, you need to be involved in AIDA. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, at the end of the day, we’re into AIDA, which 
we said all along was a flawed program for Saskatchewan 
people. On many occasions, Mr. Speaker, we said that. And 
today, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party stand up and say 
we should be in AIDA. And so, Mr. Speaker, collectively we’re 
in AIDA today. 
 
And I want to say to the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, that 
there is not one political party alone that can win this 
agricultural battle. And we should not, Mr. Speaker, politicize 
this issue, because there is no way in Saskatchewan’s history 
that any political party can win this agriculture debate on its 
own. It requires the consolidation and the co-operation of every 
party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to you that 
we’ve done a lot over the last couple of months in trying to 
bring this issue to the forefront. Our trek to Ottawa in which the 
members opposite, and the coalition, and members from this 
side of the House, and the Agriculture minister were involved in 
trying to keep this agenda at the forefront. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the most important message that we need to 
continue to send to Ottawa, is that Ottawa needs to help us, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, because this is a national issue. This is a issue 
that will require the assistance of all of Canadians. And 
collectively, in this province, we are going to work together to 
ensure that we make that message clear to Ottawa in our search 
for the $1.3 billion, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I want to take a few moments, Mr. Speaker, to return to the 
taxation piece. The entire campaign, Mr. Speaker, of the 
Saskatchewan Party, was to reduce taxes. And the member from 
Saskatchewan Rivers, I noted, talked about that this shouldn’t 
be a gradual approach to reduction of taxes in this province. 



222 Saskatchewan Hansard December 15, 1999 

What there should be, Mr. Speaker, is that this should be one 
huge reduction. 
 
And I know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this is a new member of 
the Assembly. And of course he will in time realize that in order 
to provide better services in this province, and enhance services 
in this province, in order to provide tax relief to the people of 
Saskatchewan, and in order to continue to balance a budget of 
$4.7 billion of which $750 million added to that is the interest, 
will require an approach where taxation needs to be done in a 
graduated, balanced fashion with all of the other aspects the 
Saskatchewan people will be demanding, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that today we have a 
$11.4 billion debt in this province and we still continue to pay 
$750 million in interest. And we need to address all of the tax 
issues. Clearly we need to address all of the tax issues in this 
province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
We have an interest to reduce the personal income tax, and we 
have an interest to reduce the sales tax in this province, and we 
have an interest to reduce the property tax in this province. But 
we also need to ensure on the other side, Mr. Speaker, that we 
have good education, and that we have good health care, and 
that we have good social services, and that we have good roads 
in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we need to continue to recognize that $4.7 billion is the 
amount of dollars we have today to work with in order to ensure 
that we can meet all of those expectations. 
 
And I’ve listened with some interest, Mr. Speaker, to question 
period and the theme of question period. And what I’ve heard in 
the last eight days, Mr. Speaker, is a great deal of call for 
greater expenditure. More money to come for tax relief is what I 
hear from the other side of the House. More money for 
highways, and more money for health care, and more money for 
farm support, Mr. Speaker, and more money for education. 
 
This is the same kind of call, Mr. Speaker, that we heard from 
the previous opposition that were here, but with very little, very 
little, Mr. Deputy Speaker, thought about how in fact we’re 
going to balance that approach and ensure that that spending . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say that we know what the agenda is, 
Mr. Speaker. The agenda from the other side of the House is the 
same old Conservative politics that we’ve heard for many years 
from that particular side of the House, and we continue to hear 
it, Mr. Speaker. And we hear it in the issues of the privatization 
agenda, Mr. Speaker. The privatization agenda continues to be 
the number one driver for that party across the way. And we’ve 
heard it from the member from Kindersley where he’s talked 
about how in fact we’re going to be privatizing health care. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in this particular province, on this side of the 
House, we don’t support the privatization of health care, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — And on that side of the House, Mr. 
Speaker, we’ve heard from the member from Saltcoats, and 
we’ve heard, Mr. Speaker, from the member from Kindersley as 

well, talking about how in fact if they were sitting here we 
would have fewer Crowns. 
 
The privatization of the Crowns, Mr. Speaker, is very much on 
the agenda of the Saskatchewan Party. And if they had their 
opportunity, Mr. Speaker, Crown privatization would be very 
much in the forefront, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Sell the assets, Mr. Speaker, is what they talk about. In 
campaign ’99 we heard the new Conservative Party talking 
about pitting rich people against poor people. We heard about 
Aboriginal people against non-Aboriginal people. They talked 
about rural folks against urban folks. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that’s not what this side of the House 
represents. This side of the House in government, Mr. Speaker, 
is about working together, is about building communities, and 
about making sure that Saskatchewan people are well served in 
a fashion in which they’ve grown to respect, Mr. Speaker, and 
that’s what this government is about. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to take a few minutes 
to talk about the health care scene. Today there is an attack on 
our health care system, and there’s criticism on a daily basis, 
Mr. Speaker. And I know a bit about this because it’s been the 
continuous theme, Mr. Deputy Speaker, from the members 
opposite. 
 
And they talk about things like people who are waiting for 
surgery. They talk about priorities, of course, of waiting lists. 
And they say that waiting lists are too long, and staff are 
overworked, and there are shortages, Mr. Speaker. And I say, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, from this side of the House, that some of 
those criticisms that the members opposite bring forward are 
clearly correct. And that we’re working on solutions, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, to try to find ways to reduce all of those 
issues. 
 
But the reality is that we need to pay attention to this system, 
Mr. Speaker. The health care budget already assumes almost 50 
per cent of the entire expenditure of this government — 48 per 
cent, Mr. Speaker, is what health care now takes from the 
treasury. And it leaves the rest of the budget to do things, Mr. 
Speaker. I believe it’s 42 per cent. It’s 42 per cent, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. And it leaves the rest of the expenditures to be dealt 
for roads, and for education, and for municipal government, and 
for social services, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And nobody wants to see these facilities or services 
consolidated or rationalized when I hear the members from the 
other side speak. And the member from Carrot River, I was 
most interested, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in what he talked about. 
And not to pick on him, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but just to simply 
look at what he said in his Throne Speech address about what’s 
happening in the Carrot River hospital. 
 
Now little credit was given to centres of excellence that are in 
his own district, Mr. Speaker. No attention was given to the 
centres of excellence from the member from Carrot River. Now 
why didn’t the member from Carrot River stand up and talk 
about the hospital and the health care services in Nipawin? 



December 15, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 223 

I know why he didn’t talk about the health care services in 
Nipawin, because Nipawin community hospital in this province, 
Mr. Speaker, is one of the finest community hospitals anywhere 
to be found in this province. And that’s not what the member 
from Carrot River would be talking about, because he doesn’t 
accentuate the positives that happen in this province, and nor do 
any of the members on the other side of the House. 
 
In Nipawin, Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, today there are 12 
physicians that are practising there. And they’re connected to 
the tertiary centre of Saskatoon. And when you look at the 
questions that came from the member from Tisdale, who . . . or 
the member from Melfort who represents Tisdale-Melfort, I 
haven’t heard him stand up in this House today and talk about 
the award winning physician form Tisdale, Saskatchewan. Not 
once has he talked about that. 
 
Not once has the member from Melfort stood and talked about 
the number of physicians who come to his region on a daily 
basis from the tertiary centre of Saskatoon, and provide services 
close to home. Not once have I heard him stand up and talk 
about that. 
 
Why? Because the intent of the members on the other side of 
the House and the member whom I point to is about 
fearmongering that the health system isn’t any good, and never 
talk about all of the positive things that are happening. 
 
When I toured the Melfort hospital several years ago, Mr. 
Speaker, I found several people who were there receiving 
chemotherapy for the first time in that environment, very first 
time in the Melfort hospital. And that is an indication of all of 
the services that are happening in rural Saskatchewan today in a 
major way, of which the members opposite provide no credit to. 
 
The third dialysis system in the province, renal dialysis, close to 
home community service today in the Melfort constituency in 
the community of Tisdale. You . . . (inaudible) . . . hear of the 
member from Melfort standing up and talking about the positive 
services that are provided in his constituency in that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Never do I hear anybody stand up on that side of the House and 
talk about the services of the tertiary centres of Saskatoon and 
Regina. In Saskatoon today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to tell 
you that we train some of the finest physicians and nurses that 
this country has ever seen — ever seen. 
 
(1515) 
 
And our physicians and nurses today are capable of working 
anywhere in Canada or North America, Mr. Speaker, because 
we provide in that community the very best training 
opportunities for people anywhere in North America. But I 
never hear members opposite talking about that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say to you that we have many challenges 
today in the health care system, and I remember when I . . . And 
some of the rationale, Mr. Speaker, as to why we’re having 
some difficulties in North America today and sustaining and 
retaining people within the health care system is because it’s 
difficult for people to recognize that they can have a logistic 
and full practice in some of these communities. 

I remember a visit, Mr. Speaker, that I had to the community of 
Moosomin in 1998. On that occasion I met a physician who had 
just arrived, Mr. Deputy Speaker, from South Africa. He’d just 
been there for four months. And the first words that he uttered 
to me is that he was going to be moving very soon. 
 
Now I don’t know whether or not the physician has moved or 
not, but he had told me that he was moving down the road to the 
community of Indian Head. And the reason that he was moving 
to Indian Head, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is because where he came 
from he did two and three surgeries a day, and when he arrived 
at the small, little Moosomin hospital, where they did have an 
anesthesiologist, the rationale was that he couldn’t do surgeries 
every day. In fact in the four-month period that he was there he 
didn’t do one surgery. 
 
And so he said he was moving his practice to Indian Head, 
moving his family to Indian Head, so that he in fact could 
practice every day in Regina and do his surgical procedures in 
Regina and still maintain his family practice. 
 
So in spite, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of all the critics, I think today 
when we look around North America we still have the best 
medicare program anywhere in the world, right here in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — And every day people from across the 
country, across the world, still come to Saskatchewan and look 
at the kind of stability and the kind of work that we do in the 
medicare system right here in our own province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s lots to do today in the health care system, 
and we’re going to work at improving our waiting times and 
we’re going to strengthen, as the Throne Speech talks about, 
regional centres across the province. 
 
And in fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re going to provide some 
assistance for ambulance services. And I want to say to you, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I challenge people in this Assembly to 
tell me, where in the world — where in the world we have a 
better health care system then we have right here in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Throne Speech is 
a document and a blueprint for stability and growth and jobs 
and employment. And it’s about accessibility and enhancement 
of the post-secondary system, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So that we 
can provide the best opportunities for our young people today, 
who are competing in the global world for jobs. 
 
And that’s what our education system is intended to do, so that 
they can provide students today with opportunities right here in 
Saskatchewan, but at the same time where they can compete 
with other students from all across the world for good jobs, and 
well-paying jobs. 
 
A better education society, Mr. Deputy Speaker, makes for 
stronger families and it makes for stronger communities and it 
makes for stronger nations. And we’ll have to have more 



224 Saskatchewan Hansard December 15, 1999 

emphasis, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on early intervention of which 
the Throne Speech talks about, and we talk a lot about 
community schools. And last year, the implementation of the 
role of the school. 
 
Because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have today a changing family 
dynamic in this country; and where we have more hunger, and 
we have more violence, and we have more abuse, and more 
dropouts within our educational system. And the whole idea is 
to integrate those services in a much fuller way. And that’s part 
of what the Throne Speech talks about. 
 
We talk about safer communities, where we are going to have 
more police officers. But now just for enforcement, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, but we’re going to see more police officers involved in 
education programs. And on many occasions today as I 
travelled last year as the Education minister of the province, to 
find police officers from municipal forces or RCMP (Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police) members within the gymnasiums of 
schools involved with kids playing soccer or basketball or 
badminton. 
 
This is part of what the safer communities in the integration of 
more police officers is about. Police officers working with Big 
Brothers and Sisters organizations, and boys and girls clubs, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. And that’s what safer communities mean 
to us and to me on this side of the House. 
 
And a greater emphasis and inclusion of our Aboriginal 
citizens, Mr. Deputy Speaker, serving on boards and 
commissions — not as tokens and advisory people, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, but people who have a voice, and who can help craft 
and mould policy for Saskatchewan which is reflective of what 
the Aboriginal and Metis community folks require. That’s part 
of what this Throne Speech talks about. And not discriminating 
but including and providing opportunities for people for jobs. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is a brand new day in our 
province with a coalition government that’s listening and is 
going to respond to the issues that Saskatchewan people have 
asked us to respond to. And it’s not going to discriminate, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. We’re not going to be isolating or segregating 
rural from urban or people who live in the North. That’s not 
what this government is going to do. And we’re not going to 
discriminate against people who are poor or people who are 
wealthy. 
 
And the biggest challenge that we’ll have, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
over the next four years of a coalition government, is to show 
the difference between the . . . to show the difference to the 
Saskatchewan people between the Conservative philosophy of 
our friends across the way, of the ideologies of division and 
exclusion and privatization versus, Mr. Deputy Speaker, ours of 
inclusion, competitiveness, and social democracy. 
 
And that’s why today people in Saskatchewan appreciate the 
fact that the coalition government, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 
working — is working — Mr. Deputy Speaker. And that’s why 
four years from now 50 per cent of those people who are sitting 
on that side of the House won’t be here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
won’t be here. 
 
And I say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is why today I’m pleased 

to support the Speech from the Throne and congratulate the 
member from Moose Jaw Wakamow as the mover, and the 
seconder from Saskatoon Sutherland. And I, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, will be supporting the Speech from the Throne when 
the vote comes forward later this day. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me a great 
deal of pleasure to deliver my maiden speech as a member of 
the Legislative Assembly representing the constituency of 
Redberry Lake. 
 
On election day, September 16, 1999, Saskatchewan people 
took part in a process that many of us take for granted — an 
election. An election to form a new provincial Government of 
Saskatchewan. Our form of government is called a 
constitutional monarchy which has evolved out of and is based 
on the British form of parliamentary democracy. 
 
If I may quote then Prime Minister Sir Winston Churchill 
addressing the House of Commons, November 11, 1947: 
 

Many forms of government have been tried and will be 
tried in this world of sin and woe. No one pretends that 
democracy is perfect or all wise. Indeed, it has been said 
that democracy is the worst form of government, except for 
all the others that have been tried from time to time. 

 
Mr. Speaker, on September 16 I along with all other members 
of the Saskatchewan legislature were given the honour, the 
privilege, and the gift. The gift given to us on election day was 
the right to be a Member of the Legislative Assembly. The call 
to the legislature is a call to public service — service to our 
country, service to our province, and service to our 
constituency. I intend to do my utmost to help better the lives 
and prospects of the residents of Redberry Lake constituency. 
 
At this time I’d like to thank my predecessor, Mr. Walter Jess, 
for his many years of service to the legislature and the 
constituency of Redberry Lake. I wish him well in his future 
endeavours. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the democratic process has always fascinated me. 
I have followed election campaigns and politics all of my life, 
but two years ago with the formation of the Saskatchewan Party 
I saw something that was different. I saw a party that had a 
different way of looking at the issues of the day. I did not 
hesitate to join and work for a better way, a better province. 
 
Regardless which political stripe we came from, we have all 
experienced an incredible process, a process called democracy. 
An election campaign, in my case as well as many of us, a 
campaign which has been going on unofficially for many years. 
During the last two years I have had to take precious time away 
from my family. 
 
Thank you to my wife Cindy and children Lacey, Marshall, and 
Alexandra, who kept the home fires burning while I was away 
working at the best enterprise a person could have — politics. 
 



December 15, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 225 

And a thank you to my business partners and family: my mother 
and father, Helen and Frank Weekes; brothers, Doug and Owen 
Weekes, who have grudgingly put up with my never-ending 
lapses from the farm and business. 
 
But to have enjoyed a successful campaign like I did, there are 
many other thank you’s that needs to be bestowed. 
 
First to the people of Redberry Lake constituency for putting 
their trust in me on election day and to the Owens from 
Battleford-Baljennie area. David, who was my first supporter 
who later served as vice-president of the Saskatchewan Party 
Redberry Lake Constituency Association, who also volunteered 
his wife Dianne. First Diane becoming the constituency 
association treasurer and later becoming my invaluable business 
manager. Thank you. 
 
To Leo and Agnes Lafreniere from Mayfair— Leo serving as 
second vice-president. His wife Agnes is not well and we hope 
for the best. Also to Allen Shakotko from the Biggar area who 
serves as secretary to the association. 
 
Thank you to the many directors of the Saskatchewan Party 
Redberry Lake Constituency Association which includes Mr. 
and Mrs. Chester Miller from Maymont; Philip from Langham; 
Jack McMillan and Shirley Dupuis from the Biggar area; 
Genevieve Russell from Mayfair; Mr. and Mrs. Art Meister 
from Radisson; Al Pashovitz from Sonningdale; also the 
Parsons family from Leask; Mr. and Mrs. Art Dunlop and Mr. 
and Mrs. Allen Sparrow from Vanscoy; Ken Cheveldayoff from 
Saskatoon, and the Whitbread family from Borden; and Mrs. 
and Mrs. Ernie Crowder from Blaine Lake. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my last thank you must go out to Mr. Everett 
Dnistransky who must take much credit for my success on 
election night. Everett believed in the Saskatchewan Party and 
put his efforts and talents first to organizing the constituency 
executive by being its first president, and then serving as my 
campaign manager. 
 
Everett died suddenly in a car accident on September 30. We 
will miss his stories and insight into various topics. His 
knowledge of the history of the people and the community was 
of great help and he will be sorely missed. I wish his widow, 
Evelyn, the best. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Redberry Lake constituency is a unique area in 
Saskatchewan. It covers the area between Saskatoon and the 
Battlefords. It includes the Pike Lake area, which has a 
beautiful park, many small holdings, and mixed farmland. 
Highway No. 7 crosses this part of the constituency, which 
includes the towns of Vanscoy and Delisle. 
 
West of Saskatoon on No. 14 Highway, the communities of 
Asquith and Perdue are located. The constituency boundaries 
continue north of Biggar and include the small farming 
communities of Arelee, Sonningdale, and Beljennie. 
 
The constituency is divided by the North Saskatchewan River 
and the Yellowhead Highway that connects Saskatoon and the 
Battlefords. Communities along the Yellowhead include 
Langham, Borden, Radisson, and Maymont. The constituency 
straddles the Battlefords and includes the town of Rabbit Lake; 

the towns of Richard, Mayfair, Hafford, and Blaine Lake 
populate the northern part of the constituency, and the northeast 
where the communities of Marcelin, Leask. Mistawasis, and 
Muskeg First Nations are found, which brings to one of 
Canada’s national treasures. 
 
Redberry Lake recently received international recognition as a 
globally significant Important Bird Area, or IBA, joining 
BirdLife International’s global network of IBA sites. The site 
dedication was part of the Redberry pelican project’s 10th 
anniversary celebrations. The IBA program is being delivered 
in Canada by Canadian Nature Federation and Bird Studies 
Canada. As part of a Natural Legacy 2000 initiative the 
program received $1.25 million from the Canadian Millennium 
Partnership Program. 
 
Redberry Lake provides an important nesting habitat for a 
number of species including the American white pelican, the 
nationally endangered piping plover, the white-winged scoter, 
and the double crested cormorant. 
 
Recent estimates indicate that nearly 2 per cent of the entire 
world’s American Pelican population resides at Redberry Lake. 
It has been suggested that the population of white-winged 
scoters found at the site is the single largest breeding 
concentration in the world. More than 200 birders and nature 
lovers from the surrounding communities turned out to 
celebrate the 10th anniversary and IBA. 
 
“We all share a common objective — to develop sustainable 
approaches to economic activity that maintain a balance 
between the aspirations of our community and the long-term 
integrity of the Redberry Lake area,” said Peter Kingsmill, 
director general of the Redberry pelican project. The project has 
previously received the Governor General of Canada’s 
conservation award and the Tourism for Tomorrow award from 
British Airways. 
 
The Redberry Lake project in the constituency has employed 
499 residents in tourism-related industries. There are 62 tourism 
businesses, attractions, and events as well as $17.6 million 
spent directly by travellers in the Redberry Lake constituency in 
1997. 
 
I congratulate the people of Redberry Lake constituency for 
their ingenuity and dedication to this internationally recognized 
biosphere reserve. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am a third generation Canadian and a third 
generation farmer. My grandparents, like many people, left 
Europe in the early part of the 20th century to escape war, 
tyranny, and poverty. They came to the Prairies with a hope of 
freedom and a desire to tame a new land. They survived many 
obstacles including the Great Depression. 
 
(1530) 
 
Today Saskatchewan farmers through no fault of their own need 
help urgently because agriculture is in crisis. The future of 
many family farms in the Prairie economy depends on the 
decisions that are made in Ottawa. Low world agriculture 
commodity prices are caused by excess production of grains 
and oilseeds worldwide due, in no small part, to continued uses 



226 Saskatchewan Hansard December 15, 1999 

of subsidies in the European Union and the United States. 
 
Domestic support by national governments in the European 
Union and the US (United States) are several times the level of 
support to the Canadian farmers. For every dollar of income, 
European Union wheat farmers receive 56 cents from 
government subsidies; American farmers receive 38 cents; 
Canadian wheat farmers receive 9 cents. 
 
Federal policy changes in Canada have negatively influenced 
farm incomes in Saskatchewan. A $320 million decrease in 
freight subsidy took effect in August 1995 and the loss of 
railway productivity sharing is costing Saskatchewan producers 
an estimated hundred million dollars annually. Freight costs 
have nearly tripled since ’94-95. 
 
The negotiations at the World Trade Organization level must 
put our producers on a level playing field internationally by 
eliminating the trade-distorting subsidies of other governments. 
However, in the short and medium term, the federal government 
must come to the support of the family farm and the Prairie 
economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1992 the Saskatchewan government tore a 
gaping hole in the farm safety net when they cancelled the 
GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) program and never 
replaced it. Now thousands of family farms have fallen through 
the hole in our safety net. 
 
The AIDA program was an ill-conceived plan which was too 
little, too late for the family farms of Saskatchewan and 
Manitoba. I agree with the proposal to negotiate with the federal 
government to withdraw Saskatchewan funds from the national 
AIDA program and use its share of the funding allocated for 
AIDA to top up the NISA (Net Income Stabilization Account) 
accounts of farmers in the province. 
 
The Saskatchewan government should supplement the existing 
provincial funding with the additional money they have 
contributed within the federal government’s latest AIDA 
funding announcement. 
 
Let’s not lose sight of the necessity for a long-term safety net 
for Prairie farmers, a safety net that is affordable, that provides 
protection against natural disasters as well as low commodity 
prices. I encourage the federal and provincial government to 
begin developing that long-term safety net immediately. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Prairie family farm is indicative to 
Saskatchewan as timber and fish are to the West Coast, the 
French language and culture to Quebec, and timber and fish and 
cultural heritage is to the East Coast. 
 
The Saskatchewan farmer is the most productive, efficient, 
capable, diversified producer in the world. Our deal on the 
Canadian federation is to produce high quality, affordable food 
for the rest of Canada. The contract and obligation is when the 
Saskatchewan farmer is faced with weather-related disasters or 
a world subsidy war, the federal government is there to help. 
Well the Saskatchewan family farm has done its part, now it’s 
time for the federal government to uphold its part of the 
commitment. 
 

The federal government must provide an agriculture trade 
equalization payment of $1 billion to Saskatchewan family 
farms to address the agriculture crisis now facing our farms, our 
rural communities and urban communities, and our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I watch my children growing up, I ponder their 
future. Will they have the chance to remain in Saskatchewan, 
living and working in agriculture? The debate taking place and 
the decisions that will be made by the provincial and federal 
governments in the months to come will answer that question. 
 
I, as a parent, a farmer, a business person, and as a member of 
the Legislative Assembly, hope and pray that the answer will be 
yes. Yes to agriculture and yes to the future of our youth in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I did support the amendment to the motion put 
forward by the Leader of the Opposition and I will not be 
voting in favour of the Speech from the Throne. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
I rise with great pleasure today to engage in the Throne Speech 
debate, the first Throne Speech put forward by this 
Liberal-NDP coalition. 
 
And before I take the time to speak about the substance of the 
Throne Speech debate, I would like to first of all acknowledge 
some people that are very important. First of all, I would like to 
acknowledge my family and first of all, my wife, Carole. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — It’s a true . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The 
members opposite obviously have met Carole before because 
they are very, very, very graciously acknowledging her 
presence here in the House in the gallery and welcoming her 
here. And I know she very much appreciates that. 
 
But I got to warn you as well for the members on the other side 
of the House, I’m the nice guy in this outfit; she’s the one that 
really is hard on you every time that you make mistakes or 
things of that nature. And so don’t get that sweet, demure, 
appearance of hers, don’t let that fool you. Underneath it all is a 
tenacious politician. And I want to warn you so that when it 
happens in the future, you can’t say that you weren’t warned. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, seriously for a moment. Everyone, 
everyone in this profession of politics, has to rely on the support 
of their spouse and their family. If there’s anything that I’ve 
found in the last four years when I’ve had the honour to serve 
the constituents of Melfort-Tisdale, the most difficult thing that 
I’ve found over that period of time was how to build and keep 
and maintain the relationship with your family. 
 
This job takes you away from home a great deal. It puts a lot of 
pressure and stress on all of us as members of this Assembly. 
And it is indeed a great challenge to maintain that family 
relationship that is way more important than anything that we’re 
going to do in this House. 
 
And if I had any advice to any new members on either side of 



December 15, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 227 

the House, it would be to never forget the fundamental values 
that brought you here in the first place. And the most 
fundamental of that value is the relationship of you and your 
family. Never forget it, never jeopardize it, because this job is 
worth a lot of things — it’s a great and singular honour — but 
isn’t worth jeopardizing those relationships. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the other relationship 
that is extremely important that you find early on in this type of 
career, is the relationship to the people that you have the honour 
to serve. 
 
You know, after election day each and every one of us stopped 
being a partisan politician in our constituency, if you like, 
because we now do no longer represent the people that voted 
for us only. You represent everyone. 
 
And in most instances there is a good number of people that did 
not support us, and that’s democracy. But at the end of the day 
when you’re elected and you become a Member of the 
Legislative Assembly, you are responsible to represent each and 
every citizen in your constituency and that is indeed a singular 
honour and a relationship that is important to remember. 
 
We’re partisan people. It’s the nature of the British 
parliamentary system that brought us here, that we have certain 
beliefs and certain values that we hold and they’re not the same 
as everyone else in this House. And we have the duty and the 
responsibility to advocate those principles. But when we 
represent the people in our constituencies, supporters or not, 
we’re bound by our honour and bound by the system to 
represent them all to the best of our ability. And that is another 
relationship that is important to remember and important to 
preserve. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, on September 16 I had the great pleasure 
and honour of being given the mandate by the constituents of 
Melfort-Tisdale to come back to Regina to represent them in 
this twenty-fourth legislature. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 
certainly want to thank and acknowledge all of the people of 
Melfort-Tisdale constituency. 
 
You know, in the past four years I recall many, many times 
where I’ve met new people in the area. And where you end up 
. . . one of the most beautiful and wonderful things and 
opportunities that you have when you’re out campaigning, is 
you go to people’s homes. You go to their farms, you go to their 
homes in towns and villages, and you talk to them over their 
kitchen table or on their doorstep about the issues and the things 
that are affecting their lives particularly. 
 
And as the member from Yorkton said, not all those things are 
doom and gloom all across any constituency. There are a lot of 
good things happening. In most instances I’m also obliged to 
respond or to report is they’re happening in spite of this 
government, not necessarily because of it. 
 
It’s because of the individual initiatives, the hard work and the 
time and the talent and the commitment that people all across 
this province have for this province. And you know, one of the 
things that is really wonderful to do is to stand on their doorstep 

and share in the pride that they have. 
 
And I know many of the members on both sides of the House, 
when they’re campaigning, they meet people who are proud to 
show them their farm or their shop or their pictures of their 
children or grandchildren. They’re proud to show them 
something that they built, something that they have done, 
something that they’ve accomplished. 
 
All of these things are events that we run into time and time 
again as we meet and build a relationship that we have with our 
constituents. And it always is a great source of comfort, and it is 
something that energizes me, is to meet the people of the 
Melfort-Tisdale constituency and to understand how 
fundamentally wonderful the people of Saskatchewan are. 
 
There are people that have difficulties in their lives. There are 
people that have challenges — if they’re health or education or 
financial or any of those sorts of things — that come up. And 
that’s true. And very often, they’re the people that we see in our 
offices — the people that are having problems. And it tends, if 
you let it happen to you, it’ll tend to give you a bit of a jaded 
sense of what this province is all about. 
 
And we have to understand that this province, and in particular 
my constituents, are wonderful people. They’re people that will 
reach out to their friends and neighbours. They’re people that 
care about each other. They’re people that have a great deal of 
pride and satisfaction in all of the good things that this province 
has to offer and all of the good things that this province not only 
has for its people and its citizens, but can offer Canada and the 
world. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s important that we keep these 
things in balance and in perspective in building and maintaining 
the relationship with our constituents. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, when you talk to the people in your 
area there are the prideful things that I’ve mentioned but 
increasingly, when I look back over the four years and looking 
from the 1995 to the 1999 campaign, I’m kind of concerned that 
I detected more of a tone of concern in 1999 than there was in 
1995. 
 
Up in our part of the world, we have had a good number of 
extremely profitable and bumper crops in the grain sector. It has 
been an area that has been blessed by some of the richest soil in 
the country or anywhere in the world, perhaps. We’ve had 
plentiful and bountiful rainfall when we’ve needed it, and the 
crops have been very good. And you know, with that all, the 
people in our area probably are in better shape than a lot of 
areas of this province in 1999 facing the new century. Because 
they’ve had this kind of a cushion to work from. 
 
But a number of people that I talked to on their farms in this fall 
campaign, were saying to me, you know there’s something 
wrong with this picture in agriculture. Here we are, we’ve got 
three bumper corps happening and this particular crop is going 
to be the best crop that I’ve ever grown in my entire career on 
the farm. And some of the people saying it were second and 
third generation farmers, so they were saying a lot. And they 
said, you know I think we’re going to break even this year with 
this crop that we’ve got. And they followed by saying, you 
know something is fundamentally wrong when you’ve got to 
grow the very best crop of your entire life — or the entire 



228 Saskatchewan Hansard December 15, 1999 

history of this farm — and the best you’re going to do is break 
even. 
 
Now it might have bought the farmers in our area this 
bounteous crops that we’ve had; it probably buys most of them 
another year on the farm. But what happens next year, and I’m 
not speaking gloom and doom, because you know what’s 
inevitably going to happen is you’re not going to keep getting 
one crop better than next year after year after year. That’s just 
simply not the nature of agriculture. 
 
So what happens if this cycle of booming, bumper crops breaks. 
We’re in deep trouble. And what people don’t understand and 
the comments that are made and said, well these programs are 
not being focused enough. And they’re not reaching out to just 
the needed people because surely all farmers are not in 
difficulty. Well, Mr. Speaker, with the conditions that we have 
today all farmers are in difficulty, including those that have 
been two and three generations in existence in one family. It’s 
simply not good enough for us to not give our all-out effort. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the 
reasons — one of the reasons that the Saskatchewan Party was 
as successful as it was right across this province is the fact that 
we have understood this for some time. 
 
A year or two ago when the Premier was hosting the Premiers 
of Canada in Saskatoon, we were saying in this Assembly that 
agriculture is in difficulty. We need to get the issues facing 
agriculture on the national agenda. And when the Premier was 
the host of it, and the individual that set the agenda, you know 
where agriculture was on the agenda? It wasn’t there. It wasn’t 
there at all. 
 
And so when the members opposite say, oh, we understand 
what’s going on, the only reason you even have a clue of what’s 
going on is we’ve been telling you it for the last two years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to turn as well to 
some other areas, and I know that the time is drawing nearer 
when we have to vote on the budget speech. So I want to move 
along in the Speech from the Throne — my previous 
responsibilities are overtaking me here — are showing through. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am now . . . have the great pleasure to be the 
critic for the Department of Health. And what we have been 
doing, since it’s our assignment, is trying to meet with as many 
people involved in the whole health care field as we can. 
 
We’ve met with doctors, we’ve met with nurses, we’ve met 
with licensed practical nurses, we’ve met with the district health 
boards. We’re meeting with people that are involved and 
concerned about specific diseases and issues; and we’re going 
to continue to do that as we build our knowledge and 
experience about the issues facing the health care field. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would be remiss if I didn’t say it’s a huge 

issue of fundamental importance to everyone in this province. 
And I wish I could say that you could snap your fingers and 
offer to the minister a solution that would solve all the problems 
in health care. It’s not that simple, I understand that. But you 
know there’s a fundamental problem in the attitude of the way 
this government has approached the challenge of health care. 
 
You know the former minister of Health, the member from 
Yorkton, was sitting here railing on about the fact that we never 
say anything good. Well, I’m about to say some good things 
about the health care field and again I’m not going to single out 
anybody for credit or blame. 
 
But there are a lot of good things that are happening in health 
care. Everyday people come to the health care system and 
receive some level of service. For some, it certainly is not good 
enough; for some and for many, too many, the waiting time 
issue is one that has to be dealt with. 
 
But when you talk to a lot of the people in the profession they 
are working very, very hard to deliver the very best service they 
can in very difficult conditions. And the frustration that happens 
is when they see the Department of Health absolutely have no 
direction and no plan and a complete lack of common sense. 
 
You know last week, you know, we’re accused of raising issues 
and bringing people here to highlight their concerns. But one of 
our fundamental responsibilities as an official opposition is to 
advocate on behalf of people who have not gotten the system to 
respond to their needs; absolutely, fundamentally part of our 
responsibility, a very clear one. And the minister doesn’t like it, 
I know that. 
 
But the minister had, and the minister had, for example last 
week, when we raised the issue of Mr. Ens. Mr. Ens wrote to 
the minister five or six weeks ago and outlined the whole issue 
that he shared with us. He waited for five or six weeks for the 
minister to respond. My commitment to Mr. Ens was, if the 
minister responds and answers you, then the issue may be dealt 
with appropriately. We will give her the time to respond. 
 
And so we waited and we waited and we waited and we waited 
and finally Mr. Ens phoned and he said, Rod, you’ve got to 
raise this because I’m getting nowhere with this Department of 
Health. That’s our responsibility. 
 
And so when we raised it and we said where is the logic of this? 
How in the world can you justify sending someone to the Mayo 
Clinic in Rochester for these past 20 months, paying $11.5 
thousand a month US for the treatment, which amounts to 
something like $200,000 Canadian, and then when we received 
a copy of the letter of the request from the doctor in the 
University Hospital who said we could buy this machine, we 
will staff it with existing help, and we can buy this machine for 
$38,000 US. 
 
And the minister — you know what her response was, Mr. 
Speaker, out in the scrum? She said, we’re going to send him to 
Alberta now because they’ve got a machine. And there isn’t just 
one individual, there’s two. 
 
So if you take eleven and a half thousand, multiply it by two, 
we’re willing to spend $23,000 US a month, when both of these 



December 15, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 229 

individuals could have been treated in Saskatoon for a machine 
that costs less than $50,000 Canadian. About two months worth 
of treatment would have bought the machine and we would had 
had it. You know. Now what’s wrong with this picture? Like 
what’s wrong with this? 
 
And then you sit there and wonder why doctors and nurses and 
health care professionals are frustrated with the department 
when that kind of attitude is there. 
 
And you know what the department sent them back? Sent them 
back a letter saying request denied for this machine; it may 
seem like a good idea on the surface, but it’s simply not the way 
things work around here. 
 
Well it’s time for a change. It’s time for some common sense in 
the system and it’s time that it happen. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, it always galls me to hear the 
members opposite accuse us of two-tiered health care. You 
know today there were a number of people on the floor of the 
House that have a terrible disease — multiple sclerosis — and 
you know what happens? We pushed, we pushed and pushed 
and pushed and pushed this whole issue, and we said, look it, 
we’ve got to get Betaseron on the Formulary. And finally after 
all that pressure it happened. 
 
But now we’ve got to push and push and push and push and 
push again so that the minister will consider Betaseron on the 
Formulary for progressive secondary MS. Why does it take that 
kind of pressure in order for the minister to simply do the right 
thing? Why is that? Why is that the case? 
 
And you know what really is galling? There were people here 
today who said to me, my drug plan right now covers it, or my 
husband’s drug plan covers it for the next two months so I’m 
getting Betaseron because I’m able to pay for it. And if I had 
the money afterwards, I could continue to have Betaseron 
because I could afford to pay for it. 
 
Well, Madam Minister, and Mr. Speaker, that’s two-tiered 
health care —if you can afford it, you get it, and if you can’t, 
you’re out on your own. 
 
And so it’s not a question of gloom and doom. It’s a question of 
us living up to our responsibilities as an official opposition and 
coming up with ideas and advocating on behalf of people who 
you, as a government, are neglecting. 
 
That’s our job and we’ll continue to do it. And we’ll do it very 
well because we have to prepare ourselves to be the government 
the next time there’s an election because that’s what’s going to 
happen. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, it also bothers me a whole lot 
when I hear the government members opposite say we have no 
plan. Well I’m sorry, we do. And I’m also sorry to tell you is 
that it’s not a bunch of rhetoric that you can just sort of wrap up 
when you decide to leave the Liberals and join the NDP and 

form a coalition. 
 
We had a plan that makes sense and we had a plan that we put 
forward by private members’ motions on the floor of this 
Assembly this week so people can look at it and see it again. 
We’re proud of our plan and we were proud of it in September, 
and we’re going to be proud of it on a go-forward way into the 
future as we build and improve it and make it something that 
the people of this province will see the value of. 
 
In the health care area alone, I tabled today a Bill that said what 
we’ve got to do in the health care field — we’re spending $1.92 
billion, almost 40 per cent of the total provincial budget on 
health care — isn’t it time that we took a look to see if we’re 
really getting any value for this money? Or is it simply an issue 
of trying to throw more and more and more and more money at 
silly kinds of department rules and regulations like were pointed 
out in the case of Mr. Ens. 
 
These are the kinds of things that we are prepared to advocate 
and stand up for and believe in and put in front of the people of 
this province because they’re good, common-sense policies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also said that we need things like a health care 
ombudsman. With all of the people that are falling through the 
cracks on this health care system that’s been devastated by this 
whole reorganization that the NDP have been stumbling 
through, surely we need someone that will advocate on behalf 
of the patients of this province who are not being well served. 
And we need a health care Ombudsman. The people of this 
province who are not being well served by the system need a 
health care Ombudsman. 
 
We need to give the district health boards the respect that they 
deserve by having them elected, and when they’re elected, of 
providing them with block funding so they can make the 
decisions that they need to in order for their health district to 
comply with the Canada Health Act and to provide the very best 
care for the citizens who they will be elected to serve. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we have every faith and confidence that if 
you’ve got fully elected boards, answerable to the people in 
their district, that the system will respond when they understand 
where money can be spent wiser to that challenge of providing 
a very quality health care system in this province. 
 
We met last week with the SAHO (Saskatchewan Association 
of Health Organizations) board and I was impressed by the 
people around that table. They were people that came from 
across this province and are committed to trying to do 
everything they can to improve the delivery of health care in 
this province. 
 
And you know, when you ask them what’s your biggest 
challenge; well, generally what they’ll tell you, it’s the 
Department of Health. And they didn’t say it’s our biggest 
asset; they said it’s the biggest problem, is trying to deal with 
this sort of thing. Here we got in the Throne Speech where they 
say, well now, we’re going to take over bargaining at the 
Department of Health; that you people in SAHO haven’t been 
obviously doing a good job so we’re just going to dump that on 
you; we’re going to take it over. 
 



230 Saskatchewan Hansard December 15, 1999 

You know these kinds of things are very, very frustrating. 
They’re trying to cope and build relationships in their districts 
with the people they serve and all of a sudden there’s a 
brainstorm that we’re going to form regional hospitals. Does 
that mean you’re going to have . . . (inaudible) . . . 
centralization? Nobody knows. You can’t get any definitive 
answers from the Department of Health. And these people are 
frustrated, trying to do a job and realizing that all they are in 
many instances are scapegoats for the NDP’s inefficiency and 
the mess that they’ve made of health care. And what they do is 
they say, oh it isn’t our fault; it’s the district health board’s 
fault. And these people are frustrated in their endeavour to do a 
good job. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would love to join in this debate and talk about a 
lot of other issues, but I know the time is drawing near when we 
have to put this whole issue to a vote. And I would like to just 
conclude by making a very brief overall statement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan on September 16 
voted for common sense. They voted in a majority way for the 
Saskatchewan Party. This party, who I’m proud to represent, 
received more votes than any other party in this province and 
that was from the people of this province who said, we want the 
common sense that you stand for. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — That’s what they wanted. Instead, they got 
this unholy alliance that nobody chose, and in four years or 
three years or two years, or whenever the Premier bails out and 
we have finally another by-election that we’ll win and the 
government will be in an untenable position with no majority 
left, and the people will judge again. And, Mr. Speaker, I’ll 
predict right here and now that the Saskatchewan Party will be 
given the confidence of the people of Saskatchewan and will 
form the next government in this province and it will continue 
for decades, because it’s based on common sense and principle. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at the end of the day we all serve the people of 
this province and so on behalf of the official opposition, I 
would certainly like to wish each and every one of the members 
of this Assembly, to their families, and to the people of the 
province a very blessed and Merry Christmas and all of the best 
in the new year, in the new millennium. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1600) 
 
The division bells rang from 4 p.m. until 4:18 p.m. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 29 
 

Romanow Trew Hagel 
Van Mulligen MacKinnon Lingenfelter 
Melenchuk Cline Atkinson 
Goulet Lautermilch Thomson 
Kasperski Serby Belanger 

Nilson Crofford Kowalsky 
Sonntag Hamilton Prebble 
Jones Yates Higgins 
Harper Axworthy Junor 
Wartman Addley  
 

Nays — 25 
 
Hermanson Elhard Heppner 
Julé Krawetz Draude 
Boyd Gantefoer Toth 
Peters Eagles Wall 
Bakken Bjornerud D’Autremont 
McMorris Weekes Brkich 
Harpauer Wakefield Wiberg 
Hart Allchurch Stewart 
Kwiatkowski   
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Address be Engrossed and Presented to His Honour the 
Lieutenant Governor 

 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker. I move, seconded by 
the member from Saskatoon Idylwyld. 
 

That the said address be engrossed and presented to His 
Honour the Lieutenant Governor by such members of the 
Assembly as are of the Executive Council. 
 

I so move. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Ways and Means 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 
the member from Regina Victoria, by leave of the Assembly: 
 

That the Assembly, pursuant to rule 92, hereby appoints 
the Committee of Finance to consider the supply to be 
granted to Her Majesty, and to consider ways and means of 
raising supply. 

 
I so move. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, by leave I move that 
we return to adjourned debates. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 12 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter that Bill No. 12 — An Act 



December 15, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 231 

respecting Agricultural Equipment Dealerships be now read 
a second time. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to rise 
on behalf of the official opposition to give response to this very 
important piece of legislation that’s before us. And the 
importance not only to Saskatchewan farmers, Saskatchewan 
implement dealers, as well as prairie implement manufacturers 
here in the province of Saskatchewan, indeed all of Western 
Canada. 
 
And this is an extremely important piece of legislation as 
everyone on this side of the House with farm backgrounds 
would obviously know. I hope that some of the people on the 
other side of the House have taken the time to become familiar 
with the piece of legislation that they’re about to pass here this 
afternoon. 
 
Now this is an extremely important piece of legislation because 
it puts at risk a lot of people here in Saskatchewan, whether you 
are a farmer, whether you are a implement manufacturer, 
whether you are a dealer, or work for any one of those three 
people . . . three different groups in our economy. It is a very 
serious piece of legislation; it has tremendous implications. 
 
And I want to speak to the Assembly this afternoon about the 
innovation and the kinds of things that have come forward out 
of the short-line manufacturers. But before I do that, I think it 
has to be known very clearly to the Assembly the manner in 
which this piece of legislation came forward. Clearly the 
official opposition drove the agenda in this area. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — We have been a part of this agenda dating back 
to the election campaign when our leader, the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose, came forward and said there needed to be 
legislation in this area because there was equipment dealers and 
implement manufacturers and farmers that were going to be at 
risk here in the province unless we moved quickly to do 
something like this. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — And that is clearly the reason why, during the 
election campaign, our leader came forward and said to the 
people of Saskatchewan, this needs to be done now. And he 
made the commitment during the election campaign that if the 
Saskatchewan Party formed the next government, we’d be 
moving in this area. 
 
And I think there’s ample evidence that’s been demonstrated 
here over the last couple of . . . 10 days or so in the legislature, 
with the official opposition laying out clearly a legislative 
agenda that included this piece of legislation to demonstrate our 
commitment to the people of Saskatchewan, keep the promises 
that we made during the election campaign, that this would be 
exactly what we would be doing if we were forming . . . were 
the government here in Saskatchewan. 
 
It wasn’t based on political rhetoric. It wasn’t based on the 
kinds of things that the member from Saskatoon Northwest has 
commitments that he made during the election campaign and 

then forgot all about. It was based on a clear plan for the people 
of Saskatchewan — areas that needed to be addressed for the 
people of Saskatchewan. That’s the plan that was put forward 
by the official opposition. 
 
This is a further commitment to our election campaign and the 
promises that we made during that campaign. And we are 
pleased — extremely pleased in the early days of this 
legislature to come forward, with not just this piece of 
legislation, as important as it was, but others as well. 
 
And what do we hear from the government? In the Throne 
Speech they talk about a new day — a new dawn here in 
Saskatchewan, that they’re willing to co-operate, that they’re 
willing to listen to the ideas from this side of the House and 
implement those ideas. 
 
And so when we bring forward that piece of legislation, we say 
to the government opposite, that it’s important and needs to be 
pushed forward as quickly as possible. And they asked for 
co-operation; we gave them co-operation. 
 
We said to the House Leader, the Agriculture minister, and to 
the Premier, we said to them, by all means take your time to 
look over this piece of legislation. Take it back to your officials, 
take it to Justice, take it to Agriculture. Take it to the implement 
dealers association. Take it to the dealers; take it to the farm 
community at large. See what they think. And we gave them 
that commitment that when it came back, we’d be prepared to 
move forward on it. 
 
So, what do they do as a government? They take the time, yes, 
to do that. And then they come forward with their own piece of 
legislation, mirroring almost exactly what ours said, and they 
try and jam it through in a few minutes in the House. 
 
Give us absolutely no notice of it whatsoever — no notice 
whatsoever. Bring it into the House and ask for it to come 
forward and bring it through. And the Premier is saying from 
his seat, what a bunch of baloney. How else did it happen, I say 
to you, sir. How else did it happen in the House here today. 
There were too many people on this side of the House and 
throughout Saskatchewan that witnessed the actions of the 
Minister of Agriculture. 
 
We adjourned it, yes we adjourned it, and then we gave you 
leave to bring it back. We asked for leave . . . you asked for 
leave to bring it back, and we gave you leave to bring it back. 
And the only reason it’s before us this afternoon is because we 
are prepared to co-operate on this side of the House, different 
than your side of the House, sir. Different than your side of the 
House. 
 
The kind of rhetoric that you guys come forward in this place, 
day after day after day, demonstrates your commitment to the 
farm people in this province. And they won’t forget; they won’t 
forget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — It’s always somebody else’s fault. The federal 
government, the official opposition, doesn’t matter who it is, 
it’s Mr. Premier pointing his finger at everybody and saying, 



232 Saskatchewan Hansard December 15, 1999 

it’s your fault, it’s your fault, it’s your fault. Just as you’re 
doing right now. 
 
Well I tell you, sir, that the new dawn is not all that bright here 
in Saskatchewan. The people of this province have had enough 
of that kind of attitude. Co-operate, yes, by all means 
co-operate, and then point your finger at us and say it’s our fault 
when things don’t happen. 
 
Well I’ll tell you, the only reason things are happening in this 
province is because we’ve pushed you every inch of the way. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Do nothing, do nothing, do nothing. Sit in this 
legislature day after day, point your finger at everybody else 
and say, we aren’t prepared to move on these kind of issues. We 
have to have time, we have to have time to look it over, and 
then bring in your own piece of legislation and try and jam it 
through at the last second. 
 
We agree to bring this legislation back this afternoon on leave, 
and we’ll see that it passes this afternoon because we believe 
that it’s important to the people of this province. We believe it 
is important to the people of this province. That’s why we 
moved the agenda forward as we did, and that’s why we will 
continue to move the agenda forward in this province. Every 
single day that we sit in this Assembly, we bring forward ideas. 
And your attitude over there is do nothing, do nothing, do 
nothing. 
 
Where is this government’s plan in agriculture? I say to the 
people of this province, where is it, Mr. Minister? 
 
(1630) 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order please. This is a very important 
debate. I’ll ask members on both sides of the House . . . Please, 
order. Order please. I would ask members on both sides of the 
House. 
 
Order, please. I recognize now why there is the space between 
the opposition and the government side. I appreciate that. 
 
Please, hon. members, this is an important debate and everyone 
will have an opportunity to speak. But please do so individually 
and not hollering at one another. Please, I beg of you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And the Premier shouts 
from his chair, adjourn it. We’re not . . . we have no intention of 
adjourning this because it’s an important piece of legislation. 
We have no intention of adjourning it because it is an important 
piece of legislation and it needs to be moved forward. It needs 
to be moved forward. 
 
And the only reason, Mr. Speaker, that this legislation had 
opportunity to come forward in the Assembly is because we 
pushed this government into holding this Assembly. They 
didn’t even want to do that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Boyd: — When it came to support for agriculture, when it 
came for support for agriculture, where were you after the 
election campaign? We came forward and said the farmers of 
this province and the farm leaders here in Saskatchewan need to 
have a say, need to come before this Assembly and tell this 
government what is wrong with your government. And that’s 
why we have this Legislative Assembly; that’s why we have 
this Legislative Assembly today. And the farm groups in this 
province have said, and the people of Saskatchewan, yes, the 
federal government has a responsibility. They said yes, the 
federal government has a responsibility, but they also said you 
have a responsibility, sir . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. I’m having difficulty hearing 
the member in debate. I ask hon. members on both sides of the 
House to please . . . Order, order. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And different than the 
Minister of Agriculture, different than the Minister of 
Agriculture, we gave the commitment that we’ll co-operate on 
this piece of legislation and allow it to pass. And that will 
happen here this afternoon. 
 
But I think it’s important that the farm leaders in this province 
and the farmers in this province know exactly how it came 
forward; know exactly the kind of people on that side of the 
House that we’re dealing with; know exactly the kind of people 
who at least attempt to move the agenda along. The people who 
are clearly leading the charge in terms of agriculture in this 
province today, clearly is the official opposition — the 
Saskatchewan Party. The only ones, Mr. Speaker, that have any 
new ideas whatsoever. 
 
And it was demonstrated never more clearly than this afternoon 
over in the ag symposium when your officials, and the people 
who are facilitating meetings over there, say to the farm people 
and the farm leaders of this province, sit back and visualize how 
you would like agriculture to be. That’s their answer to the 
crisis in agriculture. That’s their answer to the crisis in 
agriculture. Sit back, tip your head back, close your eyes, and 
say to yourself, how would you like things to be? How would 
you like things to be? 
 
Well we, in the official opposition, say to you, sir, open your 
eyes and try and figure out what you’re going to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . And the Minister shouts from his chair, I hope 
we’re having fun. Well, Mr. Minister, the people of this 
province are not having fun any longer. The farmers aren’t 
having fun any longer. The farmers in this province and the 
dealers here in this province and the implement manufacturers 
here in this province aren’t having a great deal of fun in 
Saskatchewan these days. Because their farms are at risk, their 
dealerships are at risk, and their manufacturing businesses are at 
risk here in Saskatchewan because of the things that you and 
your colleagues have done to agriculture. 
 
And is it any wonder in Saskatchewan today why you have 
virtually no support in agriculture circles whatsoever? Not a 
single rural member — not a single member that represents any 



December 15, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 233 

degree of agriculture community here in Saskatchewan. Each 
and every one of the people over on this . . . each and every one 
of the people on this side of the legislature have connection to 
agriculture, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the reason why we are here is because the farm community 
in Saskatchewan overwhelmingly said no to these people — no 
to these people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — They said, where is your plan in terms of a 
long-term safety net? Where is your plan in terms of a 
short-term program? Where are your plans in terms of 
education reform? Where are your plans in terms of taxation? 
Where is your plan at all in terms of anything that would be 
concrete that could help this province? 
 
It just simply isn’t there. It simply isn’t there. No plan, no ideas, 
no focus, no plan whatsoever for the province of Saskatchewan. 
And that’s the kind of co-operation that they ask us to be a party 
to. 
 
Well I can say to you, Minister of Agriculture, and Mr. Premier 
here in Saskatchewan, yes we are prepared to co-operate on 
important issues and we’ll demonstrate that co-operation here 
this afternoon by allowing this piece of legislation to go 
forward because of the importance of it. That’s what we will be 
doing here in the House this afternoon, different than you 
people opposite, different than you people opposite over there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, please. Order. All hon. 
members, order please. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — As I said, Mr. Speaker, this is a very important 
piece of legislation and we are pleased to see that the 
government has finally decided to act on it. After being pushed 
for months on the issue, they bring forward a piece of 
legislation this afternoon and ask us to pass it today and we’ll 
co-operate in doing that. 
 
It’s important for a number of reasons, Mr. Speaker. Large 
numbers of people, large numbers of . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . And the Premier shouts from his chair why did we adjourn 
it, why did we adjourn it? The reason is really simple, Mr. 
Premier, because we at least wanted to have a few minutes to 
look it over, a few minutes to look it over — is that too much to 
ask? 
 
You get days to look over our piece of legislation and you want 
yours to pass here unquestioned, unquestioned, as always is the 
case in this legislature. The Premier wants everybody to 
co-operate and do exactly as he says, but when we ask for a 
little co-operation from him in his side of the House there’s 
none whatsoever, none whatsoever. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, this legislation, as I said, is 
extremely important and there’s a number of reasons why. 
There are a number of reasons why. There’s a number of 
reasons why because virtually, virtually the province of 
Saskatchewan’s agriculture system, as we know, is at risk here 

in Saskatchewan. And there’s all kinds of reasons why. 
 
If this legislation does not pass here this afternoon there will be 
large numbers of people in this province who will find 
themselves unemployed. That clearly is the case. There are 
dealerships at risk of being told . . . there are implement 
manufacturers who through no fault of their own have had to 
lay off people because there simply isn’t product . . . or the 
sales available. 
 
And if you look at the agriculture industry in Saskatchewan 
over the last number of years, and I think a lot of people would 
agree with me here, virtually all new innovation, virtually all 
new innovation here in the province of Saskatchewan has come 
from the implement manufacturers and from the farm 
community. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — You have to look no further than air seeder 
technology here in Saskatchewan. It virtually revolutionized the 
way we seed a crop here in this province. 
 
And the Premier shouts from his chair and my guess is you 
don’t even know what one is. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — My guess, my guess is, my guess is, sir, you 
don’t even know what an air seeder is or the concept of how it 
works or anything else to do with it. 
 
Well I can tell you, sir, that there are people — person after 
person after person — not only know how they work, they 
know how they are constructed, they know how the 
development of them, and they know how to operate them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Because clearly we are the people who represent 
agriculture here in the province. It has absolutely revolutionized 
seeding technology here in Saskatchewan. And you just have to 
go through all kinds of innovation that’s came from shortline 
manufacturers. 
 
And frankly, Mr. Speaker, I don’t even really like that term 
shortline manufacturers. I consider them to be the heart and the 
strength and the backbone of the agriculture community here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Look further down the line, Mr. Speaker. Zero 
till technology, minimum till technology — virtually it all came 
out of Saskatchewan, the new innovations in terms of that. 
 
Sprayer technology virtually entirely came out of innovations 
here in Saskatchewan. Many of the manufacturers that the 
Prairie Implement Manufacturers Association represent here 
today started at the farm level and now have become 
manufacturers and, in many cases, major manufacturers — 
world-class manufacturers — and they started right here in 
Saskatchewan because innovation was needed. 



234 Saskatchewan Hansard December 15, 1999 

They came up with products here in Saskatchewan. It was 
extremely important to have those developments came forward. 
Grain handling technology, fertilizer application technology, 
and the list goes on and on and on of the kinds of things that 
have came forward from the manufacturers in this province and 
from the farm community here in Saskatchewan. 
 
And it’s extremely important that we take the steps through 
legislation like is presented here this afternoon to help those 
people, to protect those people, and to ensure that they are able 
to continue. They drive the agriculture economy here in 
Saskatchewan and we will — we will in opposition do 
everything we can to protect that industry. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — And when you look further down the line, Mr. 
Speaker, to the dealers of this province . . . and I come from 
small-town Saskatchewan, as many of the members here in this 
side of the House do come from small-town Saskatchewan, and 
virtually, when you look at small-town Saskatchewan today, the 
equipment dealer in many cases is the largest employer in the 
community — the largest employer in the community — the 
absolute backbone of the community. And it’s extremely 
important that we do what we can to help them under these 
circumstances. 
 
We believe in business. We believe in innovation. We believe 
in the kind of technology that these businesses and 
manufacturers have come forward with in Saskatchewan. And 
we will not allow a government to sit on its hands and not do 
something to try and help them in this area. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — And that’s why during the election campaign we 
said that there needed to be something — there needed to be 
legislation to address this. 
 
And then the next step in the very important chain is the farm 
community. And I want to speak a little bit about that farm 
community because they’re so vitally important, not only to the 
economy of Saskatchewan but to the dealers and to the 
implement manufacturers. And the fact is, is that farmers in this 
province, one of the reasons why they've been able to compete 
under the most trying conditions you can imagine here in 
Saskatchewan, is because of the innovations that they have 
done, the simple sit back or the scrimp-and-save attitude that 
the farm community has. 
 
I suspect that many members on that House . . . that side of the 
House simply do not understand that. Many members on this 
side of the House would clearly understand that — the attitude 
of many farm families in this province, things like simply 
saying no, we can’t do that; we will stay home; we will make 
sacrifices; we’ll put that new piece of furniture on hold so we 
can pay to fix the combine this year. 
 
That’s the kind of attitude that farmers have here in 
Saskatchewan. Do whatever it takes to stay in business. Do 
whatever it takes in the face of international subsidies, in the 
face of all kinds of adversity, from the weather or from 
governments, and many of the problems that they are faced with 

that they are right . . . you can lay them right at the feet of this 
government. All of those kinds of sacrifices that the farm 
community makes here in Saskatchewan to stay in business in 
light of all of the kinds of problems that they have. 
 
That’s why it’s so critically important that we do everything we 
can to protect them. And that’s why clearly the official 
opposition, the Saskatchewan Party, has been pushing the 
agenda in terms of agriculture right since the . . . during the 
election campaign, prior to the election campaign, and since the 
election campaign. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, clearly everyone in this province in the 
agriculture community, I believe, knows that and understands 
that. Who was it that said we should be going to Ottawa and get 
money for help for Saskatchewan? It was the Saskatchewan 
Party. 
 
Who was it that said we should have a legislative agenda, 
legislative session here in Saskatchewan to make sure that this 
was highlighted in this critically important time to the farm 
community? It was the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
And who was it that said we should be calling the farm groups 
before the legislature, before the bar here in the legislature, in 
an unprecedented fashion? It was the Saskatchewan Party that 
said that. 
 
Who was it that came up with virtually every idea of how we 
could help farmers in this province in terms of a safety net, in 
terms of a short-term help for the farmers here in Saskatchewan 
and the trade equalization payment? It was the Saskatchewan 
Party. 
 
We have been driving the agenda in this legislature and in 
Saskatchewan in terms of agriculture since before the election, 
during the election, and now. And we will continue to do that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1645) 
 
Mr. Boyd: — I’ll close by saying, Mr. Speaker, this is an 
important piece of legislation. We thank the equipment dealers 
here in Saskatchewan. We thank the Prairie Implement 
Manufacturers Association here in Saskatchewan, and we thank 
the farm community here in Saskatchewan for bringing forward 
a piece of legislation, developing a piece of legislation, asking 
for co-operation in terms of bringing forward that legislation. 
 
We’ve co-operated in every fashion right from the very 
beginning of this piece of legislation, and we’ll continue to do 
that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The division bells rang from 4:46 p.m. until 5:11 p.m. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 53 
 

Romanow Trew Hagel 



December 15, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 235 

Van Mulligen Lingenfelter Melenchuk 
Cline Atkinson Goulet 
Lautermilch Thomson Kasperski 
Serby Belanger Nilson 
Crofford Kowalsky Sonntag 
Hamilton Prebble Jones 
Yates Higgins Harper 
Axworthy Junor Wartman 
Addley Hermanson Elhard 
Heppner Julé Krawetz 
Draude Boyd Gantefoer 
Toth Peters Eagles 
Wall Bakken Bjornerud 
D’Autremont McMorris Weekes 
Brkich Harpauer Wakefield 
Wiberg Hart Allchurch 
Stewart Kwiatkowski  
 

Nays — nil 
 
The Bill read a second time and, by leave of the Assembly, 
referred to a Committee of the Whole later this day. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 12—The Agricultural Equipment Dealerships Act 
 
The Chair: —Before I call clause 1, I invite the minister to 
introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — It is with pleasure, Mr. Chairman, 
that I introduce the four officials I have with me. To my right, 
my deputy, Terry Scott; to my left our legal counsel, Heather 
Sinclair; behind me, directly, Hal Cushon, director of policy 
branch; and Mitch Demeyen, the industry development branch, 
just seated behind me as well. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d like to 
acknowledge with gratitude the presence of department officials 
today and I hope that some of the questions we have to pose will 
be answered forthwith. 
 
We want to acknowledge that this Bill is detailed and 
comprehensive, and we appreciate the time they have given us 
here today. 
 
I would also like to acknowledge the involvement of the Canada 
West Equipment Dealers Association in backgrounding some of 
this Bill for the House. And I noticed that at one time in our 
conversations with the people representing the equipment 
dealers association, they had a concern about the date of 1969. 
And I think it referenced one of the major manufacturers 
specifically. 
 
I see no reference to that date in this particular piece of 
legislation. I notice that the date on this is December 13, and 
I’m wondering if somebody can explain to me why that 1969 
date was of concern to the equipment dealers previously and it 
is not mentioned in this legislation now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I can take notice of the question, 

find out from the equipment dealers. But in the discussions that 
my staff have had, this has not been an issue. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — On the date of December 13, 1999, Mr. 
Chairman, I would like to ask if there are implications of any 
kind for dealerships that were obligated to sign contracts prior 
to December 13, and if this Bill addresses that in any respect. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — If I could just read to the member 
the application of the Act. There’s two parts to it: 
 

(a) (Those) in effect as at December 13, 1999; (and) 
 
(b) entered into on or after December 13, 1999. 
 

That’s on the front page of the Bill. 
 
I just want to say as well that I appreciate the member opposite 
doing his work on the Bill quickly and efficiently, because the 
fact of the matter is we probably both saw the Bill in its final 
form at the same time. 
 
And I just say that in order to come back to the work of passing 
this Bill today, obviously it’s important that we read and 
understand. And I just urge the member if there are other issues 
as we go through this that we can’t get quick answers for, we’ll 
do our best. 
 
And I think the vote certainly indicated that all members of the 
Assembly support this approach, and in large part what is 
entered into in the Bill is much more the dealers’ and 
manufacturers’ and farmers’ input than it is department or legal. 
And I’m sure I speak for all members in saying that if there are 
issues here we should take time to go through them here 
tonight. 
 
The Chair: — Order. Before I recognize the hon. member for 
Cypress Hills, I just want to remind the minister that all 
comments are to be directed through the Chair. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — I understand that the 1969 date is not as big an 
issue now because this Act supersedes contracts that were in 
existence at that time. Can you describe for us the consultative 
process that was undertaken to arrive at this Bill? And could 
you advise us with which groups you consulted? 
 
The Chair: — Order. Before I recognize the minister I would 
like to remind the hon. member for Cypress Hills that all 
comments are to be directed through the Chair. And while I 
have the mike, of course that admonishment goes to all 
members. I know it’s been a while since we were in Committee 
of the Whole — but such is life. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — The discussions have gone on, Mr. 
Chairman, through a number of different meetings and 
correspondence that have taken with Canada West equipment 
dealers, as well as the prairie implement manufacturers. And 
this is both official meetings and occasions where we might be 
at events, and the number of times that Larry Schneider was 
good enough to fill me in, in an informal way. And also we 
have dealt with the four mainline companies, as well as 
speaking to the Wheat Pool and SARM and others. 
 



236 Saskatchewan Hansard December 15, 1999 

But I just wanted to, for the record, quote from a letter that I 
sent to John Deere Limited very recently. And in part I said, 
and I quote: 
 

The area of specific concern relates to the issue of dealer 
purity. Actions by mainline machinery manufacturing 
companies to prevent dealers from carrying products of 
short-line equipment manufacturers, such actions have 
profoundly negative implications for our short-line 
equipment manufacturers, our equipment dealers, and 
ultimately our farmers. 

 
And I went on in the letter to say, the Government of 
Saskatchewan has been advised by mainline companies, have 
been moving in the direction of dealer purity. And in all times 
in the letter I used quotations around dealer purity, because in 
my mind, dealer purity is not quite the English that most dealers 
and manufacturers are using about this clause in the contract. 
 
It went on to say: 
 

At least one mainline company has proposed to new 
dealers that agreements that contain dealer purity 
provisions viewed as contrary to the interests of 
Saskatchewan dealers and short-line manufacturers. 
 

And we, in the letter, urged them to back away from and to 
make a commitment that these clauses wouldn’t be included. 
But obviously legislation is now needed and in order. And so 
the negotiations that have taken place in discussions over some 
months have led us to this date. 
 
And I might add as well, I know that your party that you 
represent has taken strong positions on this. And I might add 
that at our party convention, a resolution was passed on this 
issue some six weeks or two months ago. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, thank you for the answer. Have 
the manufacturers been uncooperative, resistant, or have they 
given you any kind of latitude in terms of this legislation? Did 
they offer any kind of assistance, if I can use that word almost 
euphemistically? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well in the simplest form, the 
discussions that we’ve had have not led us to gaining the 
confidence that the machinery dealers and manufacturers would 
need, and therefore the legislation I think is in order. 
 
I might remind members too that this kind of a clause if it were 
happening in the United States in a number of different states 
— we’ve checked in Montana, North Dakota, I think in South 
Dakota as well — these provisions are not allowed in a number 
of US states, and so I don’t know that it was totally unexpected 
by the mainline manufacturers because I think they’ve had to 
deal with this issue in a number of jurisdictions. And I think in 
the United States, at least what I’ve been told, is that it is seen 
to be against competition and therefore a number of states have 
moved to disallow it. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, I’d like to ask the minister if in 
clause no. 7, if I can jump ahead that far, (1)(a), it talks about 
what I know of the language to be a succession plan. And I’m 
wondering if that particular clause adequately protects the 

interests of the dealer, and secondly, does it nullify outright the 
manufacturer’s right to ultimately decide successorship in a 
given dealership? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well I guess there’s nothing certain 
in life except a couple of items that I won’t mention here today. 
But the fact is the dealers and manufacturers have accepted this 
as, Mr. Chairman, as doing the job for them. So I think at this 
point in time we’re comfortable that that protection, in fact, is 
there. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, I am getting close to the end of 
my questions. What impact will termination without cause 
requiring legal action have on the willingness of mainline 
manufacturers to locate in Saskatchewan? I guess that’s the 
other side of this debate here. And I understand that there is 
some provision there that might be seen as a negative in terms 
of locating here at all. 
 
(1730) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — As the member opposite knows full 
well, and I think your relationship with machinery dealerships 
in one of the mainline manufacturers who you probably have 
more experience than I or others, what is important here is that 
you can’t have it both ways. 
 
By passing this legislation, obviously we are taking the position 
that strongly supports our shortline manufacturers here in the 
province of Saskatchewan, the thousands of workers who work 
in those plants. And I think by ensuring more competition, 
we’re actually doing something to dampen price increases. At 
least that’s the theory of competition that I think you and I both 
agree with. 
 
On the other hand there is nothing black and white about these 
kind of issues. For every action there's reaction, and I think you 
point out very clearly the potential reaction. And having said 
that, I think that’s why it’s important that each and every one of 
us who support this legislation understand that when we pass 
legislation, obviously once it’s passed, it’s there, and obviously 
we’re all supporting it. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, I have talked to a few dealers in 
the intervening hours and they tell me that this legislation 
actually goes further than they had anticipated. And I’m 
wondering if they’re not just a little bit concerned about the 
balance that this Act should present in that area. 
 
One other area I’d like to get into. and it’s not dealt with in the 
Act at all that I noticed, but does this legislation address in any 
way the holding of reserve accounts by some manufacturers 
against the net sales of their dealers? I didn’t notice that 
anywhere and I may have overlooked it. But that’s a question of 
considerable interest to a number of dealers. 
 
And finally, I guess, these accounts amount to many thousands 
of dollars for some dealers, both in business currently and 
winding down their affairs. And I think I know of a few that 
could use some of that money before Christmas. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to 
clarify one thing with the member, because I think it’s a good 



December 15, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 237 

question. And he raised the issue of several dealers raising the 
issue about clauses. It would be helpful if the member could 
identify for the committee the clauses that have been of 
concern, that we would be able to look at them. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, actually we were in 
conversation about the termination clauses and how specific 
and immediate and direct they have been in the past. The 
particular Act now goes a little further in the area of termination 
than some of the dealers had anticipated. 
 
I can’t say they were displeased. I think they were somewhat 
concerned, maybe, that it goes a little bit too far. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, in the 
section 4, prohibitions, I wonder if you could explain for the 
Assembly clause no. 3 and the reasons that you’ve included this 
in the piece of legislation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — The arrangement here under 4(3), 
and I’ll just read it so that we have it clear: 
 

No mainline manufacturer shall directly or indirectly 
discriminate in the prices charged for agricultural 
equipment of like grade and quality sold by the mainline 
manufacturer to similarly situated dealers. 
 

The intent of this clause is to not allow the kind of pressure that 
might come, for example, if there were arrangements made 
where one dealer could potentially get their parts or equipment 
at a lower price because they agreed, although there’s no 
contract signed, that they would only sell mainline equipment 
and not sell shortline, which would accomplish the same 
arrangement with no contract and thereby getting around a 
piece of legislation using a price in order to do it. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, are you 
aware of incidents of this type? And that’s the reason that has 
prompted . . . or are there other reasons why you and your 
officials have come forward with this type of legislation? Or is 
it just to anticipate things of this type, or have you had 
representations from mainline equipment manufacturers that 
this may be the case? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — It’s precautionary in nature and it’s 
to prevent something happening through another policy that 
they were trying to achieve by contract. And so this is 
precautionary in nature only. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I think you 
are aware and certainly we are aware of some reasons in 
addition to precautionary that you might want to have a clause 
of this type in there. 
 
Certainly I think you would be aware, and we certainly are 
aware as well, that equipment manufacturers, mainline 
equipment manufacturers, mainline equipment manufacturers 
have a point system in place, points, or demerit points in some 
cases, in place that makes it very, very difficult for equipment 
dealers here in Saskatchewan to comply with in many cases. 
 
And things like everything from signage to equipment displays 
to bringing in new equipment, the volumes, all of those kinds of 

things result in demerit points to some dealerships, smaller 
dealerships, making it very, very difficult for them to operate. 
And I wonder if you could explain your thoughts or your 
information, knowledge information in this area. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Again I say to the member opposite 
that there’s no perfection in trying to draft a piece of legislation. 
But what I can say is that based on a lot of discussion and 
negotiation with the manufacturers and dealers, this legislation 
is accepted to be our best effort for the time being. And what I 
might add is that if amendments are needed or if arrangements 
were made where the Bill wasn’t necessary in the future, this 
legislature can then deal with either amendments or total 
changes to the Bill. 
 
So this is the best effort, I believe, of the opposition and 
government working with the manufacturers and dealers, to 
come up with some arrangement that would protect farmers on 
the price side by allowing as much competition as possible. 
Secondly the dealers, so that they have the right to pick and 
choose what they want to sell. And of course the manufacturers 
in the province who employ thousands of men and women who 
otherwise would not be able to find employment. 
 
And I think if you look at shortline manufacture — and I know 
the member opposite knows this because he mentioned it in his 
speech — but per capita in the terms of the amount of shortline 
manufacturing we have in this province, there is nowhere else 
in North America or anywhere that on a per capita basis we 
have more shortline equipment being manufactured; and 
therefore, we obviously have more to lose. 
 
Some people are saying, well has Alberta got this kind of 
legislation? No they don’t, and I don’t think they’re going that 
route. I think they’re very careful to avoid this kind of 
legislation. And Manitoba is wondering whether to do it or not. 
 
So this is in many ways leading edge legislation that has come 
forward. Again, give credit to yourself, ourselves, but mainly 
because the dealers and manufacturers have come forward with 
the concept. 
 
And at the end of day I think this whole debate is a little bit 
meaningless in terms of who wins and loses today. Because at 
the end of the day, if the farmers and manufacturers and dealers 
feel they’ve won, then obviously, I hope, at the end of the day 
we’ve all won. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chair. I’m not sure 
whether my colleague asked this question but I’ll ask it again if 
he has. What kind of implication does this have on dealers who 
may have already signed agreements, dealer purity types 
agreements. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Now I just want the member to go 
to the application of the Act because I think I covered this off 
with the member from Cypress, Mr. Chairman. In clause 3 . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — What clause? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Clause 3, on the first page where it 
says: 
 



238 Saskatchewan Hansard December 15, 1999 

This Act applies to all dealership agreements: 
 

(a) in effect as at December 13, 1999 
 

As well as those “entered into on or after December 13 . . .” So 
the legal advice I’m getting, it captures all of them. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — So an equipment dealer that may have signed an 
agreement back in October or November is indeed protected 
from this type of discriminatory practice, contractual practice 
between the mainline manufacturer and themselves? 
 
This then does or does not affect a dealer who may have signed 
an agreement back in November or October with a mainline 
manufacturer from any kind of discriminatory practice, 
contractual practice that they may have encountered. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Yes, it does affect existing 
contracts, and again if you look at page 1 and then flip to page 3 
under clause 8, certain provisions void, it says: 
 

The following provisions in any dealership agreement are 
void. 
 

And if you to go to (b): 
 

any provision requiring a dealer to carry on exclusive 
dealings with the mainline manufacturer, so as to prevent 
the dealers from, or penalize the dealer for, carrying on 
business with any shortline manufacturer in the dealer’s 
facility or in a separate facility; 
 

So my understanding is, it does capture the existing clauses if, 
in fact, they were in effect. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, it’s my 
understanding that this piece of legislation has no implication 
whatsoever with respect to warranties. And I wonder if that is 
your understanding as well. 
 
Apparently in South Dakota, I believe, there was two pieces of 
legislation that were before the state down there — one dealing 
with dealer impurity and one dealing with warranty implication. 
And there was some concern by implement manufacturers here 
in Saskatchewan that this may have implications to themselves 
in terms of warranties. And I think we want to be very clear to 
the implement manufacturers here in Saskatchewan that indeed 
that is not the case. 
 
Is that your understanding, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Yes, it’s our understanding that this 
does not apply to the warranty issue. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
Clause 4 
 
The division bells rang from 5:43 p.m. until 5:51 p.m. 
 
Clause 4 agreed to on the following recorded division. 

Yeas — 52 
 

Romanow Hagel Van Mulligen 
Lingenfelter Melenchuk Cline 
Atkinson Goulet Lautermilch 
Thomson Kasperski Serby 
Belanger Nilson Crofford 
Kowalsky Sonntag Hamilton 
Prebble Jones Yates 
Higgins Harper Axworthy 
Junor Wartman Addley 
Hermanson Elhard Heppner 
Julé Krawetz Draude 
Boyd Gantefoer Toth 
Peters Eagles Wall 
Bakken Bjornerud D’Autremont 
McMorris Weekes Brkich 
Harpauer Wakefield Wiberg 
Hart Allchurch Stewart 
Kwiatkowski   
 

Nays — nil 
 
Clause 5 agreed to. 
 
Clause 6 
 
The division bells rang from 5:53 p.m. until 5:54 p.m. 
 
Clause 6 agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 52 
 

Romanow Hagel Van Mulligen 
Lingenfelter Melenchuk Cline 
Atkinson Goulet Lautermilch 
Thomson Kasperski Serby 
Belanger Nilson Crofford 
Kowalsky Sonntag Hamilton 
Prebble Jones Yates 
Higgins Harper Axworthy 
Junor Wartman Addley 
Hermanson Elhard Heppner 
Julé Krawetz Draude 
Boyd Gantefoer Toth 
Peters Eagles Wall 
Bakken Bjornerud D’Autremont 
McMorris Weekes Brkich 
Harpauer Wakefield Wiberg 
Hart Allchurch Stewart 
Kwiatkowski   
 

Nays — nil 
 
Clause 7 
 
The division bells rang from 5:56 p.m. until 6:06 p.m. 
 
Clause 7 agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 52 
 
Romanow Hagel Van Mulligen 



December 15, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 239 

Lingenfelter Melenchuk Cline 
Atkinson Goulet Lautermilch 
Thomson Kasperski Serby 
Belanger Nilson Crofford 
Kowalsky Sonntag Hamilton 
Prebble Jones Yates 
Higgins Harper Axworthy 
Junor Wartman Addley 
Hermanson Elhard Heppner 
Julé Krawetz Draude 
Boyd Gantefoer Toth 
Peters Eagles Wall 
Bakken Bjornerud D’Autremont 
McMorris Weekes Brkich 
Harpauer Wakefield Wiberg 
Hart Allchurch Stewart 
Kwiatkowski   
 

Nays — nil 
 

Clauses 8 and 9 agreed to. 
 
Clause 10 
 
The division bells rang from 6:09 p.m. until 6:19 p.m. 
 
Clause 10 agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 52 
 
Romanow Hagel Van Mulligen 
Lingenfelter Melenchuk Cline 
Atkinson Goulet Lautermilch 
Thomson Kasperski Serby 
Belanger Nilson Crofford 
Kowalsky Sonntag Hamilton 
Prebble Jones Yates 
Higgins Harper Axworthy 
Junor Wartman Addley 
Hermanson Elhard Heppner 
Julé Krawetz Draude 
Boyd Gantefoer Toth 
Peters Eagles Wall 
Bakken Bjornerud D’Autremont 
McMorris Weekes Brkich 
Harpauer Wakefield Wiberg 
Hart Allchurch Stewart 
Kwiatkowski   
 

Nays — nil 
 
Clause 11 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Chair, we have some questions with respect 
to clause 11. 
 
Is it proper to call, ask for the officials to come in and help the 
minister answer questions with respect to this or do we just go 
ahead? 
 
The Chair: — It is really up to the minister whether the 
minister would require his officials. The minister’s indicated to 
proceed. 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, 
with respect to clause 11(1), and I’ll just read it: 
 

In this section, “cause of action” means any claim, cause of 
action, suit, debt, account, demand, claim for damage, loss, 
cost, expense or interest, of any nature, whether arising in 
or imposed by law, equity, statue or otherwise and includes 
any judgment or order of a court. 
 

And in clause 2 of section 11 . . . Section 11(2) I mean: 
 

No action or proceeding lies or shall be instituted against 
the Government of Saskatchewan, any member of the 
Executive Council, or any officer or employee of the 
Government of Saskatchewan based on any cause of action 
arising from, resulting from, or incidental to the enactment 
or application of this Act or the regulations. 
 

Mr. Minister, in reading that it causes us great concern because 
it appears that this cause of action may include everyone except 
yourself and your official and your government. And we’re 
quite concerned about that, Mr. Minister, that if a main line 
manufacturer decided to sue for some reason that they could sue 
members of this legislature except Executive Council. 
 
And I seek your thoughts on this, Mr. Minister, and as well your 
explanation of this. I’m hoping it is a glaring oversight that your 
department has made with respect to this and not something 
other than that. Could you give us an explanation based on your 
information and we would be willing to put forward an 
amendment to add any member of the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan for some protection against actions brought 
against all members of the executive Assembly. And I would 
hope that your backbenchers might be willing to entertain this 
amendment because it appears you are exempted as well. 
 
An Hon. Member: — You’re not exempted. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Or not exempted as well. Sorry. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I think the main 
reason that Executive Council is mentioned as opposed to 
members of the legislature is because the regulations that have 
to be implemented following, and the Act or regulation that 
Executive Council exposes themselves to, is very different than 
members of the Assembly. And that’s why members of the 
legislature are not covered in this Bill or no other Bill that has 
ever been passed in the Legislative Assembly, yet the words, 
Executive Council, are used from time to time in various Bills. 
 
And I just want to say that in the . . . One of the leading lights 
on parliamentary issues, Joseph Maingot from the 
Parliamentary Privilege in Canada states on page 12 of chapter 
2 under general definition, and I quote: 
 

Parliamentary privilege, which is an important part of the 
law and (the) custom of Parliament, is part of the general 
and public law of Canada. 
 
Parliamentary privilege is the necessary immunity that the 
law provides for Members of Parliament, (the) Members of 
the legislatures of each of the ten provinces and two 
territories, in order for (those) legislators to do their 



240 Saskatchewan Hansard December 15, 1999 

legislative work. It is also . . . necessary immunity that the 
law provides for anyone while taking part in a proceeding 
in Parliament or in a legislature. In addition it is the right, 
power, and authority of each House of Parliament and of 
each legislative assembly to perform their constitutional 
functions. (And) finally, it is the authority and power of 
each House of Parliament and . . . each legislative 
assembly to enforce that immunity and to protect its 
integrity. 

 
And so our legal counsel advises us that it’s not necessary and 
hasn’t been necessary in the past, and is not necessary at this 
time. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, why then 
would you bring in a second clause that exempts Executive 
Council, if that is the case? If that is the case, everyone would 
be exempted, would they not? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — For the member opposite, obviously 
the Executive Council is appointed. And to use I think a broad 
example, after the election in 1991 when the Devine 
administration was defeated, and they were no longer MLAs, 
(Member of the Legislative Assembly) they continued on for a 
period of time, for 10 days, as Executive Council. And during 
that period obviously did not have privilege. 
 
And so it’s a very, very different circumstance under the law, 
being a member of Executive Council and being a member of 
the Legislative Assembly. So the immunity that applies to 
myself as a member is not extended as Executive Council, 
while I’m . . . any of us are doing Acts of enforcement or 
regulation. And certainly not in that period of time when you 
cease to be an MLA, but still remain on as a member of 
Executive Council. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, while we 
still have some concerns because we have had differing legal 
opinions with respect to this particular clause, we will accept 
your explanation, Mr. Minister, fully understanding that if one 
of our members gets sued you’re going to be there to help out. 
 
Well one of the members of the Executive Council gives us 
some reason to be concerned over there, Mr. Chair. We’re 
hopeful that that is indeed the case, because speaking with the 
Clerk of the Legislature, there is some concern that may not be 
the case. And speaking with legal counsel, there is some 
concern that may not be the case, so we’re trusting, Mr. Chair, 
Mr. Minister, that you are correct in this. And you are sitting 
beside a constitutional lawyer, so we’re trusting your okay . . . 
two of them. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Chair. As I said, we still have some concerns in 
this area because we’ve had some differing legal opinions with 
respect to this. But we’ll accept the minister . . . and we accept 
it in good faith and full knowledge that he’ll be there to support, 
and his government would be there to support — in any way, 
shape, or form — an action that might be brought against a 
member of the legislature. 
 
The Chair: — Before I call this clause, I just want to caution 
members not to involve officers of the legislature in debate and 
opinions that they might have . . . may or may not have 

provided. So with that caution. 
 
The division bells rang from 6:30 p.m. until 6:39 p.m. 
 
Clause 11 agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 52 
 
Romanow Hagel Van Mulligen 
Lingenfelter Melenchuk Cline 
Atkinson Goulet Lautermilch 
Thomson Kasperski Serby 
Belanger Nilson Crofford 
Kowalsky Sonntag Hamilton 
Prebble Jones Yates 
Higgins Harper Axworthy 
Junor Wartman Addley 
Hermanson Elhard Heppner 
Julé Krawetz Draude 
Boyd Gantefoer Toth 
Peters Eagles Wall 
Bakken Bjornerud D’Autremont 
McMorris Weekes Brkich 
Harpauer Wakefield Wiberg 
Hart Allchurch Stewart 
Kwiatkowski   
 

Nays — nil 
 
Clauses 12 to 14 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 15 
 
The division bells rang from 6:41 p.m. until 6:41 p.m. 
 
Clause 15 agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 51 
 

Romanow Hagel Van Mulligen 
Lingenfelter Melenchuk Cline 
Atkinson Goulet Lautermilch 
Thomson Kasperski Serby 
Belanger Nilson Kowalsky 
Sonntag Hamilton Prebble 
Jones Yates Higgins 
Harper Axworthy Junor 
Wartman Addley Hermanson 
Elhard Heppner Julé 
Krawetz Draude Boyd 
Gantefoer Toth Peters 
Eagles Wall Bakken 
Bjornerud D’Autremont McMorris 
Weekes Brkich Harpauer 
Wakefield Wiberg Hart 
Allchurch Stewart Kwiatkowski 
 

Nays — nil 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
(1845) 
 



December 15, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 241 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 12  The Agricultural Equipment 
Dealerships Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, by leave, I move the 
Bill be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 
third time and passed under its title. 
 

ROYAL ASSENT 
 
At 6:47 p.m. His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber, took his seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 
to the following Bill: 
 
Bill No. 12 - The Agricultural Equipment Dealerships Act. 
 
His Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name I assent to this Bill. 
 
His Honour retired from the Chamber at 6:48 p.m. 
 
The Speaker: — I trust that each and everyone of you will 
have a pleasant evening. Until 1:30 p.m. tomorrow. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 6:49 p.m. 
 



 

 


