





























































Hansard: March 22, 1999


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 161 
 March 22, 1999 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Jess, seconded by Ms. Murrell, 
and the proposed amendment thereto moved by Mr. Krawetz. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, as we left off before supper we were talking 
about the farm aid package, and the shortfalls from the 
provincial government and the federal government to what we 
received in farm aid. And the one disappointment, I guess . . . 
And I’ll go through it. I started into it before we recessed, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, but it was the, I guess, the deficit budget that 
this government actually ran but then covered it up with 
upgrader money and then turned around and blamed it on the 
farmers of Saskatchewan because they pulled the whole farm 
aid dollars out of the ’98 budget instead of taking out of the 
’99-2000, 2000-2001 budget. They took it all out of ’98 and I 
believe the only reason that was is to add dollars for the election 
campaign and the goodies that they’re going to hand out to 
every little group in this province and waste tax dollars that 
we’ve had a hard time paying for the last eight years. We’re 
going to hand it away in one bang when the election comes. 
 
The worst part of this, I believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that 
we’ve blamed this on the backs of farmers out there and trying 
to tell the urban taxpayers in Regina, Saskatoon, Moose Jaw, 
P.A. (Prince Albert), the bigger cities, that we shouldn’t be 
spending their tax dollars on the farmers of this province. The 
Premier has said that it’s our fault there’s an urban-rural split. 
Well I suggest, Mr. Deputy Premier, that it’s things like this 
that cause the urban-rural split, when we’re trying to explain 
away why farmers shouldn’t get money and yet on the other 
hand we’re trying to explain why they need it so badly and how 
bad the crisis is in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
I think why this won’t sell, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is because 
people in urban Saskatchewan are starting to understand just 
how bad the effect is going to be on all of Saskatchewan — not 
just rural, not just urban. It’s affecting everywhere, such as 
Flexi-Coil in Saskatoon who are laid off a number of workers, I 
believe it’s in excess of 400 at the present time; Morris Rod 
Weeder in Yorkton who has completely shut down. It affects 
the member for Yorkton’s constituency. So I think it’s really a 
lame excuse when we try to cover up a deficit budget shortfall 
on the government’s behalf . . . mismanagement of provincial 
funds, and blame it on the backs of farmers. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to also touch on another area that 
has come up just lately, it’s an antiquated law, and I think it’s 
time that we had changes made to this. And the Minister of 
Justice, for an example, feels the law is just fine, doesn’t have 
to be changed. It’s a Farm Land Security Board, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
The situation that arose in my constituency and I believe is 

going to come up in many other constituencies out there 
because we have so many farmers that are ready to retire but 
can’t sell their land, can’t sell it for a fair price, and certainly 
can’t sell it to the highest bidder because of laws that we have 
in Saskatchewan. Laws I might add that don’t exist in Alberta; 
laws that don’t exist in Manitoba — they only exist in 
Saskatchewan where we’ve built walls around this province. 
 
You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we wonder why our 
population is stuck at one million or under. Alberta has grown 
to three million when years and years ago they were exactly 
where we are. And it’s these same walls that I believe that have 
held us at a million people. Why the city of Calgary in the year 
2001 will be as big as Saskatchewan is because we are scared of 
two things: we’re scared of change, and we’re scared of the 
word “profit” — that’s a dirty word in this province. And as 
long as we have walls around this province, our population 
can’t build. 
 
The problem we had, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and you may be 
aware of this, is that a farmer in my area found a buyer in 
Russell, Manitoba. The buyer in Russell, Manitoba offered him 
a very fair price for his land, had a very similar operation in 
Russell. And just for information, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Russell 
is a stone’s throw over the border into Manitoba. The deal was 
made, the down payment was put forth, and the Farm Land 
Security Board said, no, this deal can’t go through because this 
person is from out of Saskatchewan. 
 
The part, I think, that really disappointed me the most in this 
decision was the Farm Land Security Board has made 
exemptions in the past far farther than Russell, Manitoba, but 
for some strange reason in this case wouldn’t go along with it. 
 
Now what they have cost this family out there in my 
constituency is: number one, a very, fair price for their land, a 
price they may not have even received from their neighbours; 
the other thing is they were hired for six years to keep working 
on this farm so they had the best of both worlds. Number one, 
they had a very good price for their farm; number two, they 
could stay and farm that land until they were ready for 
retirement, retirement age. It was a win-win. 
 
The farmer, Mr. Deputy Speaker, told me that the night they 
had concluded the sale with the farmer they were ecstatic. It’s 
the best feeling they had for years. They paid all their debts off, 
had a fair amount of money left over, had a job. It was just a 
great deal. The next day they went before the Farm Land 
Security Board and were told this will not happen. And I guess 
what I’m saying and what that farmer is saying, and I believe 
many, Mr. Deputy Speaker, many farmers in Saskatchewan that 
are at that point are saying, we have to change these antiquated 
laws that are trying to protect Saskatchewan but I think at the 
same time are hurting us far more than they are helping us. 
 
I think it’s time we took a look at things like this, opened our 
borders up at least to Canadians, Mr. Speaker, to stop this kind 
of restrictive laws. They’re hurting everyone out there. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe you know every bit as well as I 
do — you’re from a rural community, rural constituency — 
many of our farmers are white hair, are ready for retirement but 



162 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 1999 

for one reason or another — whether there isn’t a market for 
their land, whether they can’t get a fair price for it, or really, 
when it comes down to it, nobody really wants to buy it now — 
can’t retire. And I think that’s a sad state of affairs in the 
province of Saskatchewan. We could help that by changing this 
antiquated law that’s been there far too long, opened our 
borders up. 
 
And you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what we could do is bring 
fresh money into Saskatchewan, bring fresh people into 
Saskatchewan; maybe our population would grow and maybe 
we would grow at the same time. 
 
I’d like to touch on taxes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because a 
couple of the members across, when they were speaking this 
afternoon, were so proud of their tax record in Saskatchewan. In 
fact, I believe one of the members over there said today that the 
only people in Saskatchewan that say taxes are a dirty word, are 
the Saskatchewan Party and the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 
 
Well I have never seen anyone in Saskatchewan, when your 
government has raised taxes, the members opposite have raised 
taxes, that anybody has jumped for joy and said, oh great, the 
NDP (New Democratic Party) has raised taxes; am I happy. So 
I think it’s a dirty word. High taxes, second highest in the 
country, is a dirty word for everybody except 42 members 
opposite. 
 
I was really interested, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with the member 
for Saskatoon Southeast. The member for Saskatoon Southeast, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, did an MLA (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly) report here in the summer. And her MLA report 
made the comment that farmers don’t pay taxes. That was right 
in her MLA report. The member for Saskatoon Southeast 
doesn’t have a clue what she’s talking about, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
And I’d like to just go through a few of the taxes. Taxes on fuel, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, let’s talk about diesel to start with. There’s 
a 4-cent-per-litre federal excise tax plus GST (goods and 
services tax). That’s on diesel alone for farm fuel. For farm gas, 
we pay a 10-cent federal tax. Also on gas we pay a 
15-cent-a-litre provincial — and I reiterate provincial — road 
tax. The member from Saskatoon Southeast just neglected to 
mention that one. Plus, on top of that, we pay the GST. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, you know the volume of fuel and gas that 
farmers use. So on fuel and gas alone, we pay an extremely 
high amount of tax. We pay the same taxes everybody else does 
on things we purchase, as urban people do, exactly the same 
tax. 
 
But another area that farmers are hit — and I believe very hard, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, and you also know this — is education tax 
on farmland. 
 
Now you can get the average quarter out there, and I don’t 
know what the average would be, but I would guess 5, $600 an 
acre, $400 at least on many quarters, in education tax alone. 
Now if you get a farmer that owns 15 or 20 quarters of land, 
that farmer is probably paying 8 to 10,000, $12,000 in 
education tax alone. 
 

Where this is a bigger problem is that we have less kids in rural 
Saskatchewan than we’ve had for years. Our population’s 
dropping. We have less farmers, so their tax is higher. We have 
less schools. We have school closures in rural Saskatchewan. 
And yet at the same time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re being 
asked to pick up a bigger share of the education tax. 
 
Reassessment . . . reassessment, when it was done a couple of 
years ago — and the Minister of Municipal Government I’m 
sure will back me up on this — reassessment shifted the load, 
not much of it from small-town Saskatchewan to our farmland, 
and once again it went up. So the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast better do a little more research before she starts 
saying farmers don’t pay tax. 
 
Some more taxes that we pay, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . and this 
comes from the Canadian Fertilizer Institute . . . estimates that 
farmers pay $300 million in taxes, collected by the federal 
government on fertilizer each year, $300 million from fertilizer 
tax. The member for Southeast, in Saskatoon, should do her 
homework. 
 
Saskatchewan has the highest fuel tax paid by railway 
companies in the country. Once again, the members opposite 
say that we’re not the highest. Well, here we are. It says 
Saskatchewan has the highest fuel tax paid by railway 
companies in this . . . by provinces in this country. That tax is 
built into the freight rate charged to farmers, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. So when we see the deductions on our grain cheque 
for freight rates, guess what? Part of that is going back to the 
provincial government. The federal government also collects 
$138 million per year from farmers in user fees, and user fees 
are nothing more than another tax. 
 
We also have provincially a number of environmental taxes, 
licensing, user fees, stuff like that on tires as an example, oil or 
filters — all those things return money into general revenue for 
the government of Saskatchewan. The member for Saskatoon 
Southeast should wake up, do her homework before she opens 
her mouth and makes a comment like she did. 
 
We should also mention, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that provincial 
and federal agriculture spending has been cut by 60 per cent 
over the last five years. So we’ve done our share to balance 
your budgets and none of that is being returned to the farmers 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve just got an example here I think is 
interesting. It took 26 bushels of wheat to clothe the farmer in 
the ’30s. In 1998 it took 206 bushels of wheat to clothe that 
same farmer. In 1938 it took one hundred and twelve and a half 
bushels of wheat to fill a 500-gallon tank of fuel. In 1998 it 
takes 401 bushels of wheat to fill that same tank. 
 
In 1938 the property tax on a section of land was $218.44 and it 
took 273 bushels of wheat to pay for that tax. In 1998 the 
property tax on that same section of land are $3,038.44. That 
took 1,433 bushels of wheat. Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 
comparison is 273 bushels of wheat at that time, 1,433 now. So 
you can see how our costs are rising. 
 
European farm subsidies average $175 an acre without 
including the export subsidies for wheat which is $38 a tonne 



March 22, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 163 

on top of that. For barley it’s $74 a tonne. European farm 
subsidies average 175 bucks an acre, Mr. Deputy Speaker, more 
than we get for most tonnes of our grain. 
 
Gross operating expenses for Saskatchewan farmers rose from 
3.9 billion in ’95 to 4.36 billion in ’97. So once again you can 
see how our costs have rose. Gross program spending by the 
federal government on agriculture for ’97-98 was 817 million. 
A comparison, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the CBC (Canadian 
Broadcasting Corporation) received a $1.1 billion subsidy in the 
same year. The federal government spent more on the CBC than 
it did on agriculture in this country. It makes you wonder where 
their priorities are, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I’d like to also talk about, for just a second, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is municipal government. I believe municipal 
government, and you know that the Minister of Municipal 
Government might be able to enlighten us, but I wonder what’s 
going to happen to municipal government this year. For the first 
seven years that this government has been in power, municipal 
governments have been cut across this province till last year 
when they actually pretty well broke even. 
 
(1915) 
 
Well we’re being told that we’ve turned the corner; this 
government’s got things together. Maybe it’s time we returned 
some of the windfall that the municipal governments out there 
have paid the price for. What better time to put more money 
into our roads than right now when farmers are hurting so 
badly. Maybe municipalities could lower the municipal tax if 
the government would return some of the money that they 
downloaded on and cost farmers over the last seven years. And 
once again the municipalities would be very interested to know 
about the education tax on farm land. 
 
One thing also I’d like to talk about, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 
we hear it across the floor every day in every speech, about the 
big debt that was left them. Well I’d like to talk about that debt 
for a minute, and this comes from a Provincial Auditor’s report. 
If you listen to the government members opposite you’ll hear 
them say, we inherited this big debt, which they did inherit a 
debt, part of which was there when they came into . . . Mr. 
Devine came to power. 
 
But let’s look at the numbers now. In 1991 the overall debt — 
and I’m just not talking the fixed debt or the fabricated debt that 
the government talks about, and those numbers quite often are 
hard to understand what they’re saying — but the total debt. 
And we’re talking unfunded pensions, the Crowns, the whole 
spectrum of debt in 1991 was 17 and a half billion dollars; 1992 
that jumped, $19 billion; 1993, $19.8 billion. What’s happening 
to that debt? The NDP government’s in power and it’s still 
climbing — 1994, the provincial debt total, everything 
included, was $20.7 billion. 
 
Now for the first three or four years you people were in power 
the debt jumped. Now you started it on the trend downwards 
and you’ve gone down. In 1991, remember the total debt was 
$17.5 billion; 1998, the total debt is 18.9, yet we’re told that 
they’re addressing the debt, they’re paying the debt down. What 
they’re doing is trying to recover from the debt they increased. 
They haven’t even got it back to where they started from. So 

they haven’t paid a nickel below what the debt was when they 
came to power. 
 
So I think it’s a deception, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for the people 
opposite to say, we’re addressing the debt. They haven’t even 
addressed the debt that they’ve accumulated since they came to 
power in 1991. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I also . . . I would be remiss if I didn’t talk 
about health care because it’s a very important issue in my 
constituency as well as every other area in this province. And I 
found it amusing in some of the speeches today — I believe it 
was the member for Swift Current who should know better; I 
believe had a care home closed in his constituency — said 
health care is in great shape, we’re wonderful out there. 
 
I think he . . . I might have misunderstood him but I think he 
said he’s going to be re-elected with bells on because health 
care is in such a wonderful state. 
 
Well I’d just like to quote, Mr. Deputy Speaker, from a speech 
that Shirley Douglas gave, Tommy Douglas’s daughter, in 
Swift Current, in your backyard. And I’d like to quote some of 
the things she said here. And she’s going on to say that the state 
of health care in Canada . . . And I’m sure the members 
opposite at that stage, part of the speech, thought, this is 
wonderful — in Saskatchewan we’re doing great; the rest of 
Canada is horrible. 
 
Part of her speech said, and I’ll just read parts of it, and I quote: 
 

The daughter of former Saskatchewan premier, Tommy 
Douglas — the “father of medicare,” made an impassioned 
plea to Canadians to fight to preserve her father’s dream of 
a universal, publicly funded national health-care system. 
 

Then she went on to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I quote: 
 

While Saskatchewan may be the birthplace of medicare, it 
is not immune to these trends. 
 

Interesting, isn’t it? 
 

For example, an American company has been hired to 
provide laundry services in health-care facilities in Swift 
Current, she said. 
 
“Aren’t we capable of doing our own laundry?” she (said), 
telling reporters when she heard the news it was like being 
“stabbed in the heart.” 
 
“We’re talking about Swift Current, the No. 1 hospital 
district (she said.) This is the town and the place where the 
. . . system started,” . . . 
 
“When my father used to talk about the slow strangulation 
of the health-care system this is what he was talking about 
. . .” 
 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, she’s not talking about Ontario. 
She’s not talking about Alberta. She’s talking about our 
Premier, your government, health care in Saskatchewan. 
 



164 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 1999 

She said: 
 

“You just let them in to wash the sheets, you just (let them 
in for) lab work, and before you know it you have given 
the shop away,” . . . 

 
Now that’s funny because that’s coming from one of your own. 
Tommy Douglas’s daughter is running down Saskatchewan’s 
provincial health care. She goes on to say, and I quote: 
 

The privatization of health care is slow, it is incremental 
and it is massive, she said, noting the dismantling of the 
national health-care system is by design, not by accident. 

 
So I guess what she’s saying it’s not by accident you people are 
doing what you’re doing; it’s by design. You close 52 hospitals 
— actually I’m wrong, it wasn’t 52 — 53, the Plains was 54. 
Now I believe the associate minister, did she say 36 more 
hospitals. No, she said that’s not right. That was the 
Saskatchewan Party saying 36. She said it’s somewhere 
between 13 and 15; I think it’s 14 we’re going to close. Now 
she’s retracted those comments. Now the Premier says we’re 
not closing another hospital. But don’t forget, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that’s the same Premier that stated last spring there 
will not be one bed lost when the Plains close. And what have 
we lost? Sixty-four in Regina alone. So who can you trust if you 
can’t trust the Premier? I’m really disappointed. 
 
The Premier also said a number of times, zap. And I would say 
if you people are elected after the next election it will be zap to 
36 hospitals — not 14, not 13, not 15. That rumour I believe, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that rumour wasn’t supposed to get out 
until the members opposite thought they’d be government 
again. 
 
You know, we have an idea, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Maybe it’s 
time when the federal government throws new money into 
health care, maybe it’s time for an audit for money. Let’s check, 
see where the money’s going. These members opposite keep 
saying, oh we’re putting more money in than we’ve ever put 
before. And I find it amazing, totally amazing, that we’re 
putting more money into health care than ever before and we’re 
probably lucky if we’ve got half the health care we had when 
you people came to government. Waiting lists are longer than 
they’ve ever been before. Every day we see people in the 
gallery that have health care problems that this government isn’t 
addressing. It’s amazing when we put more money — it would 
be like our farms. If we just kept . . . sold a section of land 
every year or a quarter of land, dump more money in, and close 
their eyes and neglected to look at the problem, well we’d go 
broke. 
 
What do we do in Saskatchewan? We raise taxes. Every time 
we’re short of money, oh raise taxes. As the member said, it’s 
only a dirty word, except to the NDP. 
 
Another thing I’d like to talk about and what I think one of the 
members mentioned this afternoon, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I 
thought it was quite interesting. He touched the issue of polls 
and polling, Mr. Deputy Speaker. He neglected to say though 
that the Saskatchewan Party is, I think, 51 per cent and 
climbing, I think the last I heard. That was two weeks ago. 
 

I think after the Throne Speech, we’re probably 52, 53. After 
some of those speeches this afternoon, probably 54, 55. I 
believe after the budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we could top the 
60 mark on average which means of course we’re probably 90, 
95 in some areas of the province. 
 
That doesn’t leave much room for the member from Swift 
Current, the member from Lloydminster. Actually when you 
think about it, what about the member for Yorkton? Sitting in a 
hotbed, surrounded by opposition members, I think there’s a 
member in trouble. I honestly do. 
 
Let’s talk about his record for a minute, the member from 
Yorkton, Mr. Deputy Speaker. What was he? Let’s go back to 
his record. I believe . . . was he not Minister of Highways for a 
while? And the heat got on. Was he Minister of Highways when 
that piece of pavement come through that lady’s windshield? 
That was in the member for Estevan’s constituency where the 
lady pretty near got killed by the piece of pavement off our 
great highway system we have here. I believe the member for 
Yorkton was Highways minister. 
 
Then we moved him out of there and we gave him Health. No, 
we didn’t; you did because we wouldn’t have give that to him; 
we’d have give it to somebody responsible. He had health care 
. . . 
 
And I’ll give you an example of how well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that the member for Yorkton did with health care. East Central 
Health District is the member for Yorkton’s home area. Do you 
know we ended up with East Central Health District when that 
member finished as Health minister? We have a $13 million 
debt in the East Central Health District, his home area. Don’t 
forget that. That’s where he lives. That’s where he goes for his 
health care, although he is the same member that goes on three 
waiting lists at one time. 
 
Then what do we do? We let him out of there, never forgetting 
that the East Central Health District had a $3 million deficit this 
year. Now, just imagine, we give him education. Before he got 
there I was losing schools. I lost MacNutt School. Now he’s 
Minister of Education, he’s got one in his own area that’s 
fighting for survival: Ebenezer. They’re begging not to close 
their school. This man has got a really bad record, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, for bad things to happen when he’s the minister. Don’t 
give him agriculture, Mr. Deputy Speaker, please don’t give 
him agriculture. We’re in bad enough shape now. 
 
I’d like to talk for a minute, and we just talked a bit on it, but 
. . . highways in Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This 
government two years ago, and I believe it was the member for 
Carrot River when he was minister of Highways said, we’re 
going to put $250 million into highways, two and a half billion 
over the next 10 years. The problem being, that government 
hasn’t come close to honouring that commitment in the first two 
years. Not close, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I believe 208 million one 
year, 218 million another year. And we must remember that a 
lot of that money never reaches our highways. It’s ate up in 
administration that this government’s so famous for. The actual 
dollars that probably get out there to build new highways, after 
we repair the ones that are broken down, is probably 60 or 70 
million a year. It’s a pittance. 
 



March 22, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 165 

And I’d be remiss if I let the federal government off, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. It’s not totally the provincial government’s 
fault. This federal government we have today, if you look at the 
numbers, in eastern Canada . . . let’s take an example: 
Newfoundland. I believe it was 400-and-some million dollars 
over a seven-year period Newfoundland got out of the federal 
government. PEI (Prince Edward Island): 400-and-some million 
dollars. I’ve got as many highways in my constituency as Prince 
Edward Island. On top of that, they build them a bridge, cost 
millions upon millions of dollars. What does the federal 
government put into Saskatchewan for highways in that same 
period? I believe it was $35 million over that seven-year period. 
We want to twin — you want to twin — No. 1 Highway and 
they don’t commit to nothing for twinning of No. 1 Highway. 
 
Where’s Mr. Goodale, our beloved, one, lonely, single, little, 
old MP (Member of Parliament) from Regina here? A little bit 
of rural riding he’s got — I would say that would be enough to 
knock him off next time. Where is he when we need help? 
Where was Mr. Goodale when the ag crisis was on? I’m not 
sure he wasn’t in the bubble with the Premier here. They both 
seemed to disappear about the same time. Neither one has 
seemed to come out. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, highways all over this province are in 
terrible shape. I’d just like to read off a few just in my 
constituency alone. There’s No. 8 Highway, No. 80 Highway; 
15 Highway — I believe was built by one of the past 
Agriculture ministers in this province, Mr. Edgar Kaeding. It 
was a bit shorter way to get to Regina — we built a highway. 
But guess what? Mr. Kaeding’s not in government any more. I 
am. We let the highway crumble. I think it’s time we fixed that 
highway, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
There’s so many others. I was at Raymore, went through 
Raymore the other day. I don’t know what highway that is. 
Anybody been west lately, of Raymore? You’re lucky if you 
can go 30, 40 kilometres an hour without knocking a wheel off. 
That’s the reason, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we came up with our 
highway hotline to . . . by the way, is still . . . the phones are 
ringing constantly. And you can win a wheel alignment. Phone 
in, tell us which is the worst highway in the province, you could 
win a wheel alignment. With any luck we’ll get the Highways 
minister to sit on and judge which highway is worst. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think I’d be remiss if I didn’t talk about the third 
party. I guess I would be remiss. I’d like to just talk about the 
third party for a minute, Mr. Speaker. A number of people over 
there have spent their full time today not talking about what 
Saskatchewan needs, not talking about what this problem of 
vision we have for this province. They’ve talked about the 
Saskatchewan Party. I think mainly because they can hear 
footsteps. 
 
But I think they neglected to mention some of the problems that 
this government has. And one of the problems being that the 
third party is going left, left, left . . . in fact, I’m not sure 
they’ve passed the government opposite. And I think where 
they may be sitting and might hurt the government of the day is 
that we might have another new party in this province. And it 
could be called the green libbers -- the Liberals and the Green 
Party, because if the Liberal Party, the third party, goes any 
farther left, they’re going to be right over there with the Green 

Party. So don’t be running down new parties. There may be 
more on the scene to come. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to go on and on, but I know some 
of my colleagues would like to get up. They don’t want to miss 
the chance to talk about the things we have. 
 
I guess, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe that what we need in this 
province, number one is lower taxes. We’ve got to get our 
economy going. High taxes drives people out of this province; it 
drives investment out of this province. We’ve got to remove the 
walls. 
 
Just like The Farm Security Act, just like the high taxes, we’re 
creating walls around the province of Saskatchewan, the 
problem being is that there’s holes in it letting the people out. It 
is not letting them come back in and invest in this province. The 
only time they come back is on long weekends and it’s bad on 
Sunday nights to see them leave. Most of these are our kids and 
grandkids. 
 
You know, they say we shouldn’t compare ourselves with 
Alberta, but when you think about it, why not? We’ve got oil; 
we’ve got gas; we’ve got uranium; we’ve got coal; potash; 
we’ve got agriculture. What does Alberta have that we don’t? 
They’ve got foresight; they’ve got lower taxes. They’ve got a 
vision for how you let business operate and get out of the road. 
And that’s what we’ve got to do in this province. 
 
(1930) 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, until we lower taxes, until we take these 
walls down around this province, we will be stuck at a million 
people. Farm aid was a good example. If we had two or three 
million people, can you imagine how we could have addressed 
that problem quickly? Alberta did. Even Manitoba have 
nothing. They haven’t got anything compared to what we have 
and yet taxes are lower in Manitoba than Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I was disappointed in the Throne 
Speech. I’m sure I’m going to be disappointed in the budget, 
unless of course it happens to be an election-goody budget 
which will probably be never passed. A lot of goodies in it will 
never be passed and an election will be called. All I can say to 
that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is bring it on. We’re ready for the 
election. Let the polls say what they want. Let the actual voter 
tell us what they think. We’re ready. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to annually get up in my seat here in the legislature and 
to take some time to review some of the things that have passed 
in the constituency, some of the things that have been done 
provincially and that have affected my constituency, and also to 
take a look at the proposals from the Throne Speech, see how 
they fit in and how it would affect, I believe it would affect, our 
constituents. 
 
Before I get into that, Mr. Speaker, I notice that when the 
opposition members get up to speak, particularly the Tories 



166 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 1999 

from the side opposite, that they often like to use Alberta as an 
example. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Often? All the time. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — My colleague says that it’s becoming more 
than just often, it becomes a sort of a bad habit with them. Mr. 
Speaker, there are things that have happened in Alberta which 
all of us might sometimes envy. I suppose nobody would give 
up . . . Nobody would have given away the fact that if you were 
given some sweet oil as was found in Leduc in the early ’50s 
. . . 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, it’s not just what you’re given, it’s what 
you do with what you’re given. And when it comes to Alberta, 
Mr. Speaker, there’s a trend that’s happening there that I would 
not be proud of and I would be very concerned with. I’m 
concerned with the fact that it has some spillover effect even to 
us in Saskatchewan. 
 
What am I referring to, Mr. Speaker? Here is a headline from a 
newspaper called The Province, March 10, and the headline 
says “Growing gap between rich and poor spells trouble”. Now 
what this refers to is an article written by Jim McNulty — he 
writes on national affairs in these papers, Mr. Speaker — and he 
talks about what a Toronto economist Armine Yalnizyan 
published in an extensive report which . . . for the Centre for 
Social Justice. 
 
Now the first thing that Mr. McNulty does is he makes a 
statement here that these words are not that of a New Democrat 
politician or a union boss or any left-wing think-tank. These 
words and these statements and these conclusions that he came 
to were by this particular Toronto economist. 
 
He says this: 
 

In Canada, the rich are enormously richer. In 1973 the 
wealthiest 10 percent of families with kids under 18 made 
21 more times more than the poorest 10 percent of the 
families. But by ’96, moneyed families made more than 
314 times more than the poorest. 

 
Mr. Speaker, in 1973 the gap between the rich and the poor was 
about 18 to 21 times in terms of salary. That has magnified, that 
has leaped to a figure of 314 times more. That’s what’s 
happened. In other words, the middle class is shrinking, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But he goes on to say here that the gap between the rich and the 
poor is growing faster in Alberta than in any other part of the 
country. That is not something to be proud of. The gap between 
the rich and the poor is growing faster than anyplace else in the 
country. That is in Alberta. 
 
Alberta also has the largest wage gender gap in Canada, where 
women earn only 68 per cent of men’s average salaries. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the great Alberta that the members opposite 
are so proud of — the province with all the money, all the 
money — what are they doing? They have the highest single 
rate . . . highest rate of single moms in poverty — 71.4 per cent, 
according to the study done by Armine Yalnizyan for the 

Centre for Social Justice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that does not speak well for a province, for any 
province. And it certainly doesn’t speak well for one of the 
wealthiest provinces in the country. And if there’s any mission 
that I feel still needs to be addressed in the country, that is one 
of the things that needs to be addressed, and that is to . . . that 
growing gap between the rich and the poor in the country. And 
at the same time, what is happening when that grows is that the 
middle class is shrinking. Without a good strong middle class, 
Mr. Speaker, it’s very difficult to maintain a democratic system. 
A democratic system . . . In a democratic system people need to 
have access to information, they have to have time to ponder 
the information, they have to have time with which to act on the 
information in a democratic fashion, volunteering their 
activities and using community-based organizations with which 
to implement good policies. Mr. Speaker, that remark I wanted 
to make because it was following close on some of the remarks 
made by the Tories opposite and I thought it ought to be 
addressed immediately. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to advise that I will be supporting the 
Speech from the Throne. It was a good speech. It reflects 
Saskatchewan values. It speaks to hope. It speaks to hope in the 
future, Mr. Speaker, and it was built on successes of past years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve come a long way here in Saskatchewan 
since 1991. No longer are we referred to as Canada’s basket 
case. Why? Because with the prudence of this government, the 
government which I support, we have created a situation where 
we are now free from fiscal slavery, fiscal bondage. 
 
We’re not totally free, Mr. Speaker, but we’re free enough to be 
able to function. We’re free enough to be able to provide extra, 
for example over the last few years, an extra $80 million to 
health care when it was needed; an extra $70 million to fight 
forest fires when it was needed, Mr. Speaker; an extra $140 
million to farmers just this last year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that’s on top of providing modest wage increases to 
employees in all departments. Wage increases consistently in 
Saskatchewan, modest as they be, but not decreases such as was 
done in the Tory provinces on both sides of Saskatchewan. Our 
civil servants, Mr. Speaker, deserve praise and deserve 
commendation for the work and their efforts and the 
co-operation that they gave to the rest of the province, 
everybody coming together when we were in tough times. They 
deserve credit for that. They’ve pulled through, and in some 
cases when the loads were extraordinarily heavy. And now we 
are fortunately in a position where we are able to consider 
suggestions and weigh them out and draw priorities, whether 
they be on tax reductions or debt repayments, and I believe, Mr. 
Speaker, that they also deserve credit for it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Before I go into more detail, Mr. Speaker, I 
am reminded of the story that was spoken earlier today by the 
member from Estevan. He talked very briefly about a glass 
before being placed before a person. When the glass . . . There 
was a glass of water, Mr. Speaker, and he asked whether the 
glass, which was about half full of water, whether it was half 
full or considered to be half empty. Mr. Speaker, he said it 



March 22, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 167 

depends on your point of view whether it’s half full or half 
empty. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will refer to that again in a moment but when I 
was pondering as what to say here, I thought to myself how are 
things in Saskatchewan; how are things in Canada; how are 
they overall? Is the glass half empty or is the glass half full? 
 
And I want to just take a moment and look at things by going 
back, not over just a day at a time but looking at almost a 
lifetime’s worth. And when I do that, I think that we here in 
Saskatchewan — perhaps in all of Canada, but particularly in 
Saskatchewan — have a rare human experience, very rare when 
you look at it on a global and a long-time schedule. That is in 
my lifetime, Mr. Speaker. I have not experienced a war; I have 
not experienced pestilence; I haven’t experienced famine; I 
haven’t experienced any kind of major political disaster — we 
came close to it once mind you. 
 
Overall, Mr. Speaker, with small exceptions, small periods of 
time, we’ve experienced steady growth; we’ve experienced 
liberty; we have an extraordinarily high standard of living. 
Compared to most places in the world, Mr. Speaker, we are a 
favoured province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — And we live in a favoured nation and we are 
a favoured population. Now how come, Mr. Speaker? Did this 
all happen by accident? Was it luck? Was it because of the 
brilliant decisions of our leaders? Think of it, Mr. Speaker. How 
come? Because, to borrow a title from a current movie, when it 
comes right down to it, life is beautiful here. Here we are in 
Saskatchewan — quiet place, remote, unassuming. We’ve got 
time to laugh, to play, to work, and to develop. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the total answer to that question is beyond what I 
want to deal with today, but I do want to say one thing about it. 
I believe that our favourite place here in the world would not 
have happened if we were not the benefactors of good 
governance, good overall governance. Governance which has in 
it a balance of good public policies. Governance which balances 
the structuring for economic success with being socially 
progressive. Governance which balances the taxation system so 
that there’s room to pay for education, to pay for health, to pay 
for social services, and yet be globally competitive. 
 
These are the type of policies, Mr. Speaker, that provide for 
wealth creation and then wealth distribution. These are the type 
of policies — policies I’ve experienced in my lifetime — that 
provide for programs for people. And it gives us freedom from 
want; it gives us freedom for creativity; freedom for us to 
self-actualize and to pursue our dreams. 
 
Mr. Speaker, policies like these are talked about in this year’s 
Throne Speech. They’re policies for people. They are policies 
that are based on the people’s agenda, Mr. Speaker. The 
people’s agenda in this year’s Throne Speech are in four main 
areas — the areas of education, health, safety at home, jobs and 
the economy. 
 
I was particularly pleased to see that the Throne Speech had a 
lot to say about education. Why, Mr. Speaker? As a teacher, I 

know that education holds the key to our future and it’s the key 
to our well-being. It’s the key to our ability to trade in the 
future; it’s a key to our ability to research; it’s the key to our 
ability to apply research; and our key to a developed, 
technologically based society. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is being done in our school is very important 
to our well-being. I think that sometimes it goes 
underemphasized, because it’s in our schools that our teachers 
are faced with the task, the task of challenging our children’s 
brains to develop. Taking a child from this level, and helping 
that child achieve this level. Preparing our youth to take our 
province and our country, Mr. Speaker, from this level to 
achieve at this level. 
 
(1945) 
 
Mr. Speaker, ordinarily throne speeches speak in terms only of 
one year. This one speaks for a little longer. A Confucian 
prophet . . . pardon me, a Confucian proverb reads something 
like this, Mr. Speaker: if you think in terms of one year, plant a 
seed; if you think in terms of 10 years, plant trees; but if you 
think in terms of 100 years, teach the people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget speaks to the long term. It pays 
attention to education. Let’s take a look at some of the things 
that it does, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to education. First 
thing it does, Mr. Speaker, it mentions a bit about where we’ve 
been in education. But what I want to turn to particularly is the 
comment on page 4 of the Throne Speech. It says: 
 

During this session of the Legislature, my government will 
work closely with parents, teachers and school boards, to 
move forward on some of the key priorities facing our 
school system: 
 
Making sure vulnerable children get the best possible start, 
through stronger pre-kindergarten programs. 
 

It’s right from the start, Mr. Speaker — children from the start. 
 
Second: 

 
Making sure children get full benefit from their schools, by 
implementing Saskatchewan’s core curriculum and making 
it more accessible to parents and teachers. 
 

That is about three-quarters done, Mr. Speaker; maybe 90 per 
cent done in most of the schools. But it’s a job that is not yet 
finished. 
 
Number three: 
 

Making sure (that) students can handle the basic tools of 
tomorrow’s economy, by providing broader access to 
computers and new technologies. 

 
And last of all, Mr. Speaker: 
 

And investing appropriately to ensure that all (of our 
children) . . . learn in good, safe schools. 
 

There’s one more important thing that this Throne Speech does 



168 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 1999 

when it comes to education for K to 12. It says that we will 
launch a Role of Schools Task Force, Mr. Speaker. We will 
launch a Role of Schools task force. I believe that this is a very 
timely thing for us to do here in Saskatchewan now, Mr. 
Speaker. We have progressed through several stages in 
education, K to 12. We have gone through implementation of 
what is known as the Directions report, started about 20 years 
ago. This led to the development of core curriculum. 
 
But what’s happened, we now have a new situation in our 
schools and we have a new situation in our society. Schools are 
now being asked to do more. Schools are asked now to integrate 
special-needs students. Schools have to deal with the 
information age. They have to deal with children at risk. We 
have things in schools now that we never heard of before — 
attention deficit disorder, fetal alcohol syndrome. Mr. Speaker, 
the context of schools has changed. The context of school in 
societies has changed. 
 
The information age. When these other things were put into 
place, Mr. Speaker, there still was a Soviet Union. There was 
not such a thing as Aboriginal self-government. Nunavut . . . 
none of us knew that Nunavut existed. And now we have the 
largest land claim in the world implemented in 1999. We went 
through oil crises, two of them, shortages in the ’70s and gluts 
in the ’90s. We’ve gone through globalization. Globalization of 
trade, Mr. Speaker, globalization of information. RRSPs 
(Registered Retirement Savings Plan) didn’t exist, Mr. Speaker, 
when we first started the Directions report. NAFTA (North 
American Free Trade Agreement) didn’t exist. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I look forward to the role of schools task 
force. That, I believe, is the people’s agenda. It comes at the 
right time; it’s a good policy. Mr. Speaker, what a contrast with 
the Tory proposal to freeze funding to education and health, 
where they say and their leader says that they will allow for 
inflation only. Well I tell this to the Tories, go and tell that to 
the teachers that you’re going to freeze education. Go and tell 
that to school board members. Go and tell that to the parents. I 
wouldn’t want to fight an election on that kind of a platform. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to take a moment to deal with 
post-secondary education. I want to compliment my friend, the 
member from Meadow Lake, who has taken on the role of 
ministry of the Post-Secondary Education because as minister, 
he has also initiated a review. They have set up regional 
colleges, post-secondary education, and skills training review 
committee. And this, the job of this committee, Mr. Speaker, is 
to examine the colleges’ future and the unique role that they 
have in the post-secondary system. 
 
It looks to position colleges to support the goals of the 
Saskatchewan training strategy and to position regional colleges 
to meet the needs of learners, employers, and labour-market 
needs of the next millennium. 
 
To do this, Mr. Speaker, they’re going to secure input from 
staff, from students, from business, from REDAs (regional 
economic development authority), First Nations, and Metis, and 
anybody else who may be interested. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the colleges of Saskatchewan are not a small 
thing. They serve 30,000 residents in a variety of ways. This 

review, Mr. Speaker, will fulfill the mandate of The Regional 
Colleges Act which asks for a review every five years, and it 
will serve the colleges well into the future. 
 
I’m also pleased, Mr. Speaker, that the Youth Futures program, 
which was established in 1997 as a pilot project, is positioned 
and is placed in Prince Albert, my town. This program, Mr. 
Speaker, is a community-based . . . is run by a 
community-based organization. It’s overseen by a steering 
committee with representation from a wide variety of interests 
in Prince Albert which include the human service agencies, 
businesses, secondary and post-secondary education 
representatives, and First Nations. 
 
Now what is it, Mr. Speaker? It takes young people who would 
ordinarily be at risk, who would ordinarily end up on welfare 
rolls, and it requires them to plan their future and to take 
appropriate action. It starts with an assessment of their skills, 
their abilities, and ambitions. And from this, they develop a 
plan to achieve their desired goals. That plan would include 
appropriate programs and services. 
 
Now some of the youth in this program may need to address 
personal or family issues before they begin formal training or 
education. This is also provided for. And these participants 
receive a youth allowance which parallels the level of financial 
support provided by the provincial training allowance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re into the second year. I’m looking forward to 
the continuation of this program. There are between 300 and 
350 youth involved in this program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me turn now to the topic of jobs and the 
economy — one of the pillars of this Throne Speech. I believe it 
was wise, Mr. Speaker, for the government to deal — to take 
this topic — jobs and the economy, as one of the four main 
areas of the people’s agenda. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when it comes right down to it, most of us gain a 
lot of our identity from our jobs, from our work. Quite often 
when you meet somebody, one of the two questions that are 
asked is: what do you do? The other one may be: where do you 
live? It’s our custom and it’s probably a nice one. But it points 
out how important jobs are. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, what’s happened in Saskatchewan over the 
last while? Since 1992, Mr. Speaker, this government has set a 
goal to create 30,000 jobs and it’s done exactly that, Mr. 
Speaker. It set a goal to create 30,000 jobs and it has created 
30,000 jobs. Our record is particularly good with young people, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
But when we did the job creation here, Mr. Speaker, it was done 
in a sensible way. It was done in a balanced way. And the 
results of this, of the policies that were implemented, the 
economic policies, we see that our population is growing 
steadily. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, between ’92 and ’97, Saskatchewan led 
the nation in economic growth. And it’s still growing today. By 
doing this, Mr. Speaker, we are now able to be paying down 
some of the debt from 70 per cent of the GDP (gross domestic 
product) to 40 per cent today. There are now more people 



March 22, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 169 

working in good full-time jobs in Saskatchewan than ever 
before. That was last year’s record. 
 
Employment is at a 16-year low. Mr. Speaker, a recent Alberta 
study ranked Saskatchewan number one in youth employment 
for three years running. There are people coming back to 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now what has happened is we are building partnerships, Mr. 
Speaker, with northern communities and with aboriginal 
communities — a very significant thing to do because this is 
where the youth x500 
Now what has happened is we are building partnerships, Mr. 
Speaker, with northern communities and with aboriginal 
communities — a very significant thing to do because this is 
where the youth unemployment was the highest. And as a result 
of our taxation policies, as a result of the planning shown by 
this government, people are investing capital in our economy. 
In 1998 we saw $7 billion in new investment alone come to 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year, as I mentioned earlier, it was the 
deliberate decision of the Government of Saskatchewan to help 
farm producers which were badly affected by the drought 
situation and also by the weak hog prices. As I mentioned 
earlier, our government has committed $140 million to assist 
these producers, and they will pay 40 per cent of the proposed 
federal program to cover the 40 per cent of Canada’s farmland, 
Mr. Speaker, and that’s only using 3 per cent of Canada’s 
taxpayers which reside in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this was possible because our province has 
diversified a lot. We heard Grant Devine, when he was in 
power, speak a lot about diversification. We didn’t see much 
diversification, but we heard a lot about it. What has happened 
in the last eight years, Mr. Speaker, is the farmers have 
diversified just tremendously, Mr. Speaker, and as a result we 
were able to get through some of these tough times, as last year 
with the decreased oil prices — decreased commodity prices all 
through really — but particularly oil and wheat. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to just take a few moments to look at a few 
more statistical indicators about our economy, particularly take 
a look at how much Saskatchewan has grown from the period of 
’92 to 1998. In the press, Mr. Speaker, you don’t get much of 
this. You will get every individual little story where people set 
up complaints, but you don’t get the good stories — you don’t 
get the success stories, Mr. Speaker. What statistics do is they 
even out all of the stories, the good stories and the difficult 
stories, and they give you the overall average. That’s why it’s 
important to take a look at them. It gives you the overall 
direction that your province is going. 
 
Youth employment, Mr. Speaker. What has happened to youth 
employment in Saskatchewan, ’92-98? It’s increased, Mr. 
Speaker, by 7,100 people; 9.7 per cent during that period. Way 
more than Manitoba’s, Mr. Speaker. Way more than 
Manitoba’s. And in particularly, female employment in 
Saskatchewan rose by 4,100 — again way more than Manitoba. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what has happened to personal income per capita 
in Saskatchewan, and how does it compare with Manitoba and 
Alberta? In Saskatchewan, from ’92-97, personal income grew 

by 11 per cent. How does that compare with Manitoba and 
Alberta? Saskatchewan grows by 11 per cent, Manitoba by 9.4 
per cent, Alberta by 9.3 per cent — ’92-97, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
proud of that. 
 
(2000) 
 
Mr. Speaker, what about average weekly earnings? 
Saskatchewan’s average weekly earnings in ’97 was 12.1 per 
cent higher than in 1992. Now how does Manitoba’s 
comparison at that time? Manitoba, at that time, while 
Saskatchewan up 12.1 per cent in increase, Manitoba’s increase 
was 7.1 per cent. Well it would have been nice if Manitoba 
would have been at 12.1 per cent as well, Mr. Speaker, but the 
point I’m trying to make here, Mr. Speaker, is that 
Saskatchewan is not slouching. In many cases Saskatchewan is 
leading, Mr. Speaker, and that is after coming from behind and 
having to take care of that monstrous debt that was given to us 
by the Devine government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what happens in the case of child . . . the child 
poverty rate. This is something, Mr. Speaker, that is not a thing 
that is . . . that any Canadian should be proud of. And when I 
started my address here I mentioned what the situation was in 
Alberta. It was drastic. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is in much 
better shape when it comes to child poverty. Still not good 
enough, not nearly where we should be. Still not good enough, 
but compared to Alberta and Manitoba, we are way better off. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is a graph compiled from StatsCanada. It 
was published in this book that was delivered to every MLA 
and every MLA should take a look at it. But this graph talks 
about the increase in number of poor children in Canada. Is the 
number of poor children in Canada increasing or decreasing? 
Now we’d all like to think that it was decreasing. But what this 
graph says that since from 1989 to 1985, 1989 to 1985 — this is 
not my research, Mr. Speaker, this is not our caucus research. 
These are figures taken from StatsCanada and put into this 
right-wing magazine here called “The Future of Work in 
Canada” called “RoadKill” . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . This 
is from 1989 to 1995. 
 
All right, now what’s happened. Percentages, by percentages, in 
Ontario one of the wealthiest part of our country, the increase in 
the number of poor children in Canada increased by 99 per cent 
— 99 per cent — from 254,000 to 506,000. Ontario has the 
worst record in this particular case. 
 
Go down to Alberta. How much did it increase in Alberta 
according to this? From 116,000 to 156,000, which comes out 
to 34 per cent. 
 
Now guess which province got the best record — still not very 
good, Mr. Speaker — but which one has the best record? Well 
at 7 per cent it’s Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. But even here we 
have a situation where the number of children in those years 
increased from 54,000 to 58,000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that statistic in itself is one of the main reasons 
that we need to have a government in power which thinks about 
balancing social programs, cares about people, and does not 
care exclusively about the bottom line and measure everything 
exclusively on the bottom line. 



170 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 1999 

Mr. Speaker, lastly let me turn to the concept of health care. I 
want to talk about my feeling about health care and how 
important medicare is to this country, and particularly the role 
that I believe we have to play when it comes to managing health 
care. I want to start out with the proposition that says that 
Saskatchewan has the best health care system in the world. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — I say that, Mr. Speaker, because it’s based 
on . . . first of all it was started here, but it’s based on and 
follows and leads the Canada Health Act which is the federal 
legislation which sets down some basic principles about 
medicare and about health care. It says that . . . And these 
principles are comprehensiveness, universality, accessibility, 
portability, and perhaps most importantly, Mr. Speaker, public 
administration. 
 
When you look at how anybody here has access to health care, 
compared to anyplace else in the world, really, you’d wonder 
why other people still have a different system. However, Mr. 
Speaker, trying to change medicare or change a health system 
or any kind of a governmental system is like trying to turn the 
Titanic around in the middle of the Saskatchewan River. You 
know, you just go through a few bumps and sometimes you 
might get stuck. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we were able to upkeep our health care system 
here and continue to provide more dollars for it. When we got 
into government we spent, in our budget, about 1.5 billion. 
Right now it’s up to about $1.76 billion spent on health care, 
and rising. 
 
And that was . . . And when you look at the record of that, when 
you look at the record of the Saskatchewan payments, when 
Tommy Douglas and Woodrow Lloyd instituted medicare, of 
course, they paid the entire 100 per cent of medicare. Later in, I 
believe it was in 1962, when the Liberal government 
implemented the task force recommendations that John 
Diefenbaker set up, the federal government picked up 50 per 
cent of the costs. But what happened is when this government, 
this current government that we have in power now, took over, 
they carried out the agenda of the Conservatives before them 
and reduced it, reduced their payment to merely 13 per cent. So 
the Saskatchewan taxpayer had to pick it up. 
 
Now fortunately, Mr. Speaker, and I’m very happy about this, 
that after 10 or 15 years of that right-wing rhetoric and moving 
the agenda towards globalization and free trade and NAFTA 
(North American Free Trade Agreement), and hearing nothing 
but that and reduced taxation, finally — at the urging, I must 
say, of our Premier — the federal government has come back at 
least a little bit and they’ve increased . . . they told us they’re 
increasing the payments by about $70 million a year, which 
brings it back up from 13 per cent to, my calculations, it’s about 
18 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amount may not be that great, but the change 
in direction is very, very significant for the Canadian people 
and for Saskatchewan people. The change in direction that we 
no longer are driven solely by tax cutting and cutting back on 
benefits to people, but instead looking at ways to help out and 
help the province increase its services that it provides to health 

care, is a very significant thing. 
 
I might add, Mr. Speaker, because people ask this question: 
well, wouldn’t it be cheaper if we went to a privatized system? 
Wouldn’t it be handier? They get this idea from various places 
— largely I think from the US (United States) media. But the 
public would like to know, Mr. Speaker, if you take all of the 
medical services that are provided in the United States, it costs 
them about 13 per cent of their gross national product. Then if 
you compare that with what it costs in Canada, our cost is much 
more efficient. It comes out to be about 10 per cent of our gross 
national product. 
 
It’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, when Conrad Black — who has 
nearly now got the monopoly in all of the papers in 
Saskatchewan and many in Canada — when he was asked to 
comment about medicare, that he said this in the Saturday Night 
magazine in 1998, February 1998, and I quote. This is what he 
thinks about medicare. 
 

The policy has proved to have completely failed in its 
objectives and to have been overwhelmingly unaffordable. 
 

That is that guru, the wise Mr. Conrad Black, speaking about 
medicare. I’ll repeat that. Here is what he said: 
 

The policy has proved to have completely failed in its 
objectives and to have been overwhelmingly unaffordable. 

 
Have you ever heard anything that is more untrue? Have you 
ever heard anything that’s got more hooey, Mr. Speaker? That 
was him speaking about our medicare system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it quite amazed me when I looked at some of the 
things that are available to us here in Saskatchewan and how 
we’ve progressed in this and what’s happening, happened to the 
demands on our system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 10 years ago the government sponsored or the 
government paid for, through government, and our doctors 
performed 77,000 operations. Last year they performed 91,000 
operations. Mr. Speaker, 10 years ago the number . . . over the 
last period of 10 years, the number of hip and knee operations 
went up by 87 per cent. Right now there are 88,000 families — 
about 30 per cent of the families in Saskatchewan — who 
access the drug system in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these numbers are kind of staggering. You often 
wonder how you can even accomplish that with the tax money 
that we’re putting into it. But there’s more. Mr. Speaker, there 
are now 11,000 cataract surgeries per year conducted in 
Saskatchewan. That’s up about 300 per cent from 10 years ago. 
There are 35,000 people that access the medicare system daily 
in Saskatchewan; 35,000 people go to some part of our health 
system here in Saskatchewan every day. How many people visit 
physicians, Mr. Speaker? Do you think you might visit a 
physician once a year, twice a year? Mr. Speaker, there are 4.6 
million office visits to Saskatchewan physicians annually. 
That’s like an average of 4.6 per person, yearly. 
 
That all adds up to something, Mr. Speaker, that requires 
considerable management, considerable skill and diligence on 
the part of the administrators, on the part of the board members, 



March 22, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 171 

on the part of the people in the Department of Health, Mr. 
Speaker — all of that, to manage that on the budget of $1.76 
billion. 
 
It’s something, Mr. Speaker, that when I talk about medicare to 
my children or youth anywhere, that they sort of take for 
granted, and they feel that it always was there and it might 
always continue to be there. Mr. Speaker, the fastest way to lose 
medicare is to lose control of the fiscal purse of the province. 
That’s the fastest way. And if the federal government starves 
the provinces, and if the debt created by the Tories was still 
started by the provinces, medicare would have been threatened. 
And if the people of Saskatchewan hadn’t saw fit to get rid of 
the Devine government and put into place a government which 
cared for social programs like medicare. Medicare could have 
been threatened. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have one more quote I want to refer to. And that 
is the talks to the future, the future direction of medicare; and 
where medicare is headed; and where we should be putting our 
dollars, our medicare dollars; and what direction we should go. 
 
Should we be funding, Mr. Speaker, excess beds as some 
people are requesting; extra beds in every corner of the 
province? Should we be funding preventative programs or there 
is some combination of this that we should be funding? 
 
(2015) 
 
I have here, Mr. Speaker, a quotation from a speech by one 
Richard Lamm, he was a former governor of Colorado. He talks 
about some research that the US Department of Health and 
Human Services had in their report. And it says this: “For a 
healthy nation, clinical medicine however, is credited . . .” I’m 
just ahead of myself here for a minute, Mr. Speaker. The first 
thing he says is: “That over his lifetime, the system in the States 
and here has added 30 years to human life expectancy.” Our 
human life expectancy in the year 1900 was about 50; right now 
it’s very close to 80. We can expect that . . . I believe it’s 79.6 
or 79.8. 
 
So he speaks to that 30-year increase. He says: 
 

For a healthy nation, clinical medicine however is credited 
with only 5 of the 30 years that have been added to life 
expectancy since the turn of the century. The other 25 
years are due to a higher standard of living, cleaner water, 
soap, refrigeration, safer jobs (etc., etc., etc.) 

 
Mr. Speaker, a job for everybody, good housing, some leisure 
time, time for parents to spend with their children — those are 
the things that we can continue to focus on if we want to 
increase our longevity and increase our record in this province 
as being one of the best places to live. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, I just want to mention how the 
government is reacting in the Throne Speech to the demands, 
tomorrow’s demands in health care. 
 
The Throne Speech directly states that the new money coming 
in from the federal government will be used to address waiting 

times. It will be used to address cancer treatment. It will be used 
to address women’s health issues, and to work to spend less on 
administration. 
 
All in all, Mr. Speaker, I’m proud of the direction that’s been 
set by this Speech from the Throne. I also looked at some of the 
things that were accomplished in my constituency over the two 
terms of office during which I served, Mr. Speaker, and I have a 
pretty nice list. I think I’m going to save it for another time. 
And with that, Mr. Speaker, I thank you very much for this 
opportunity to bring my remarks to this legislature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my privilege 
and honour to rise in the Assembly today in response to the 
Speech from the Throne. 
 
First of all, Mr. Speaker, I would like to give greetings to all the 
people of Saskatchewan, and most particularly to my own 
constituency of Rosthern. It’s a very special constituency, and I 
think as far as rural constituency goes, it’s by far the most 
vibrant and exciting one that we happen to have in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So many communities in that constituency, Mr. Speaker, every 
one of those communities is growing. There’s not one of those 
communities that’s dying. And we’ve had a number of new 
ventures that are taking place, and we’ll talk a bit about those a 
little later on. 
 
But there’s probably one thing that needs to be underlined right 
at the start. People are saying well, it’s kind of nice that you live 
in a constituency that doesn’t have towns that are shrinking and 
schools that are closing. The interesting fact that needs to be 
noted, Mr. Speaker, is that that constituency has never in its life 
voted socialist, and I think that says a whole lot, says a whole 
lot. And we look at what’s happened in Saskatchewan in the 
last while we’ve had some socialist government — 
unfortunately for the last 50 years — and that’s why we haven’t 
grown. 
 
As a province, we’re at the same place we were back in the 
1940s. Population hasn’t grown. Same thing. We’ve been 
shipping them out. Question comes, question comes . . . where 
have all the babies gone? Because about 1 million people have 
been in Saskatchewan and making babies for the last 50 years. 
Where are they? They’re not in Saskatchewan. They’re in 
British Columbia. They’re in Alberta. They’re in Manitoba. 
And with a socialist government we can’t get over a million. 
 
Take a good look at my constituency has never voted socialist 
and see what that sort of an attitude does. It’s brought it to the 
top of all rural constituencies without a single community 
decreasing in size. Schools that are full and overflowing. And if 
this government that we have over there just did something for 
those schools they’d have some decent buildings as well. But 
we’ll get into that in a minute. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to begin by saying that this 
government has shown absolutely no leadership or vision for 
the future of Saskatchewan. And I’m referring specifically to 
what we saw on the Throne Speech. It has become more 



172 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 1999 

apparent now than ever before that this government does not 
have the best in mind for the people of Saskatchewan. It’s a 
disastrous Throne Speech. Disastrous just because it doesn’t do 
anything, doesn’t do anything. 
 
In their Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, the member’s opposite 
claim they are dedicated to health care and education. But we’re 
going to look a little later on this evening at what that 
dedication has got, and it hasn’t managed to bring anything to 
the people of Saskatchewan. And we’ll take a substantial 
amount of time to clarify that for the people opposite because 
they haven’t quite caught on to this point. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has the second latest tax freedom 
day in the country, July 2, which means that for some strange 
reasons they’ve been collecting all these taxes, have no money. 
It’s spendthrift, misspent, not knowing what they’re going to 
do. And we’ll go into that, Mr. Speaker, we’ll go into that. 
We’ll talk about where the money for highways goes, but where 
it should go, and those are not the same places. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s another area of serious concern that 
member’s opposite did not even acknowledge in the Throne 
Speech and I just mention that’s the highways. Nowhere else 
has the failure of this government become as obvious to 
everybody else in North America than in our highways. They 
are the laughing stock of North America. We don’t get to laugh 
over them because we have to drive over them. But they’re a 
disaster, they’re dangerous. When you have large hunks of 
highway coming through and missing people as they’re sitting 
in their cars driving down the highway — dangerous. Ducks 
swimming in the middle of the highway in the potholes. In fact 
is on 312 they don’t even have to look for a pothole. They can 
just swim in the ruts and just keep going east or west. 
 
That crumbling system is there. Mr. Speaker, the people of 
Saskatchewan depend on those highways. And they’re getting 
worse. They’re getting worse, getting far worse. 
 
We had a member opposite from the NDP over there, Mr. 
Speaker, make some statement the other day about the fact that 
her family and other families had come from Europe, come 
from here to get land to get going in farming, and what in the 
world would happen if the NDP weren’t here to keep them here. 
Well I would suggest it’s been the NDP that’s chased them out. 
Why don’t we have people to take over the farms? There’s no 
one left in the province to take them over. 
 
I spent some time in a coffee shop in one of my communities 
talking with a group of farmers living in one area. Probably 
about 60, 62 years of age was the average, and there wasn’t 
anyone except one young person around to take over those 
farms. You’ve chased them all out. And once they’re outside, 
they’re not going to come back in here and have to go ahead 
and defend the kind of highways they have, defend the kind of 
school systems that you’ve created in this particular province. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order! Now hon. 
members . . . Order! I’ll ask all hon. members to come to order. 
The hon. member is a veteran member and recognizes of course 
that he is to direct his debate through the Chair and not to — 
order — no to other members across the floor, and I think we 
see the reason for that. And I’ll ask the hon. member to direct 

his comments through the Chair. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for that direction. 
I’d like to spend a little bit of time on education because it 
seemed to be something that attracted their attention just for a 
moment, Mr. Speaker. And it’s hard to keep their attention 
because just as they, you know, run amok when they run the 
province, they can’t seem to pay attention to a particular speech, 
either. 
 
There’s a number of things we have to do with education. We 
have to put some confidence back in education from the people 
of this province. When they hear that for some reason, whatever 
it is, that the math scores in this province, the students are dead 
last in Canada . . . Mr. Speaker, that’s not because our students 
aren’t smart, and that’s not because their teachers aren’t good. 
But there’s got to be something else in there, and I think the 
Department of Education needs to look at that and say, Mr. 
Speaker, what in the world do they need to do to correct that 
problem. And I don’t see them doing very much. I don’t see 
them doing anything. 
 
About the only thing that this province knows, Mr. Speaker, 
that this government has done in education, that is off-load onto 
the property tax payer the load that they should be carrying. 
And our people in rural Saskatchewan, in my constituency, Mr. 
Speaker, when they get their tax notices, it used to be they’d 
look at that tax notice and they would see that the majority of 
that amount they would have to pay were going to go for roads, 
for runoffs, for taking care of rodents, whatever they happen to 
do out there, but they’d be taking care of that. 
 
And there’s a small amount for education because the province, 
Mr. Speaker, was taking care of its own responsibility. And 
they felt a small amount for education — their kids went to 
school, that was fair enough. 
 
Now they get the tax notice, Mr. Speaker, and the balance is 
shifted. And they’re paying a major portion of the tax load, an 
unfair portion of the tax load, Mr. Speaker. And that needs to 
change. In my particular constituency we have, Mr. Speaker, a 
school in Martensville that’s so full that the teachers have lost 
their staff room because it has become a classroom. Teachers 
are now eating their lunches between the rows and the stacks in 
the library. And it makes an awful mess of the books. The 
Minister of Education needs to pay some attention to that, Mr. 
Speaker. That needs to be taken care of. 
 
Osler gym, Mr. Speaker, has been crumbling for a decade — 
can’t get any funding for it. Rosthern doesn’t even have a gym. 
The local people, Mr. Speaker, have raised nearly $200,000. 
They met with the Department of Education who promised 
nothing and left. The local people paying 60 per cent of the tax 
load, Mr. Speaker, having raised almost $200,000 for a gym. 
and the department people just kind of shrugged and said, well I 
don’t know what we can do and away they went. 
 
Hepburn school, another growing school — in fact they’re all 
growing as I said earlier on — has a classroom you literally step 
through the floors, and they can’t get the money to fix it. And 
what’s disappointing, Mr. Speaker, is that I look across to the 
people over there, the NDP. It’s not that they are devoid of 
teachers in there that should be able to understand the problem, 



March 22, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 173 

they have quite a number of them in there, but somehow they 
must not be able to influence whoever the power brokers there 
are. 
 
Power brokers are probably the Premier and the Deputy 
Premier, but we’ll say a bit more about their brokering of power 
when we discuss where they live and what the crime stats in 
their own constituencies are all about. We’ll see how fine 
they’re doing there, but it was one of the NDP members, Mr. 
Speaker, that about an hour or so ago spoke of the increased 
responsibilities that teachers were getting, and yes they are. And 
it happened to be a teacher that said it over there. Strange thing 
he didn’t seem to realize, Mr. Speaker, it was his NDP 
government that was putting those loads on to the teachers. It 
came right into his own area, but he couldn’t see that. 
 
While we’re discussing the Premier and the Deputy Premier, I 
think we have to discuss a few things about the Premier, Mr. 
Speaker. And that is, the question that comes up so often is: 
where is he? Where is he? Sometime ago, Mr. Speaker, we had 
the Prime Minister of Canada come to our province, and the 
Premier was going to go ahead and have a meeting with him, 
and he did. But what did we ever hear that was raised? Would 
have been an ideal opportunity to tell the people of 
Saskatchewan, I’m sticking up for you, and I will tell the Prime 
Minister what our difficulties are and what we need and what 
we expect from you — and those two would be much the same. 
 
(2030) 
 
But we never heard a thing. In four years, I have not once heard 
the Premier address our Prime Minister and say, this is the 
situation in agriculture. In fact, when the agriculture situation 
got serious, who in the world did he send down to Ottawa to 
negotiate? He sent out his Agriculture minister, the fellow who 
said, Mr. Speaker, there is no problem. You know, we have 
areas that haven’t had a crop in three, four years: Neilburg, the 
whole area around there. But there is no problem. 
 
We have people who had hogs who were losing thousands of 
dollars a day, Mr. Speaker. But the Agriculture minister said we 
have no problem. That’s who our Premier sends down to 
negotiate on our behalf, Mr. Speaker. And no wonder we got as 
little as we did get. Just amazing we got anything, just amazing. 
 
Goes down there and he tells the people, we have no problem in 
Saskatchewan And we have our budget balanced, and we have a 
surplus. Well with that kind of an introductory statement, Mr. 
Speaker, who in the world would give us any help? First we tell 
them there’s no problem, Mr. Speaker. And then we tell them 
that our financial situation is a piece of cake. I wouldn’t have 
given us any money either. How ineffective can you possibly 
be? 
 
No problems, we had no problem in agriculture. We had no 
Premier present. What about justice? What about justice? 
 
How often do we hear our Premier saying to the Prime 
Minister, we’ve got to get a few things changed, when we’re 
talking about crime in our cities. 
 
And Saskatchewan needs that dealt with, Mr. Speaker. We need 
that dealt with when we have cities that happen to be number 

one in car thefts in Canada; when we have cities in 
Saskatchewan that happen to be number one break-in capitals in 
Canada. We need that addressed. We didn’t hear a thing from 
him. Heard next to nothing from our Justice minister either. 
 
Speaking of silence from our Justice department, Mr. Speaker, 
last year, 1998, was an opportunity for people in this province, 
if they wanted to, to apply for an FAC (Firearms Acquisition 
Certificate) which would last for five years. There were 1,000 
people who applied for that one at the end of that year and it 
would last into the new system. Half a year after they had 
applied for those, they still hadn’t received it because they had 
been sent down to someplace down East. They were waiting for 
half a year for their FACs. 
 
Did we hear our Justice minister say one single word on that 
issue? Did he contact the firearm community and say: fellows, 
women, sportsmen, target shooters, I know that you’re waiting 
for those FACs and this is what I’m doing and we’ll have it 
solved this way in a short period of time? Not a word from 
them. For all I know, they’re still waiting for those FACs. We 
have this unbelievable problem, Mr. Speaker, of silence over 
there when we need to speak up for something that’s important 
to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Throne Speech — just a whole lot of nothing. What did it 
give to roads? What did it give to roads, highways? RMs (rural 
municipality) get more money to build all those roads they need 
for the heavier traffic for grain? No, nothing. 
 
An Hon. Member: — No. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Is there more money to build up our primary 
highways? 
 
An Hon. Member: — No. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — No. There was a commitment made by that 
government, the NDP, Mr. Speaker, of how much they were 
going to spend every year over a certain period of years. They 
have been behind that every single year. 
 
Now what unfortunately the people of Saskatchewan didn’t 
know — or will know after they listen to the next sentence or 
two — is that they may have been under the perception from 
this particular government that all that money that was 
committed, and that part of it that they did adopt for highways, 
was going to build highways. 
 
Well that’s not correct. They’ve been hiring all kinds of 
bureaucrats and people sitting in offices working for the 
Department of Highways who haven’t painted a stripe on the 
road. And you remember, Mr. Speaker, the fiasco about six, 
seven months ago, when this government was going to stop 
painting stripes on the highways . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Now that was a skunky idea if I ever heard one. So they’re 
behind in their own commitment to highways; and the money 
that they do say they spend on highways, much of that doesn’t 
go to highways. 
 
It hires some people that they hope are going to work on this 
next election which will be something they’ll have a very hard 
time doing when one of the national newspapers recently had a 



174 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 1999 

poll on the status of premiers throughout Canada. And for a 
long time our Saskatchewan NDP Premier led his party by a 
substantial amount. Now they’re down in the dismal thirties. 
Their Premier’s down there with the party. He hasn’t been that 
low in forever. His name could be Bob Rae for all the 
popularity he has in Saskatchewan. It could be Glen Clark, 
could be Glen Clark. All we would need is someone coming to 
his house with the lights flashing. 
 
So what that Throne Speech did for roads was nothing, which is 
what is the underlying tone of that whole particular Throne 
Speech. What about health? What about health? Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I had the misfortune of needing our health care about a 
month or two ago, and I will say I received excellent care. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Now the credit for that care, Mr. Speaker, the 
credit for that care — as the NDP applaud for probably the first, 
what they thought was a compliment they’ve heard in a long 
time — went to the doctors and the nurses. 
 
The health care is so shaky that when I was sent to Saskatoon 
by ambulance, my family physician, who said I should go down 
there for the care that I needed, had to go to Edmonton. When 
he got near North Battleford, he phoned Saskatoon just to make 
sure that I wasn’t still in an ambulance, playing the little 
ambulance games between hospitals because he was fairly sure 
that that might happen. 
 
So I ended up in the hospital in the emergency ward, and the 
doctor there had said I would have my procedure in about an 
hour and a half which is about one o’clock at night. And one of 
the nurses says, you’re rather fortunate. We’ve had a person 
sitting here in emergency for two days waiting for his procedure 
— two days. 
 
But there was something that happened before that, Mr. 
Speaker, that I think needs to be explained. We want to have 
confidence in our health care. That confidence is not there 
because unfortunately as I was in that ambulance driving that 
half hour to Saskatoon my concern was not how the operation 
would turn out or any of those sorts of things. It was: when I get 
there will I be able to get into emergency or will I have to play 
those games and maybe be sent off to who knows where? 
 
No one in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, should have to have 
those worries when they’re not feeling well and they’re in an 
ambulance going for some special care. But in Saskatchewan 
that’s there, and that feeling and that attitude has been created 
by that NDP government, Mr. Speaker. They need to take 
responsibility for it. They need to take responsibility for that. 
 
We had an example in question period this morning, Mr. 
Speaker, of an individual who had to go to the United States for 
some care. Fortunately he was able to afford that. He comes 
back here and he needs some procedures taking place 
afterwards. And our Health minister wasn’t prepared to promise 
that a Saskatchewan citizen, Mr. Speaker, could get that 
continued care here in Saskatchewan, even when it was 
available, as if they were being punished. 
 
You dare look outside this province for some help and we will 

punish you; we will take care away from you; we will make you 
go back to the United States for some more care. Two-tier 
health care, Mr. Speaker, two-tier health care. Our Minister of 
Health this morning showed it very directly. That’s what we 
have, telling us that we have to go for more private care when 
we could take care of it out here. We could take care of it out 
here. 
 
This government, Mr. Speaker, shown through this Throne 
Speech, is bankrupt; shown in their actions of how they treat 
people. They’re arrogant. They have no ideas. They have no 
vision. We dare not let that group of people, Mr. Speaker, lead 
this province any longer. And the people of this province are 
saying the same sort of thing. 
 
The fact is today, as the session continued, we received a 
number of phone calls, letters, and faxes saying, get on with it 
and get this group of people out of government; this province 
can’t handle this any longer. And I challenge the people over 
there, call an election. We’re ready. The people of 
Saskatchewan are ready and they’re waiting for the opportunity 
to get rid of most of you, if not all of you. 
 
I look at the member from Swift Current city, Mr. Speaker. 
He’s one that’s gone. There’s no hope. I used to live in Swift 
Current. I know the people there, I’ve talked to them. They’re 
just waiting for an opportunity. There happened to be a Sask 
Party nomination there and a hard-fought one, Mr. Speaker. I 
had phone calls from some individuals that I knew from Swift 
Current saying, I want to get involved — who do I contact? We 
have to get in on this and get rid of the NDP government in 
Saskatchewan; we’ll start by doing that in our city, and that 
kind of a thing. 
 
And that fire is being fanned all throughout this province, Mr. 
Speaker. And those people are gone after the next election. The 
people of Saskatchewan know it and the people over there 
know it; you can see it by the looks on their faces as they’re 
hunkered down behind their desks wondering what’s going to 
hit them next. 
 
Job creation. I spoke earlier on about where have all the babies 
gone, Mr. Speaker. Well most of them have gone out of 
province. And we look at job creation — and this seems hard to 
believe. Because unfortunately, or fortunately, we tell a lot of 
jokes that involve other people from other provinces in this 
country. Newfoundland seems to be the butt of more jokes than 
anything else, Mr. Speaker. Well I’m afraid it’s turned around. 
It’s us now, Mr. Speaker. Newfoundland has created more jobs 
than we have. 
 
Do you know, Mr. Speaker, hard to believe but Saskatchewan 
has lost jobs in the last year and Newfoundland created 6,100 
jobs. I don’t know what they’re doing out there, but they’re 
working. And where do we ship them off to? Elsewhere. Out of 
the province. And there should be no reason for that. 
 
We have oil, Mr. Speaker; we have potash, unique to 
Saskatchewan. We have a good lumber industry. We have a 
unique uranium industry. We have steel processors, plus our 
agriculture and other industries in the cities. With all of that, 
Mr. Speaker, all of that — and I want to repeat that to make my 
next point: oil, potash, lumber, uranium, steel processors, and 



March 22, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 175 

everything else that’s going on, and less than a million people 
— we can’t create jobs. What is this government doing? 
They’re devoid of any ideas; they’re devoid of any vision. And 
thank goodness we’ll soon be devoid of most of the NDP in this 
province. 
 
Lost jobs in the past year. Unbelievable. Lost jobs. Every other 
province in Canada gained jobs. And I would hate to be in 
Newfoundland right now, sitting around in some gathering hole, 
and hear the jokes about Saskatchewan. All the jokes we’ve told 
in the past about Newfoundland, I’m sure they’re turning 
around very quickly. And there’s Saskatchewan, can’t create 
one job in a whole year, Mr. Speaker, a whole year. There will 
be a few openings though when some of those people lose in 
the next election. 
 
There was a statement made in a speech by one of the NDP 
within the last hour, Mr. Speaker, about the fantastic job that he 
thought Saskatchewan was doing with its care of children. Well 
there’s a statistic that I think puts the actual face on that 
particular statement. Our infant mortality is 50 per cent higher 
than the national average. What a shame. What a shame. Fifty 
per cent higher than the national average. What have these 
people been doing? And they say, we give up. 
 
Well I’m afraid there was 50 per cent more children gave up in 
this province than in any other place in Canada. It’s a shame. 
It’s an absolute shame that our children have to have the highest 
infant mortality in Canada by 50 per cent higher, Mr. Speaker, 
not just a little bit. And they say they can manage those sorts of 
things. 
 
There was one of the NDP in their response to the throne who 
obviously has a great deal of difficulty with the English 
language, who came up with the statement that the 
Saskatchewan Party had said we would freeze spending on 
health care. That is a downright three-letter word, Mr. Speaker. 
It is definitely not the way it is. All they would have had to do 
is check the resolutions we’ve passed, checked our election 
platform, and the word “freeze” for health care is not in there, 
Mr. Speaker, is not in there. 
 
(2045) 
 
In fact there is going to be extra money put in every year and 
it’s stated in there. And every single extra cent coming from the 
federal government will be going in there. And then to make 
sure that that pays off, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to make sure 
that every single dollar is well spent. 
 
As I go throughout this province and as I spend some time in 
the hospitals, as I said I had, Mr. Speaker, spent some time late 
one night talking with a number of nurses, and they expressed 
some of the concerns about health care, and they had a question. 
They didn’t know what the answer was but they had a question. 
And the question was this, Mr. Speaker: we’re just not sure if 
all the money in health care is really being used as good as it 
could be or should be. These are front-line people who are in 
there seeing what’s happening and they have some definite 
concerns. 
 
And when I saw how hard they worked, how hard those nurses 
worked, it sure wasn’t the fault of theirs because they’re 

working hard; they’re doing double duty. But they had the 
feeling that somehow the money wasn’t going where it should 
be going and wasn’t being used effectively, and we need an 
audit to make sure that every cent is being used correctly. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, the NDP over there have appointed half 
the people to all the rural districts, to all the hospital 
organizations. No wonder they don’t want to check where the 
money is going. They know where it’s going because half the 
people on those committees are their appointed people and they 
hope they’ll knock on doors for them come this next election. 
That’s why that’s happened, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So we’re going to have to get that administration cleared up so 
the people of this province are confident that when their tax 
dollars are going for health care — and they don’t mind that 
happening — they know that that money has been used well 
and carefully. And I have no doubt, and very few people across 
this land, Mr. Speaker, have any doubt, that if we take that audit 
and then use the money carefully we’ll find we have a lot more 
money to take care of the people in this particular province, so 
that our lines and our waiting lines will be shorter, and we don’t 
have to play the silly little goofy games that the health 
department’s playing. 
 
The kind of things where they want to decide how many beds 
they have for a particular thing and they say, well you know, 
you had an average this last year of 10 people in a particular 
category; that’s your average. So boom we’ll pull out a bunch 
of beds and we’ll now only give you 10 beds because that’s 
been your average. 
 
Well how in the world, Mr. Speaker, could you keep 10 beds 
full all the time? Now mind you living in this province probably 
helps. Driving on our highways probably helps. But I’m sure 
it’s a situation that we realize is just manipulative. It’s an 
arrogant attitude, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of this government to 
think that they can go ahead and remove those beds and then 
come back a year later and say, see you haven’t filled your 
beds. Those 10 beds weren’t full all the time. You had 10 for 
about half the year, you had 6 for about half the year, so your 
average was 8. We’ll pull out another 2. Now we’re down to 8 
beds. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, the arrogance of this 
government’s unbelievable. Thinking that the people of this 
province can’t figure that out, that in about five, six years 
they’ll have every bed pulled out of those hospitals, and then 
say, well you had no beds in your hospital and nobody seemed 
to be sick in there so we can shut the hospital down. Seems a 
little stupid for logic, Mr. Speaker, yes it does. But that’s the 
logic that the Health Department uses in this particular province 
and they use it very well. 
 
I said a word or two about crime. I need to say a bit more about 
that. We look at . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And the Health 
Minister said, some kind of logic. Well, Mr. Speaker, I suggest 
to you it’s the Health Minister’s logic. He’s the one that goes 
ahead and pulls out those extra beds. He’s the one that makes 
sure that they have the number of beds down to that particular 
level. I haven’t seen him go to a single hospital and say, well 
the beds were pulled down to 10 because that was your average. 
We’ll bring it back up so we can keep your average there. He 



176 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 1999 

hasn’t done that, Mr. Speaker. He buys into that goofy logic and 
he buys into it very well. 
 
The crime in Saskatchewan. In this province, Mr. Speaker, we 
take a lot of pride in the fact that we’re neighbourly. We take a 
lot of pride that we still stop to help someone with a flat tire. 
We take a lot of pride that if someone’s hurt on a farm, we go 
out there and we help take off his crop. If the neighbour in the 
city isn’t feeling well or going away on holidays, we’ll cut their 
grass for them. That’s the kind of province, by and large, we 
are. And I’m proud of that, Mr. Speaker, because the reputation, 
that’s very important to me and I think to each one of us here. 
 
But then suddenly we had that reputation, and then we find out 
that we have the other part and I talked about that earlier: about 
the car thefts, about the murders, about the break-ins. And when 
those things start happening, Mr. Speaker, people become 
fearful and they start to worry about helping somebody else 
they don’t know. We need to be very vigilant in this province, 
Mr. Speaker, to make sure that we get those crime rates under 
control. And if it means being a little tougher on the criminal 
element, that’s fine. That’s fine. 
 
I need to say a word or two about our highways — and I’ve 
already talked a bit about the lack of commitment to that by this 
government — but particularly Highway 312 in my 
constituency. There’s a couple of exciting developments that 
have happened and I mentioned earlier on, Mr. Speaker, about 
the vibrant agricultural aspect of my constituency. We have at 
one end of it a Can-Oat plant; only one in Saskatchewan, doing 
very well, Mr. Speaker, doing very well. People in the area love 
it because they can go ahead and ship their oats without having 
to pay a whole lot of freight for it — just take it right to 
Can-Oat. 
 
Now in my town of Rosthern, there’s a debranning plant 
coming up, Mr. Speaker. So at the opposite ends of Highway 
312, you have two major farm processing plants. The grain 
going to Can-Oat comes from Duck Lake, comes from 
Rosthern, comes from Wakaw, Laird, Carlton, goes down 312 
and heads in that direction. The grain coming to the debranning 
thing will come in the opposite direction from communities 
such as Carlton and Laird and Waldheim and Hepburn and 
Dalmeny. 
 
So Highway 312 will see a major increase in very, very heavy 
traffic. And that highway has had some serious problems in it. 
And with those sorts of things happening, it needs some very 
definite attention to it, especially with the fact that the things 
that are there are exciting, Mr. Speaker. Because farmers many 
of them now are being able to grow crops, sell all their crops 
without paying a dollar of shipping to the railways because they 
can deal with it all within that area — whether it’s the 
debranning plant, the Can-Oat plant, whether it’s the hog 
operations, the cattle and dairy operations — everything that’s 
grown there can basically be taken care of in that area, but we 
need some good roads. 
 
One other thing, retail sales. We have become dead last in 
Canada again in retail sales. And this government needs to look 
at that and say, how can we perk that up a little bit? And I 
suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, if we could keep in Saskatchewan 
the sales that go across the border to Alberta, would take us 

right out of last place, out of second-, third-, fourth-last place, 
probably put us well up into the middle and maybe even the top 
half for retail sales because those sales are going over there. 
This government needs to address it, and needs to address it 
very definitely with a very close look at their sales tax. 
 
To that end, Mr. Speaker, I would like to conclude by 
reiterating my earlier point that this government has no vision 
for the future of this province and that’s unfortunate. So the 
Saskatchewan Party did the NDP’s homework for them. We 
have proposed cutting the basic provincial income tax by 20 per 
cent, reducing the PST (provincial sales tax) from 7 per cent to 
5. By doing this it’ll save the average Saskatchewan family 
thousands of dollars which they’re going to spend, Mr. Speaker, 
which they’re going to spend. When people have money, they 
spend it. And the member over there who’s hollering with his 
. . . (inaudible) . . . I’m sure spends every dollar he gets too. We 
have no doubt about that. 
 
Cutting taxes, Mr. Speaker, will hinder cross-border shopping, 
and we’ll get that business back into our communities of 
Lloydminster, North Battleford, Swift Current, and that whole 
area. 
 
Just two years ago, Mr. Speaker, the NDP government 
committed to spending 250 million a year on the highways in 
Saskatchewan but they’ve fallen far short of that. We need to 
deal with that. Since the members opposite have come into 
power, the number of people on their welfare rolls — their 
welfare rolls which are there because of the kind of province 
and the situation they’ve created — has significantly increased, 
Mr. Speaker, from 57,000 to over 72,000. And that number is 
growing, Mr. Speaker, because there isn’t enough of an 
incentive to get them off of social assistance. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party wants to help these people to better 
themselves and contribute to society, as we all want to, by a 
welfare-to-work program that will replace the existing welfare 
system with a true employment system that both requires and 
enables fully employable welfare recipients to work. 
 
With respect to agriculture, Mr. Speaker, which did not seem to 
be that important an issue to the members opposite or to the 
things they’ve done for farmers in the last while, the 
Saskatchewan Party will ensure that Saskatchewan crop 
insurance is affordable and effective. 
 
As you can see, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party has a 
blueprint for the future of this province. It is clear that our 
message is getting out to the people in Saskatchewan, and we 
call upon this NDP government to dissolve this legislature and 
to call an election. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the debate 
be now adjourned. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, to request leave to 



March 22, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 177 

correct a printing error in Bill No. 6. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

BILL WITHDRAWN 
 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, 
seconded by the member from Regina Qu’Appelle Valley that 
Bill No. 6, The Coroners Act, 1999 be withdrawn and the order 
for second reading discharged. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 8:58 p.m. 
 



 

 


