





























































Hansard: March 19, 1999


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 101 
 March 19, 1999 
 
The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I have a petition to present on behalf of residents of 
Saskatchewan. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
finally show a serious commitment to roads and highways 
in Saskatchewan by urging it to increase its highway and 
road construction and maintenance budget by $300 million 
over the next five years as called for in the Saskatchewan 
Party’s election platform. 
 
And as in duty bound your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the signatures to this petition come from Unity; 
yes all of the signatures are from the community of Unity. 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
have a petition to present on behalf of Saskatchewan 
disenfranchised widows. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to have the Workers’ 
Compensation Board Act amended whereby benefits and 
pensions are reinstated to disenfranchised widows and 
whereby all revoked pensions are reimbursed to them 
retroactively with interest to April 17, 1985. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions come from the Regina, Estevan areas, Mr. 
Speaker, a large number. 
 
I so submit. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present this morning. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
demand the federal government to work with 
Saskatchewan to put in place a farm aid package that 
provides real relief to those who need it, and that the 
provincial government develop a long-term farm safety net 
program as it promised to do when it cancelled GRIP 
against the wishes of farmers. 
 

The communities’ signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Kamsack, 
Runnymede. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, as well to present a 
petition. Reading the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
finally show a serious commitment to roads and highways 
in Saskatchewan by urging it to increase its highways and 
road construction and maintenance budget by $300 million 
over the next five years as called for in the Saskatchewan 
Party’s election platform. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, the petition I present today is signed by 
individuals from the Macklin, Lloydminster, Unity areas of the 
province as well as the community of Provost in Alberta. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I rise on behalf of citizens 
concerned about the unfairness of the Crown Construction 
Tendering Agreement. 
 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to end 
its unfair tendering policies and immediately cancel the 
Crown Construction Tendering Agreement. 
 

Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are all from the city of 
Regina. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I also have a petition to finish 
paving Highway 349. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately repair and pave the gravel portion of Highway 
No. 349. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Everyone that signed this petition is from the beautiful 
community of Rose Valley. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition this morning to 
present as well, and the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to end 
its unfair tendering policies and immediately cancel the 
Crown Construction Tendering Agreement. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

This petition comes from the city of Regina, and I’m pleased to 
present on their behalf. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, I too stand today to present a petition 
on behalf of Saskatchewan citizens. And the prayer reads as 
follows, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 



102 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 1999 

demand that the federal government work with 
Saskatchewan to put in place a farm aid package that 
provides real relief to those who need it, and that the 
provincial government develop a long-term farm safety net 
program, as it promised to do when it cancelled GRIP 
against the wishes of farmers. 
 

And the signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
MacNutt and Calder, Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to rise 
today to present petitions for behalf of people of the province of 
Saskatchewan. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call on federal and provincial 
governments to dedicate a significantly greater portion of 
fuel tax revenues toward road maintenance and 
construction so that Saskatchewan residents may have a 
safe highway system that meets their needs. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition has been signed by people in the 
communities of Strasbourg, Govan, Cymric, Nokomis, and 
Raymore. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Speaker. This morning I 
am pleased to present petitions from approximately 250 of 
my constituents who have responded to the request of the 
hon. member from Humboldt and have requested that this 
legislature act to address the serious problem of child 
prostitution. I so present. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I can’t find words to 
express how much I appreciate being able to be here today to 
present a petition on behalf of people of Saskatchewan. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call on federal and provincial 
governments to dedicate a significantly greater portion of 
fuel tax revenues towards road maintenance and 
construction so Saskatchewan residents may have a safe 
highway system that meets their needs. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

The signatures are from residents of Fort Qu’Appelle, Lipton, 
Balcarres, and Esterhazy. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Good morning, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy 
today to present petitions on behalf of the RM (rural 
municipality) of Benson, and I’ll read the prayer. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately start work on the rebuilding of our secondary 
highway system to provide a safe driving for what are 

becoming known as pothole roads, to enter into 
negotiations with SARM and SUMA for a longer-term 
plan of rural road restoration and reflecting the future 
needs, and to provide safety for all drivers as new trucking 
regulation changes safety factors on these roads. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the signatories are from of course Benson, but 
they are also from Lampman and Estevan and Weyburn, I 
see. And I’m happy to present these on their behalf today. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order petitions presented at the last 
sitting have been reviewed and found to be in order. Pursuant to 
rule 12(7) those petitions are hereby received. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 10 ask the government the 
following question to the Minister of Crown Investments 
Corporation: 
 

Has the proposed FarmGro organic mill announced by the 
minister received all the necessary export permits from the 
Canadian Wheat Board. 

 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 10 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: will the minister provide an 
explanation why the Watrous hospital has only four beds 
and an acute ADC of six; will the minister please explain 
why the health district is so underfunded that it cannot 
provide enough staff for the number of beds needed to 
adequately deal with the patient load at this hospital. 

 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day 10 ask the government the following question of 
the Deputy Premier: 
 

My constituents are asking what research has gone into the 
development of Bill 9, The Respect for Constituents Act; is 
there any precedence for this legislation; who did the 
research; and will the legislation prevent new parties from 
being started; how many NDP backbenchers will be 
prevented from joining the newly proposed Green Party of 
Saskatchewan; and is this Act constitutional? 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
recognize a constituent of mine, Mr. Bob Ivanochko, and I 
single him out today because this past year he received an 
award for community service as a volunteer in many areas of 
the community. So Bob’s just the kind of person that makes 
Saskatchewan a great place to be. And join me in welcoming 



March 19, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 103 

him today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I see sitting 
in the west gallery Mr. Jay Litman, who is a constituent of 
actually, I think, the Minister of Health in Saskatoon, but is a 
former law associate of mine. And I’d like to welcome Jay to 
the legislature, and I’d like everyone here to join me in 
welcoming Jay to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Farmer of the Year Award 
 
Mr. Ward: — Thank you Mr. Speaker. Yesterday the Estevan 
Chamber of Commerce held its 18th annual Farmers Day — 
one day to recognize the year-round contribution of the farming 
community. The highlight is the honouring of the outstanding 
farmer of the year. 
 
I was pleased to have the Premier present to give the award to 
Stanley and Dorothy Fornwald of Lampman. Mr. and Mrs. 
Fornwald have been farming for almost 50 years on a farm that 
has grown and prospered over this time. The family believes in 
and practises soil conservation, shelter belts, zero-till seeding, 
and continuous cropping. 
 
They have raised a large family and are dedicated, productive 
members of their local community. Stanley has held many 
political offices, and both are active members of their church. 
 
This is an award to an individual — or in this case a couple — 
but it also recognizes and celebrates ideals and goals: the goal 
of achievement on the farm; the goal of contribution to the 
community; the ideal of citizenship. The same ideals and goals, 
Mr. Speaker, that built our province. 
 
We’re all proud to honour Stanley and Dorothy Fornwald. And 
I congratulate them for their life of contribution and 
achievement. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Kamsack Air Cadet Selected to Honour Band 
 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
morning I’d to congratulate a constituent of mine. I have a 
Kamsack air cadet selected for the 1999 cadet honour band of 
prairie region. 
 
A young lady, Stephanie Setlack, daughter of Patti and Wayne 
Setlack, has been selected as a member of the 1999 cadet 
honour band of prairie region. She is one of a hundred cadets 
chosen from the 210C Army and Air Cadet Unit across the 
prairies. 
 
Stephanie, who plays the clarinet, is a member of the 633 
Kamsack Royal Canadian Air Cadet Squadron. The 
commanding officer of this unit is Lt. C. Pollen and the local 
sponsor is Kamsack Royal Canadian Legion. 

Stephanie takes music lessons at school and enjoys music and 
drama club when not involved in the cadet activities. 
 
The cadet honour band of prairie region will present concerts in 
Calgary, Saskatoon, Edmonton, Winnipeg and Thunder Bay, 
Mr. Speaker. They will be performing in Saskatoon at 7:30, 
April 3, at Centennial Auditorium. 
 
Congratulations, Stephanie Setlack. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Regina Health District Performance Statistics 
 

Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
share with this Assembly some solid facts on how the Regina 
Health District has been dealing with health care this week. 
 
In particular I would like to report that so far this week there 
have been 322 surgeries. Of those, 49 surgeries were 
unscheduled and were added in and an additional 36 were 
emergency. During this time no surgeries were cancelled due to 
lack of beds. 
 
I want to repeat that: no surgeries were cancelled due to lack of 
beds. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to report that at no time were there 
more than one or two patients being treated in emergency while 
they waited for beds on a unit. 
 
The health care professionals are to be commended for the work 
in this district. Mr. Speaker, I bring this information forward to 
the Assembly today because far too often the members opposite 
— and unfortunately media — buy into this and report only the 
bad news in our health care system. 
 
This information today is indeed very good news that the 
Regina Health District is working and working properly. 
 
Thanks very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Social Workers  
 

Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With this week being 
Social Worker Appreciation Week it’s ironic that the people 
feeling most under appreciated are social workers themselves. 
 
On Valentine’s Day hundreds of valentines were delivered to 
the Premier from social workers asking for help. They asked for 
more staff to help do the work the government has piled on 
them, and some of these valentines are messages from social 
workers. One talks about feeling neglected and abused by their 
employer — this government. Workers talk about not having 
enough staff and all programs and being treated disrespectfully 
by their employers. 
 
Social workers are performing voluntary overtime just to do 
their jobs, yet the government which employs them says they 
are not getting more people or resources but to work smarter. 
This is a slap in the face of social workers trying to serve the 



104 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 1999 

public as best they can. 
 
There are signs that shortage of workers in social services may 
result in the overpayment of thousands of dollars of social 
benefits simply because there are not enough people to keep 
pace with the cases. There is an answer to this. The answer is to 
not hire so many communication specialists, go on so many 
international trips, or squander so much money on trying to 
cover up mistakes instead of owning up to them. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 

Teachers’ Awards 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is the 
last day of Education Week and on behalf of my colleagues, the 
member from Prince Albert Carlton and Saskatchewan Rivers, I 
want to congratulate five Prince Albert teachers who have won 
significant awards for their contribution to their profession and 
their students. 
 
First, Linda Kasko, is a special ed. teacher at Ecole King 
George. She has been named Saskatchewan Teacher of the Year 
by the Council of Exceptional Children. She will be honoured at 
the council’s annual convention in Charlotte, North Carolina, in 
mid-April. 
 
Debra Kuzbik of Riverside Community School and Dawn 
Kilmer of Carlton Comprehensive have been honoured by the 
Canadian Teachers’ Federation for a project that twinned grade 
10 at-risk students with division 1 at-risk students to write 
children’s books. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, two other teachers at Carleton High, Irene 
LaPierre and Linda Bird have received provincial awards from 
the Canadian Teachers’ Federation for developing a culturally 
sensitive program that helps older Aboriginal students make the 
transition to high school. My congratulations to these five 
deserving and excellent teachers. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Moosomin and Area Volunteers Recognized 
 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
take a moment this morning just to recognize the efforts of 
some volunteers in my area. Certainly in this province, we 
recognize that most communities survive — and community 
events — as a result of the volunteer efforts given by many 
people across our constituencies. 
 
Yesterday I had the privilege of attending the Sask. Housing 
Authority Recognition Award luncheon for John Corbett who 
served . . . given 15 years of his life to serve the community in 
the area of local housing authority. Certainly to John, I extend 
my congratulations as I did yesterday, and just to give 
recognition to all the housing authority members we have 
across our province. 
 
As well when it comes to events, most members might be aware 
of the fact that the 2000 Imperial Oil provincial mixed curling 
championships are currently taking place in the community of 
Moosomin. Mr. Speaker, here again this event would not take 
place in a small community if it wasn’t for the efforts not only 

of the curling club but the many volunteers who have given of 
their time and efforts. 
 
And I can attest to you that the community of Moosomin 
certainly has observed some very keen and competitive curling. 
And I would like to again commend individuals who give of 
their time and efforts so that functions like this can be held in 
our small communities. And communities certainly benefit 
from these efforts. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Saskatoon Girl Rescued from River 
 

Mr. Whitmore: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I’d like to 
commend the quick thinking and unselfish actions of Gordon 
Doell from Saskatoon. While crossing the railway bridge late 
on Sunday afternoon, Mr. Doell and some friends noticed two 
young girls had strayed onto the South Saskatchewan River. 
The ice broke and one of the girls fell in. Her companion held 
onto her arm but she was in danger of being pulled in under the 
current. Mr. Doell acted quickly and managed to drag the nearly 
submerged girl back onto solid ice. 
 
In an instant, life can change. In an instant, Gordon Doell made 
a decision and became a hero. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Meadow Lake Welcomes Newest Physicians 
 

Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This morning I 
wish to extend a welcome to Meadow Lake’s newest doctors, 
Dr. Anton Nel and Dr. Janna Van Tonder. Their arrival brings 
Meadow Lake’s total number of physicians to nine. 
 
Doctors Nel and Van Tonder are husband and wife duo from 
South Africa. Prior to taking up residence and practice in 
Meadow Lake, they served temporary short terms in Loon Lake 
and Maidstone for a total of nine months. Such was their 
appreciation of our friendly, hospitable Saskatchewan people 
and of our universal health care system that they have chosen to 
return to our province with their young family and practice 
medicine here. 
 
These two young doctors have first-hand experience of two-tier 
health care. South Africa’s health system consists of private and 
public facilities. As a result, proper health care is sometimes 
denied to people in the public system. 
 
Doctors Nel and Van Tonder have returned to Canada, returned 
specifically to Saskatchewan, because here with our health care 
reforms, they say, and ongoing changes to improvements of our 
needs-based universal system their current and future patients 
have good access to medical care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wish to reiterate my welcome and also to wish 
them every success in their practice. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Education Week 
 

Mr. Jess: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This week is Education 
Week in Saskatchewan. And today I would like to congratulate 



March 19, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 105 

SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology) Kelsey campus automotive service technicians 
program, and its partners on receiving the first national 
Canadian Auto Repair and Service, or CARS, motive power 
accreditation. 
 
This accreditation confirms that SIAST is on the leading edge 
of automotive industry training. This is exactly the kind of 
training that employers are looking for in prospective 
employees. And the program is popular. It is filled to capacity 
at 218, and more students are interested. 
 
The program has become a model for others like it across 
Canada. Saskatchewan is setting future directions for 
post-secondary education, and other provinces are following 
our lead. More importantly, we are improving interprovincial 
mobility and job opportunities for students. 
 
We’re providing high quality, relevant, economically and 
socially responsive post-secondary training and SIAST will 
continue to play a major role in The Saskatchewan Training 
Strategy. 
 
The accreditation further boosts SIAST’s reputation. So once 
again congratulations, your achievement is one of which we can 
all be proud. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Contract for Asbestos Removal at Plains Health Centre 
 

Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, my questions this morning are for 
the Minister responsible for SPMC (Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation). Madam Minister, a story in today’s 
paper talks about some of the problems with the asbestos 
removal project at the Plains hospital. The Saskatchewan Party 
has learned that the problems with this project extend far 
beyond the bankruptcy of I.E.S. Contracting. You have 
mismanaged this project since day one. 
 
Madam Minister, the Saskatchewan Party has been told that the 
original contractor was not bonded. You went to this Alberta 
company even though you had several bonded Saskatchewan 
companies bid on the job. Why would you award a million 
dollar contract, multi-million dollar contract to an unbonded 
company. It’s no wonder they went bankrupt and couldn’t meet 
their payroll. 
 
Madam Minister, would you confirm that you awarded the 
original contract to an unbonded Alberta company? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank 
the member opposite for the question. I’d like to take this 
opportunity to assure the people of Saskatchewan that the 
SIAST redevelopment project remains on budget and on 
schedule. 
 
The government’s investment and taxpayers’ interest are fully 
protected as this project is fully insured, Mr. Speaker, and fully 
bonded. The project budget remains unchanged at $29 million 
with the work to be completed by September 2000. All 

deadlines are being met. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in addition to our own requirements for bonding 
the company, the bonding people themselves assured 
themselves at the time that this contract was awarded that due 
diligence on this company was being done and at the time that 
company was solvent. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Madam Minister, you have now awarded the 
contract to Vision Industrial Group, which is simply the original 
contractor under a new name. 
 
Madam Minister, your SPMC spokesman says that the project 
is now fully insured and bonded. However, we have been 
informed that Vision Industrial is unbonded and does not have 
pollution liability insurance. We’ve also learned that the project 
consultants strongly recommended against hiring this company 
to finish the job. 
 
Madam Minister, why didn’t you simply re-tender this project. 
Will you confirm that your consultant recommended against 
hiring Vision Industrial and will you release that consultant’s 
report today? And will you also release a copy of Vision 
Industrial’s bonding and insurance contracts? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m having 
difficulty following the issue the member is trying to get at. At 
one point, he says, that there is no bonding happening and 
there’s no insurance on this project. 
 
The original contract was fully insured and fully bonded. The 
bonding company themselves did due diligence on the original 
company. And SPMC follows the same guidelines and will 
continue to follow those guidelines. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, SPMC does not have responsibility on the 
subtrades once the general contractor, PCL, a Saskatchewan 
company, assumes the project. They themselves have to be 
assured that the company now working is fully bonded and 
fully insured. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also like to say that we have the same 
qualified workers on site because of this change; the same wage 
rates will apply; the same guarantee of employment and 
payment is in place. And that is 90 per cent of the project has 
Saskatchewan people working on asbestos removal at this time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Madam Minister, your SPMC spokesman said 
that the asbestos removal project is on time and on budget, and 
that’s what you say here this morning. On time and on budget 
— where have we heard that one before from your 
administration? 
 
The Saskatchewan Party has obtained a copy of the instructions 
to bidders, including the projection . . . or the projected 
completion schedule. In it, it says that the entire project was to 
be completed by February 28, 1999. February 28, Madam 
Minister, not September as you suggest now. Doesn’t sound 
like you’re on time at all. The deadline was later revised to 
March, then to June, and now this morning now you say 
September. The fact is this project is now only about 20 to 25 



106 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 1999 

per cent complete and you’re not going to meet any one of your 
deadlines. 
 
Madam Minister, will you confirm and will you admit that this 
project is way behind schedule because of your NDP 
mismanagement? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This project 
is an exciting project for the province of Saskatchewan. The 
members opposite probably will have students from their area 
wanting to take the opportunity to be a part of a knowledge 
corridor in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the project in its entirety remains unchanged with 
a budget of $29 million, with the work to be completed by 
September 2000. 
 
You can take information and say, well this part or that part is 
always changing within the deadlines and time frames, but our 
people are on site to make sure that that project continues to 
meet those deadlines. 
 
SPMC is making sure that the contractor, PCL, which is a 
Saskatchewan firm, is fully insured and fully bonded. Mr. 
Speaker, we have qualified people employed at that project; 90 
per cent of the workers there are Saskatchewan people receiving 
employment opportunities, and the remainder of the project will 
have a hundred per cent Saskatchewan content. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, the 
Saskatchewan Party has also learned that there have been 
serious problems with this project right from the outset. The 
SPMC project consultant is Bersch & Associates, and they have 
issued reports citing numerous project infractions. 
 
Madam Minister, will you release the SPMC consultants’ report 
today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
SPMC took over the responsibility of changing the building to 
the redevelopment of the SIAST campus — eight campuses 
being amalgamated at that location that will be close to 
proximity of the University of Saskatchewan and provide 
opportunities for young people to be well trained in technical 
trades in this province. Probably the students from their 
constituencies will be excited about an opportunity to attend at 
this campus and the prospect of having the opportunity that that 
whole development involves. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SPMC has a general contractor on site, 
PCL-Maxam. The company is a Saskatchewan company. Once 
they’re on-site, the subcontractor is the responsibility of the 
construction manager, who will assume full responsibility for 
all subtrades. I am told that the project remains unchanged. It’s 
a good project. I don’t know why the members opposite can’t 
see the possibilities for future students in this province. 
 

The Speaker: — Order. Next question. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, 
simply, will you release the Bersch & Associates consultant 
report? That was the question. Will you please respond to that? 
 
And at the same time, will you also respond to the following 
question. The Saskatchewan Party has also learned that 
occupational health and safety has serious problems with this 
project. They have issued a report citing various infractions that 
put workers’ safety at risk. For instance, the negative air 
pressure levels in this building are not being properly 
maintained. That means workers could be breathing in the 
asbestos that they’re trying to remove. 
 
Madam Minister, will you release the occupational health and 
safety reports for this project as well as the Bersch and 
Associates’ consultant report? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — I thank the member opposite for that 
question, Mr. Speaker. On a project, a positive project of this 
magnitude, Mr. Speaker, we have many reports that are 
developed on many issues. We have and the reason why we 
have occupational health and safety at work in this province is 
to assure that those guidelines are being met. 
 
With regard to this project all due diligence on the safety of 
workers would be assured to the workers that are there, Mr. 
Speaker. To this date I haven’t heard one person bring forward 
this issue of concern. But if it’s brought to the attention of 
officials at SPMC, all due diligence would be met, and the 
safety of the workers is uppermost in our minds. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can’t understand why the opposition can’t see 
how well we’re progressing on this project and that we are 
employing Saskatchewan people to look forward to the future 
for students and technical trades in this province. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Tax Reduction Proposals 
 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 
the Minister of Finance. Mr. Minister, thanks to the NDP 
government Saskatchewan families struggle under the weight of 
the second highest taxes in Canada. Saskatchewan people are 
paying $1 billion more in provincial taxes today than they were 
in 1991. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has raised taxes by $1 billion in 
just seven years — no wonder people are leaving. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party is committed to easing the 
tax burden on Saskatchewan families by cutting the provincial 
sales tax from 7 per cent to 5 per cent and cutting the provincial 
income tax by 20 per cent. And, Mr. Speaker, the NDP 
government’s own economic advisors, WEFA Canada tell us 
we can make these tax cuts within a balanced budget. 
 
And what does the Finance minister say? It can’t be done. 



March 19, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 107 

Mr. Minister, will you support our platform and reduce taxes in 
your budget? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, you know I always get 
a little bit nervous when I hear the words balanced budget 
coming out of the mouth of the Tories because as everyone in 
this province knows, Mr. Speaker, they have never balanced the 
budget provincially and they have never balanced the budget 
federally. We had them in the ’80s at both levels of 
government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I’m pleased to get up on my feet and answer the member’s 
question, Mr. Speaker, because I’m proud to stand on the record 
of this government which record is this: 1994-95 we balanced 
the budget, Mr. Speaker, and then what did we do? We 
committed . . . we met our commitment of cutting taxes, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
In 1995-96 we cut income taxes. In 1997 we reduced the 
provincial sales tax by 2 per cent, in ’97. In 1998 we cut the 
income tax by 2 points. And you know, Mr. Speaker, we’re 
going to keep doing more of the same as we can afford it in a 
responsible, reasonable, sustainable way. That’s the record of 
this government and that’s the plan of this government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
another question for the Minister of Finance. Does the minister 
really think that cutting the PST (provincial sales tax) from 7 
per cent to 5 per cent so that we can compete with our sales tax 
free neighbours in Alberta, is irresponsible? Do you really think 
that cutting provincial income tax by 20 per cent so we can be 
competitive is irresponsible? Why is it irresponsible for the 
government to put money back into the hands of Saskatchewan 
taxpayers? 
 
Mr. Minister, what really is irresponsible is taking . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. Now the Chair . . . 
the hon. members will recognize that the member who is asking 
the question is not far from the Chair and the Chair is having 
difficulty being able to hear the question being put because of 
interventions from both sides of the House. Order. Now I’ll ask 
for the co-operation of all members. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, what 
really is irresponsible is this NDP government ignoring these 
realities and forcing our businesses and young people and 
retired people to leave our province for opportunities that they 
can’t find here under this high tax regime. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you deal with this issue before there are no 
taxpayers left in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, in answer to the 
member’s question, I want to remind the member that when his 
fellow Tories were in office in the 1980s, we had record 
out-migration from Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker — 15,000 

people a year — 15,000 people a year. The member asks what’s 
wrong with tax reduction, Mr. Speaker. Nothing is wrong with 
tax reduction. 
 
But there is something wrong with the platform of the Tories 
which does not add up, and I’ll tell you why. Because they are 
going to pay for the tax reduction that they proposed by 
freezing health care spending and freezing education spending. 
And if I was them, I’d be running away from that platform too, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And speaking of that platform, Mr. Speaker, these are not my 
words. These are words from the Regina Leader-Post of 
December 15, 1998 talking about the Tory platform. Listen to 
this. This is six weeks after they released their platform: 
 

According to Statistics Canada, the Saskatchewan Party 
platform overstated Saskatchewan’s 1997-98 revenues by 
$392 million. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And do you know what . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Next question. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Another question 
for the minister. Mr. Minister, your NDP government is the 
proud owner of the worst job . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Now once again the Chair is 
having difficulty being able to hear the question being put, and 
quite frankly I was having difficulty being able to hear the 
answer being provided. And I’ll ask — Order! — for the 
co-operation of all members of the House. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, your 
NDP government is the proud owner of the worst job creation 
record in all of Canada. The worst. Last. Bottom of the barrel. 
Last year Saskatchewan actually lost jobs, 4,100 of them. 
 
In the meantime Alberta created 54,000 new jobs; and 
Manitoba created 10,400 new jobs; even Newfoundland created 
more jobs than ever before. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the reason the NDP’s brutal job record is 
happening in Saskatchewan is because we have the second 
highest taxes in Canada. Mr. Speaker, the NDP government 
increased taxes on businesses and people of this province by $1 
billion. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you deal with this issue and provide 
meaningful tax relief in next week’s budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — You know, Mr. Speaker, they’re not even 
in office yet and already they’re trying to cook the books. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And, Mr. Speaker, the reality is that never 
between 1992 . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Now the hon. members don’t even need the 



108 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 1999 

Chair to intervene to know what the message is here. Order, 
order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, between 1992 and 1997 
Saskatchewan enjoyed the highest economic growth in Canada. 
And you know we have been hit hard in 1998. We have been hit 
by low prices on the farm and we’ve been hit by low prices in 
the oil patch, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, despite the fact that we have been 
hit very hard in Saskatchewan, our economy is still growing, 
the number of jobs is still growing, and that is because our 
economy is more diversified than it’s ever been before. There 
are more people working in Saskatchewan in 1998, Mr. 
Speaker, than there ever were before in the history of the 
province notwithstanding those problems. The employment 
numbers are the highest in 16 years. 
 
And I’ll tell you this, Mr. Speaker, and through you to the 
people of the province, the employment numbers are a lot better 
than when the member and his colleagues were in office in 
1980s when people were leaving the province in droves and job 
numbers were going down, Mr. Speaker. Job numbers today are 
going in the right direction, which is up, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Long-term Care Beds 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the Minister of 
Health, this province is sick of wellness. Yesterday the minister 
admitted there is a serious shortage of acute care beds in the 
province. According to the Barriers to Access Report which the 
minister commissioned but is apparently unaware of, patients in 
the Regina Health District need access to home care, mental 
health, and long-term care in order to ease the pressure on our 
acute care facilities. 
 
In other words long-term care patients are being kept in hospital 
because we don’t have sufficient resources in mental health, 
home care, and long-term care. When acute care beds are full 
that means longer waiting lists for surgery. With the aging of 
our population we know we need more long-term care facilities 
now and will need more in the future. Your waiting list report 
says nothing about reducing the waiting list for long-term care. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order, order, order. Now the 
hon. member has been extremely lengthy in his preamble, and 
I’ll ask him to go directly to his question now. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — What is the plan to deal with the crisis not just 
in acute care but in long-term care as well? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As 
the member may know the province of Saskatchewan is 
undergoing a change within our health care system. And we are 
moving away from a system that we relied heavily upon people 
providing services in long-term care facilities. For instance, in 
the province of Saskatchewan we find about 9,200 nursing 
home beds. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, we have begun to put significant 
amount of money into home care in the province of 

Saskatchewan, which allows people to stay in their own homes 
as long as possible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know from senior citizens that they wish to 
remain in their own homes with the support of home care for as 
long as they can. And we also know that there are those senior 
citizens that require more intensive nursing home care. And 
that’s why we’ve seen over the years a number of commitments 
and capital projects where we’ve seen a rejuvenation of nursing 
home beds across the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, we will not correct the shortage 
in acute care beds unless we also address the crisis in long-term 
care in mental health and home care. How does this minister 
expect to deal with these problems if she ignores her own 
commissioned report to deal with the long-term care problem. 
 
I know the minister was caught off guard over the nursing 
shortage. It came out of the blue; she didn’t know it was 
coming. I know she was caught off guard by the Barriers to 
Access Report. What is the plan? 
 
In the North Battleford by-election there was a promise of a $25 
million long-term care facility for the Battlefords, never to be 
heard of again after election day. What is the plan? Are you 
going to ignore your own report saying we can’t correct the 
problems in acute care unless we correct the long-term care 
facility shortage with the aging of our population? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
You know, Mr. Speaker, I think these are important questions. 
But I also think the Liberal Party has to realize that we began to 
see reduced funding to health care and post-secondary 
education in this country starting in the late 1970s. 
 
And then we saw a major change in how we fund 
post-secondary education and health care in the 1980s under the 
Tory Party of Mr. Mulroney. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we have just recently received a 
commitment from the federal government to begin to put back, 
on the part of the federal government, funds into health care of 
the provinces. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is no question that every government in this 
country has had to deal with debt and deficit. There is no 
question. We got ours started as soon as we came to 
government. As soon as we balanced the budget, what did the 
federal government do? They began to take out about $200 
million per year for funding of health care and post-secondary 
education. Mr. Speaker, this has not been easy but we have 
begun the transformation of health in the province of 
Saskatchewan and we are building long-term nursing home 
beds, Mr. Speaker, and we will continue to build more. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, next year is the year of the senior. 
This year we’re getting more funds from the federal 



March 19, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 109 

government, 65 to $85 million for health care. Now is the time 
to address the serious shortage we have got. Otherwise seniors 
will either have to suffer at home or occupy an acute care bed 
which will mean longer waiting lists. 
 
I haven’t heard anything yet from the minister that will deal 
with the fact that we have eight health districts reporting 
roughly 150 people waiting for placement right now in 
long-term care facilities — 53 in Moose Mountain alone; 
Gabriel Springs, 12; South Central, 20; East Central, 30; 
Pasquia, 15; and the list goes on and on. This is the current 
waiting list. 
 
We know that it’s going to get worse with the aging of our 
population, the aging of the baby boomers. What are you going 
to do ? What is the specific plan to deal with these issues? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I remember being the 
NDP Health critic in the 1980s. And at that time, Mr. Speaker, 
there were people that were waiting for nursing home care beds 
in the province of Saskatchewan, but we didn’t have a very 
sophisticated home care system in the province of 
Saskatchewan. We have seen a tremendous increase in funding 
to home care. 
 
And what home care does, Mr. Speaker, it allows people to 
receive nursing services in their own home, personal care in 
their own home, and for those people that need it, the support of 
housekeeping and cleaning and maintenance. Mr. Speaker, 
that’s what senior citizens want. They want to be able to stay in 
their own home for as long as possible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people who are in nursing homes are there 
because they require that kind of intensive care. And, Mr. 
Speaker, there are people who are in their homes that require 
intensive care, but that’s where they want to be. And home care 
allows them to be where they want to be, in their own homes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 2 — The Municipal Employees’ Pension 
Amendment Act, 1999 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 2, The 
Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 1999 be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 3 — The Intestate Succession Amendment Act, 
1999/Loi de 1999 modifiant la Loi de 1996 sur les 

successions non testamentaires 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 3, The 
Intestate Succession Amendment Act, 1999 be now introduced 
and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 4 — The Securities Amendment Act, 1999 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 4, The 
Securities Amendment Act, 1999 be now introduced and read 
the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 5 — The Municipal Hail Insurance 
Amendment Act, 1999 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 5, The 
Municipal Hail Insurance Amendment Act, 1999 be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 6 — The Coroners Act, 1999 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 6, The 
Coroners Act, 1999 be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 232  The Saskatchewan Farm Security 
Amendment Act, 1999 

 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
move first reading of Bill No. 232, an Act to amend The 
Saskatchewan Farm Security Act. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Jess, seconded by Ms. Murrell, 
and the proposed amendment thereto moved by Mr. Krawetz. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure today to stand in this 
Assembly and to make a few comments and to address the 
Assembly in regards to the Throne Speech that was recently 
brought forward by the current NDP government of the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d just like to begin by just noting a few 
comments in some of the headlines that we’ve seen in the 
papers recently in regards to Saskatchewan and the dilemma 
this province is facing on many issues, certainly health care, 
highways, whether it’s education, our welfare system, or 
judicial system. Many of the areas that, Mr. Speaker, I think 



110 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 1999 

you will realize even as the leader in this Assembly and the 
overseer of the Bills that are presently before the Assembly — 
Bills that my colleagues and I have presented — we look 
forward to debating in the upcoming session of the Legislative 
Assembly here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
But when we look at this upcoming session, the interesting 
thing about the Throne Speech that has been presented, that the 
Premier of this province and this NDP government have 
presented to the province of Saskatchewan, as we note in many 
of the editorials, the comments have been basically nothing new 
in this legislative session. 
 
In fact you have to ask yourself, why are we sitting in the 
Assembly here today? 
 
Maybe it’s time, rather than sitting here, Mr. Speaker, maybe 
we should be out going to the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan right now and asking for their opinion. 
 
Those are some of the things that I’m hearing from the public. 
In fact even over the past couple of days when I . . . whether it’s 
in the community of Maryfield where we’re recognizing the 
hard work of volunteers for Sask Housing authority . . . or 
whether it’s in the community of Moosomin where they’re 
currently hosting the Saskatchewan mixed curling 
championships. Or as even yesterday, Mr. Speaker, the fact that 
the regional college in our area has integrated with the local 
school, both in the communities of Moosomin and Whitewood 
to provide a facility to provide expanded educational 
opportunities. Something that I’ve believed in and spoken about 
for many, many years. 
 
And I’m pleased to see that we’re expanding the use of the 
current educational facilities rather than building other office 
space while we see in rural Saskatchewan specifically, lower 
numbers which means it’s been difficult for local school boards 
or area school boards to even keep the facilities open. 
 
And you know the interesting thing, no matter where I go, Mr. 
Speaker, what I find is that people are coming up to me and the 
question is, when is the next provincial election? Well that is 
something that I don’t have knowledge of, Mr. Speaker, I’m not 
sure if you have knowledge of. But certainly, there’s one person 
that does know in this province, at least on one if not two or 
three on the government side, and that’s the Premier of the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as we note from the Throne Speech debate 
that took place the other day, and that has been delivered and 
the debate that’s been going on this Assembly, we can see that a 
provincial election is not far on the horizon. 
 
Whether it’s in April — the possibility still exists for it to come 
this spring; it’s certainly there. And we acknowledge that. 
That’s why the Saskatchewan Party is going full bore to make 
sure that it has the adequate candidates in place, quality 
candidates in place to fight the next provincial election, whether 
it’s in June or even, Mr. Speaker, whether or not the Premier 
gets cold feet all of a sudden and decides he’s got to wait till 
fall. 
 
The fact is, Mr. Speaker, I believe there was a sincere 

possibility of an election last fall if it wasn’t for the fact that the 
Plains health care centre was just such a big issue, that the 
government decided that we’ve got to close this facility 
immediately in order to get it out of the way before we get into 
the next provincial election. And in a lot of ways, Mr. Speaker, 
I’m glad they made that move. 
 
Because if there’s anything that has really created a lot of 
animosity and anger and has really turned people off in regards 
to the NDP Party right now it’s the closure of the Plains Health 
Centre. It’s the turmoil surrounding the access to health care 
services, whether it’s the Regina General Hospital here in 
Regina or the Pasqua or other facilities in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those issues are burning on the hearts and minds 
of individuals on a daily basis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just last week before . . . or pardon me, on 
Monday after the Throne Speech debate and after visiting with 
some of the visitors that had come in for the Throne Speech, I 
took a moment to go visit a constituent in the Regina General 
Hospital. And before I left I had the privilege of talking to six 
other individuals. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, if I had had the time to go up and down all 
the corridors of that facility, who knows? I might have had the 
privilege of meeting a number of constituents and doing a fair 
bit of constituency work — a lot easier than driving from one 
community to the next, even though it wasn’t just going up a 
floor and walking for a few feet. You had those long corridors 
and trying to find your way around the General Hospital. 
 
It was very interesting just hearing of who was in the hospital, 
finding out somebody else was in, and walking over and just 
having . . . spending a few moments to comment and just to sit 
down and visit and chat. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I will say this, that many of the individuals I 
talked to, actually when they finally had the chance to get to the 
hospital they were pleased with the service they were getting 
from the caregivers. 
 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, we need to acknowledge . . . and just 
chatting with some of the nurses across our province in the past 
few weeks, while they are becoming distressed with the amount 
of hours they’re asked to put in, they’re distressed with the fact 
that in many cases they feel they are not given the opportunity 
to really provide the type of care that they would like to 
provide. At the same time they are showing compassion and 
doing their best to reach out to meet the needs of the patients 
that are in their care. 
 
And that’s what I heard from a number of patients, that they 
were pleased with the type of care they were receiving despite 
the turmoil it took and the anxiety that they faced in finally 
getting the opportunity for the bed and having the operational 
procedure, whatever procedure they were facing. 
 
(1100) 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, health care is definitely a major concern. And 
despite what the NDP rhetoric is, despite what the letters to the 



March 19, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 111 

editor are saying, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party has laid 
out a plan for health care. The Saskatchewan Party has made a 
commitment to funding of health care. The Saskatchewan Party 
has also indicated, more so than the NDP have, that they would 
certainly go after the federal government for its commitment to 
health care in the province of Saskatchewan, not only 
Saskatchewan but all of Canada. 
 
And while the NDP, the Premier of this province, and the 
Health ministers and the associate ministers would like the 
people of Saskatchewan to believe that the Saskatchewan Party 
does not have a plan, Mr. Speaker, people across Canada are 
seeing that plan. Because the Saskatchewan Party has released a 
document that is indicating the direction that it would take if 
given the opportunity at the next provincial election call which 
we are looking forward to, which if the Premier wants he could 
call today. He can call an election today. We’re ready to go to 
bat; we’re ready to take on the New Democratic Party in a 
provincial election. I’m not sure the New Democratic Party are 
really prepared to do that right now. 
 
But talking about some of the comments. I read here when you 
talk about the fact that a provincial election is on the horizon, 
it’s . . . I quote from a recent LeaderPost article that says it’s 
easy. 
 

How can you tell a provincial election is coming? (It says), 
It’s easy. 

 
Premier Roy Romanow is admitting the government has 
made mistakes in health care. 
 

The interesting thing about that comment, Mr. Speaker, when 
you look at it, is that the writer goes on to say: 
 

Of course, the mistakes had nothing to do with closing 52 
rural hospitals without having adequate home care or 
long-term care in place. The mistake had nothing to do 
with the hundreds of bed closures in larger health districts 
that were incapacitated by huge debt loads. They had 
nothing to do with gutting the provincial drug plan or the 
children’s dental plan. 
 

Mr. Speaker, when you look at it the article basically goes on to 
say, we’re back where we were in 1995. The Premier now is 
saying, we’ve made mistakes. Why is he acknowledging or 
trying to admit he’s made mistakes? He’s going back to 1994 
when he realized even before he had completed his first full 
term in government they were already facing some unhappy 
electorate, and the Premier said we’ve made mistakes and tried 
to cover up or cover over the mistakes. 
 
And as the current article is indicating, we’re seeing the same 
scenario coming into being. The Premier of this province, the 
NDP Premier of this province, is telling the people of 
Saskatchewan yes, we made mistakes. We’re sorry we made 
mistakes. 
 
As the article says at the end: 
 

But if (the New Democrats) want voters to believe they’ve 
learned from past mistakes, they’ll (first) have to 
demonstrate they recognize a mistake when they see (it). 

Mr. Speaker, that’s what we’re asking of. We’re asking of the 
Health minister; we’re of the associate Health minister; we’re 
asking of the Minister of Agriculture — will you finally 
recognize your mistakes? Rather than just saying we’re sorry, 
we’re sorry for what? Recognize where the mistakes have been 
made and acknowledge those facts rather than blaming 
somebody else. We’ve seen in the past that the NDP have found 
it very convenient to always blame somebody else. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, I believe the Finance minister this morning 
again resorted to his blame the other guy. Blame the 
government of the 1980s or blame the federal Liberal 
government for the problems that this province is facing. Or 
blame the United States of America, the lending institutions, for 
the problems we’re facing, or the low dollar in oil. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that in my mind is not acknowledging your 
mistakes. You say we’ve made mistakes, we’re sorry, but the 
mistakes we made are as a result of somebody else’s problems 
that have been laid at our feet. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s time that the Premier of this province and this 
NDP government finally grew up and recognized the fact that 
when you make a mistake you acknowledge that. And you say 
yes, here’s an area that we certainly fell short in, and while 
we’re asking you to give us the benefit of the doubt, here’s how 
we’re going to address that problem. Here’s how we’re going to 
address that concern. Here’s how we’re going to meet the 
challenges of the Year 2000 and the high tax load in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Here’s how we’re going to by . . . as a result of addressing the 
high tax load, we’re going to take a serious bite into the 
problems of job creation in the province of Saskatchewan. 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, has the distinction of being the 
worst job creator in all of Canada — the worst jurisdiction. In 
fact in the Throne Speech I believe, the Throne Speech as 
presented by the Lieutenant Governor, was a lot more . . . well 
closer to the reality of the number of jobs created than what was 
actually on paper. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, when you look at the job creation, this 
government says they created 30,000 jobs. According to the 
statistics we have . . . 30,000 jobs is just extending the number. 
Really it isn’t even close. They’re not really being honest. Why 
doesn’t the government say, based on . . . looking at the stats, 
looking at the real jobs that have been created, here’s the 
reality. Don’t just fudge the numbers as we’ve seen them do in 
the past and say more jobs have been created than actually have 
been created. 
 
Why doesn’t the government basically say . . . acknowledge the 
fact that yes we did lose some jobs. We’ve lost 4,900 jobs 
between January of ’98 to January of 1999. And when we talk 
about job creation, a recent letter to the editor in the Whitewood 
Herald basically talks about we see the number of job 
advertisements throughout the paper which seems to indicate 
that there are . . . a sign that the economy is doing well. 
 
The unfortunate part in regards to this letter to the editor in the 
Whitewood Herald talking about job creation, I just drove down 
to Whitewood yesterday evening when I was in the community 
for the regional college expansion, the move to the integrated 



112 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 1999 

facility, and I was surprised at some of the businesses that I saw 
that are actually almost closing the doors. There’s very little in 
the front, in the businesses there, and you have to ask yourself if 
the economy is doing well, why are businesses closing the 
doors in rural Saskatchewan? 
 
Mr. Speaker, part of the problem we have in rural 
Saskatchewan — the minister knows it, the Premier knows it, 
his government officials, his MLAs (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly) know it — is a fact that this province is driven by 
agriculture. In fact I believe the Minister of Agriculture, at the 
rally in Regina, acknowledged that 40 per cent or just over 40 
per cent of the economy of this province, economic wheel of 
this province, is agricultural based. Our small communities rely 
on agriculture. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, once we look at the Throne Speech that was 
presented to us, what commitment did the government really 
make to its rural economy, the economic engines of this 
province that they need to rely on in order to provide a good, 
sound government for the province of Saskatchewan? To 
provide good, sound government, not just for rural communities 
but larger centres like Regina and Saskatoon as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we’ve seen so far we see again, the 
government, the Premier, or the Agriculture minister, or the 
Minister of Finance blaming somebody else for their problems. 
It’s time they took their heads out of the sand and recognized 
that yes, we’ve all made mistakes. I believe, Mr. Speaker, that 
the former premier of this province would also admit that he 
made mistakes during the ’80s. I haven’t seen anyone, including 
myself as an individual grown-up, I don’t know of anyone who 
has not made mistakes in their lifetime. Hopefully we learn 
from our mistakes. 
 
But as I just indicated earlier in the quote in the Leader-Post 
back in . . . or the Star-Phoenix, pardon me, Friday, March 19, 
as the writer said, hopefully the government begins to 
acknowledge and learn from and recognize its mistakes rather 
than saying we’ve made mistakes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the reason we’re looking forward to this session of 
the Legislative Assembly is because we believe as a party that 
we have and are prepared and are going to present to the people 
of this province a clear alternative to the New Democratic 
Party, saying to the people of Saskatchewan, here’s what the 
Saskatchewan Party is willing to do for you. Here, we’re 
willing to go to bat for you. 
 
And rather than just standing up and saying we reduced the 
provincial tax . . . and I guess that’s another thing that comes 
from this letter in the Whitewood Herald. The letter writer talks 
about the MLA — the MLA for Moosomin, which is myself, 
Mr. Speaker — forgot that the government reduced the 
provincial sales tax. Mr. Speaker, I haven’t forgotten that but 
the fact is the impression is given that the government reduced a 
provincial sales tax that somebody else had raised, when the 
realities were all the government did was reduce the provincial 
sales tax to the level that it was when they started, when they 
formed government. 
 
And I hear the member from Regina South . . . 
 

The Speaker: — Now all hon. members know that shouting 
across the floor is not permitted and accepted during debate and 
I’ll ask for the co-operation of all members of the House to 
allow the hon. member for Moosomin to be heard. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I certainly appreciate input from other members. And 
as I recall, when you hear other members entering the debate, I 
think, Mr. Speaker, what it indicates is you’re striking a nerve. 
And certainly when you try to bring to the attention of the 
people of this province . . . when a government or the Finance 
minister tells you they’ve reduced the provincial sales tax and 
leave the impression, as the Premier did at the recent SARM 
(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) 
convention, that his government was the government that had 
put $85 million into the NISA (Net Income Stabilization 
Account) program rather than that it was a federal-provincial 
program, and this government only put $10 million in. The 
federal government actually put $75 million in. 
 
Or when they talk about reducing the provincial sales tax. Look, 
they say, look at what we did: we’ve removed two per cent of 
the provincial sales tax. Mr. Speaker, it’s important for the 
people of this province to recognize the fact that all they did 
was took back what they had taken in . . . or added in the first 
place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when it comes to taxes in the province of 
Saskatchewan, Saskatchewan is the second worst taxed 
province in this country. And we don’t have to look too far, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And in fact, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting to note some recent 
documentaries on TV of individuals, individuals who . . . in fact 
one family who used to live in the city of Regina, and looked to 
Alberta . . . went to Alberta to check things out and just to see 
what they would have, whether there was an advantage for them 
to look at Alberta. They’d been hearing all these rumours of the 
prosperity in Alberta. 
 
But on the other hand they were told, but you’d be paying a 
health-care premium, your insurance on your vehicles would be 
higher, and all these negatives. In the end they made the move. 
What did they find? They found, Mr. Speaker, after everything 
was said and done, they had, I believe, about $3500 more in 
their pocket. That was even after they paid their health-care 
premium. That was even after they paid for their car insurance, 
which they said was less than it was in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, for this government to continue to mislead the 
people of this province is unfortunate. Mr. Speaker, it’s time 
this government recognized the fact that when they . . . and this 
Premier, when he says, we know we made mistakes. Well then 
acknowledge where you made the mistakes, and then let the 
people know what you plan to do as a result of those mistakes, 
as a result of what you’ve learned. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s why the Saskatchewan Party, almost a year 
— well I guess it’s about seven months ago now — presented a 
document for the people of Saskatchewan to peruse, a 
document that basically says, this is the plan for the next 
coming election for the Saskatchewan Party. This is what we 



March 19, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 113 

plan to do. And we’ve done this after careful discussion and 
debate and thought in regards to whether or not it’s achievable. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’re pleased to say that after consultation 
with the WEFA Group, in fact an economic forecasting agency 
that the government uses on an ongoing basis, they have said 
yes, these programs are achievable. Yes, it is possible over the 
next two years to reduce the provincial sales tax by 1 per cent a 
year for the next two years. Yes, it is possible to reduce the 
personal income tax by 20 per cent over the next four years. Mr. 
Speaker, that’s responsible. 
 
It’s not responsible to go to the public and say we’re going to 
reduce the provincial sales tax by two points or the personal 
income tax by 20 per cent and just leave it at that, leaving the 
impression that the night after the election or the night of the 
election if the . . . when the people of Saskatchewan elect a 
Sask Party government, they’re going to expect 2 per cent. No, 
that’s irresponsible. 
 
But it’s responsible to say that you can over two years reduce 
the provincial sales tax to a level . . . to 5 per cent. Or 20 per 
cent over four years. Or over the next period of next five years 
of adding so many more dollars to the provincial Highway’s 
budget, another $40 million to the Highway’s budget, and $10 
million to SARM . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Fifty million for Highways. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Or $50 million as my colleague corrects me on 
that. 
 
Because, Mr. Speaker, that is another concern on the province 
of Saskatchewan. I mean when you look at whether it’s health 
care, we look at our key economy, highways have a major 
impact and play a major role in the trade of this province. And 
so far this government has not shown a very clear commitment 
to highway reconstruction in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we realize, we realize that this province has the 
largest highways base in the province . . . in all of Canada. But 
it’s imperative that the government make a commitment to 
highway maintenance and repair in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Why do I say that, Mr. Speaker? Not just because the people 
have to travel up and down those roads. Not just because we’re 
hoping to bring tourists into the province of Saskatchewan. But 
as well, Mr. Speaker, what we find, we find that ambulance 
drivers are complaining to us about the conditions of highways. 
In fact patients that I’ve talked to just recently, individuals who 
were brought into the city of Regina in an ambulance 
complained about the terrible ride that they had to endure, oh, 
for an hour, an hour and a half, two hours — in some cases 
three hours — as a result of the problems in our highway 
system and the need to address that situation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party has presented and people 
are looking at our plan. And people are saying yes, that looks 
like it’s an achievable plan. Yes, we’re looking at in fact many 
. . . as I found the other day an individual who delivers mail for 
Canada Post said to me I’m going to, I need to buy a 
membership from you; it’s time we got rid of the New 

Democratic government in this province and got a real 
government in the province of Saskatchewan. I hear that on an 
ongoing basis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are so many areas that I could delve into; 
there’s so many areas that I could talk about. I could talk about 
welfare and I could talk about the welfare numbers. And I’m 
looking forward to the opportunity to debate some of the issues 
in regards to welfare and its implementation, in fact with the 
current new minister of welfare in regards to the program that 
was introduced last spring regarding helping low income 
families. 
 
Because I’ve had families come to me who’ve asked what do I 
do? And we’ve gone to the department and it just seems the 
answers we’ve been getting are totally contradictory to what the 
former Health minister had spoken of — his vision for health 
care reform and giving people an opportunity to not only 
provide for themselves but to really remove themselves from 
the grips of welfare and give them that real opportunity to get 
into the workforce. 
 
(1115) 
 
We find, Mr. Speaker, just from the people that have come into 
my office, they feel that welfare is letting them down; that it’s 
not giving them that opportunity. And that’s why, Mr. Speaker, 
another area we feel it’s imperative that we help people, 
whether it’s through educational programs . . . And, Mr. 
Speaker, let me correct you. Educational programs will not do 
anything unless there is not a job ready for that individual to 
enter into. 
 
And those are some of the things that Saskatchewan Party 
wants to address and bring forward as we enter the debate in 
this session of the Legislative Assembly of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to just take a moment to talk about 
agriculture. Coming back to agriculture again and the recent 
federally announced program or joint federal program. It’s 
unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, that it took so long for the province 
and for this NDP Premier to recognize the difficulty that 
agriculture is facing today. 
 
And as a result of that difficulty small businesses, main street 
businesses in our small communities . . . in fact one individual 
. . . Yesterday I stopped at a equipment dealer and he made a 
comment about a person who’d been in his office the day 
before. And his comment was, in one community if you shot a 
gun down main street you wouldn’t have to worry because there 
was nobody on the street it was so quiet. That’s how quiet it 
was. 
 
People aren’t used to seeing streets where you can drive into 
town and basically there’s nobody in town. Small communities, 
usually you have people milling around downtown whether 
they’re doing a lot of business or in town. But it’s just a 
reflection, Mr. Speaker, of the difficult days we’re facing in 
agriculture. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it’s unfortunate that this Premier didn’t take 
the time to call the federal Prime Minister and really demand 



114 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 1999 

assistance and really bring to the attention of the federal Prime 
Minister that there is a real need in agriculture. 
 
And the need — and we acknowledge it, Mr. Speaker — the 
need comes as a result of international trade problems that have 
arisen, and trade negotiations, and some of the tariff barriers 
and the subsidies that we’re facing. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it’s imperative that we have a government in 
this province that takes to task a federal government that does 
not accept its responsibility. But at the same time we need to 
have a government that will recognize the importance of 
agriculture and will begin to lead the way in bringing forward a 
program that is fair and equitable. 
 
And I would suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, as our caucus we 
talked about an acreage payment basically . . . while we use the 
word acreage payment, it’s unfortunate we couldn’t do like the 
Americans. Just recently the Americans announced that the 
floor price for durum will be, I believe it’s 5.35 or $5.65 
American. And how are they implementing that program? 
They’re using the crop insurance program to do that. And 
they’re using the crop insurance program so that it gets around 
the GATT (General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade) rules and 
some of the other trade rules. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s time that even as . . . in a province 
where we are so strongly tied to agriculture that we starting 
looking at and coming up with ideas and presenting them to our 
federal governments and saying, these are some of the issues 
that we believe you can take to the international trade table and 
say if you’re going to work . . . if you’re going to apply 
programs in this manner, then our country will respond 
likewise. 
 
And I realize that when I say that, Mr. Speaker, that we do not 
have the populace base, that we do not have the population to 
consume the ability of the farm products that we produce. 
 
But I believe, Mr. Speaker, we need to go to the international 
trade table with an argument — not only an argument — but a 
plan that says here’s how we plan to address current situations 
unless you start to respond to some of the grievance we’ve done 
in the past. Rather than leaving our farmers out in the cold as 
we’ve seen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my colleagues and I are looking forward with 
great anticipation to the ongoing debate that will take place in 
this Assembly. But I would have to say this, while we’re 
looking forward to taking our place in this Assembly and 
speaking out on behalf of our constituents and the constituency 
of this province, we’re looking forward even with greater 
debate . . . greater anticipation of the upcoming election that we 
anticipate will be announced in the very near future. Who 
knows whether it’s announced after a few days after the 
delivery of the budget, next Friday. 
 
I don’t know, Mr. Speaker, but we have already laid out a plan. 
We are continuing to present that plan so the people of this 
province can see what the Saskatchewan Party is going to 
present to this province. And, Mr. Speaker, we take great 
delight in being here as a voice for the constituency that we 
represent. 

I take great delight in being here to represent the constituency 
of Moosomin. To bring forward the areas of concern and care 
whether it’s in agriculture; whether it’s in our small 
communities and business communities; whether it’s in the area 
of health care, welfare reform, or highways. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is certainly an honour — I count it an honour — 
to be here as a member of the Saskatchewan Party, to be an 
elected representative in the province of Saskatchewan to speak 
out and to offer ideas. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think you will be pleased to note as well 
that not only will we be critical of the government in areas, we 
will be putting forward ideas that we believe that if the 
government implemented some of these ideas they could really 
be of benefit to the people in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it’s with great pleasure that I have had this 
opportunity to stand here and to address some of the concerns 
we have, to bring to the attention of the electorate of the 
province many of the shortfalls we see in the Throne Speech 
before us. I thank you for your time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
today to rise to give my first speech to the Assembly on behalf 
of my constituents in Saskatoon Eastview. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me say a few words about Saskatoon Eastview. 
It is a very special constituency. It is blessed with a great mix of 
families, businesses, schools, and services. I’m very thrilled that 
I’m representing a constituency that has the highest 
concentration of seniors in Canada. It is a great honour to be 
able to represent a constituency of people and I take this task 
very seriously. 
 
I’ve been happy to meet with many people, both in the 
campaign and since my election. I want to take this opportunity 
to thank all of those who supported me and worked hard on my 
behalf after I made the decision to change directions and 
become a member of this Legislative Assembly. 
 
I want to thank my colleagues on this side of the House for their 
support, and also my cabinet colleagues for their support and 
encouragement. It has been very much appreciated while I have 
been on this steep learning curve during the past six months. 
People helping people is the Saskatchewan way. 
 
I’d also like to take this opportunity to thank my family for the 
support they have given me over the last year as I entered 
public office. I’d like to thank my husband Don, for his patience 
and understanding. Politics runs in our family: Don’s father was 
a long-serving city councillor in Saskatoon and I am pleased to 
follow in his example of public service. 
 
I’d also like to mention my son, Sean, who was just elected as 
president of the Students’ Union at the University of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Sean and I have had many interesting 



March 19, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 115 

political discussions over the last year and he was active in my 
campaign to get elected. 
 
I would also like to thank my daughter Heather who has also 
supported me and worked on my campaign. I take this 
opportunity to welcome Heather to Regina, as she has taken a 
new job here in the city and become a proud homeowner. 
 
My parents and my sisters as well as our extended family have 
also been very supportive and often phone me with advice and 
comments. 
 
I’d also like to thank many of my previous colleagues in the 
nursing profession who supported me and who continue to 
support and encourage me. In my previous position, I had the 
honour of working on that constituency’s behalf for five years. 
 
As president of the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, I was able 
to bring forward the concerns of nurses across the province and 
ensure that they were taken into consideration. We worked to 
improve . . . to improve the working conditions and 
remuneration for our members and worked with other labour 
organizations to promote our issues. 
 
Last year I decided that health care in Saskatchewan was so 
important that I wanted to try and influence it’s development 
from a different place, and that place is here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Health and health care is so important to 
me that I changed directions and put my name forward in the 
Saskatoon Eastview by-election in the hopes that I could bring 
the experience of my career as a nurse and a health provider to 
the government decision-making process. I wanted to make a 
small contribution to the future of medicare. 
 
I’d like to talk about what attracted me to run in the Eastview 
by-election. It was the record of this government and the 
commitment to continue to build on that record. This 
government embraces change, Mr. Speaker. This government 
has a forward vision. This government keeps its promises to 
manage government responsibly. Simply put, we are the best 
managers of government for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Our programs are seen by the world, from Taiwan to Spain to 
South Africa to the Ukraine, as models and as the best there is. 
Our programs win awards and our civil servants are seen as 
innovative and dedicated in health care, in education, highways, 
social services, economic development, justice, and fiscal 
management. This is the government that the people trust. This 
government has balanced the budget, reduced the debt, and 
reduced taxes. Mr. Speaker, this is no small feat. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve walked in my nurse’s shoes for many years. I 
understand clearly the issues in health both in the workplace 
and in the community. I wanted to serve the people of the 
Saskatoon Eastview constituency and Saskatchewan because I 
felt that as a nurse I could address those issues with this 
government to improve health services all over the province in 
both rural and urban areas, in large cities and small towns. 
 
Improvements such as providing health services where they’ve 

never been previously available by providing access to an 
expanded number and variety of services for the people across 
the province; by providing funding for the operation of new 
technology that better diagnoses the ailments of Saskatchewan 
people; and by working on new initiatives to improve the 
waiting times that people face when they need some types of 
surgery. 
 
I know that this government will continue to work on 
improving services like home care, mental health, therapy, and 
rehabilitation services — services that in many places come to 
the people rather than the people going to them. 
 
Kidney dialysis and chemotherapy now come to people and are 
available to them without them having to travel long distances. 
And services are now available in more convenient settings than 
ever before so that people can go to one place to receive their 
services rather than having to go all over town or into the city. 
 
Our government’s promise to more forward with enhancements 
to our health services, to care delivery, health promotion, and 
illness disease prevention, has validated my decision to join the 
government and continues to do so with the promises in the 
Throne Speech. 
 
For example, our government has promised to decrease waiting 
times for surgical procedures, improve women’s health with a 
multi-year plan to address the critical needs for women’s health, 
make important improvements to cancer treatment in the 
province, improve working conditions for health care workers. 
 
What gives me renewed hope and indeed excitement as we 
move into the new millennium is the fact that our government 
has built the best health care system in the world, and that 
Saskatchewan continues to lead in innovative health practices. 
 
I have been across the country and can say with certainty and 
confidence that I am proud to be part of this government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — The Minister of Health and I met last night 
with Shirley Douglas, health activist and daughter of Tommy 
Douglas, and Pat Armstrong, author and professor, both from 
Ontario. We discussed the totally privatized home care system 
in Ontario and the negative impact on the quality of services 
and the increased cost that has resulted from this. They told us 
about cases such as a woman with a double mastectomy who 
was sent home on the second day after surgery with no support 
and having to make her own arrangements. 
 
Mr. Speaker, privatization is all around us. Most significantly in 
Ontario, but knocking at the door in Alberta and Manitoba. And 
the door is being pried open by these Tory governments. I am 
more convinced than ever that despite some mistakes, some 
false starts, we have the best health care system in the world. 
This is the only government that will keep the door shut. 
 
It’s very easy to criticize and finger point. That’s the job of the 
opposition. But frankly, Mr. Speaker, I am appalled at the lack 
of real understanding about health and health care issues that 
are demonstrated by the questions and concerns that the 
opposition raises. I’ve been surprised at the genuine lack of 



116 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 1999 

concern demonstrated by using people’s stories to advance a 
political agenda. 
 
(1130) 
 
It would benefit all of the opposition to learn about health issues 
so that their constituents have the benefit of accurate 
information and thoughtful criticism that seeks to improve the 
health system. Let me give you an example, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The current shortage of nurses is a national and international 
issue. There are many factors at work here. One of these . . . one 
of the major ones is the way we offer work to health workers. 
There has been a national trend towards casualizing the 
workforce in health instead of paying attention to workload and 
planning for change. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people need permanent jobs. They need security 
to be able to plan and to be able to have time with their families. 
The kind of work atmosphere where people are secure and 
happy is the kind we want to have in Saskatchewan because that 
is one of the ways to improve services. I’ve been able to 
provide my thoughts on this issue as we work on a strategy to 
retain and recruit health professionals. 
 
I’d like to talk for a few minutes about how I see the health 
systems of the future. We’re always moving forward. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we began health reform we were governed 
by more than 400 separate boards which operated hospitals, 
nursing homes, home care, and other services. We now have 32 
health districts and one health authority. We’ve come a long 
way. Administrative structures have been greatly reduced. 
Coordination has been greatly increased with health services 
now linked. 
 
We have achieved much, but there is always more work to be 
done. We can always improve efficiency and coordination, we 
can always expand services to communities, we can always 
look at new ways to provide services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I always prefer to discuss the positive things that 
have happened and to think about ways to expand services 
according to needs assessment and continuing innovation. Mr. 
Speaker, since becoming the Associate Minister of Health, I 
have visited many places in Saskatchewan. I’ve visited 
Humboldt, Fort Qu’Appelle, Lestock, Borden, Weyburn, and 
Big River, Estevan, Indian Head, Redvers, Hafford, Nipawin, 
Tisdale, and Prince Albert. 
 
I’ve been from Gull Lake to Black Lake. Mr. Speaker, I’ve 
eaten caribou in Black Lake and it was delicious. 
 
In every place, people were very pleased to tell me about the 
innovative programs that they are providing to their patients and 
residents and to their greater community. People are eager to 
contribute their thoughts and ideas to the health system and are 
proud to be solving problems. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we need to recognize that there is more to health 
than just treatment. We need to work towards moving towards a 
more preventative system. And in Saskatchewan, we have 
moved. More and more health providers, administrators, and 

citizens are recognizing that we have a responsibility to try and 
prevent disease and accidents. 
 
I’d like to talk about the determinants of health for a few 
moments; those things that determine how healthy we are. One 
of the greatest determinants, Mr. Speaker, is our level of 
education. That, more than almost anything else, determines 
how healthy we are for the rest of our lives. Our education 
influences our economic welfare. 
 
Another very important determinant is how we experience our 
first few years of life. Yes, Mr. Speaker, those first few years of 
life are so important that Saskatchewan people work together 
and now once again lead the way with our child action plan. 
Our government has developed some very innovative programs 
such as the successful mothers’ support program, the provincial 
parenting education project, six youth wellness centres, and 
school link services to children at risk of failure. 
 
These are very important programs. They have a long-term 
focus, and once again, they are part of a collaborative process 
that involves people from all sectors and all parts of the 
province. We now have a council on children, a new Children’s 
Advocate, and have regional action plan committees. I am 
proud to have joined a government with such accomplishments. 
 
The child action plan received national recognition last fall in 
Ottawa, and our Premier received the award of Champion for 
Children on behalf of our province — another great 
achievement for the people of Saskatchewan, another example 
of Saskatchewan leading the way. 
 
We also need to educate people about how maintaining a 
healthy lifestyle can prevent many diseases. And we need to 
make our youth aware of dangerous behaviours and risk-taking, 
on how doing something like catching some air on a skateboard 
or a trick bicycle, or diving into unknown waters, or driving 
without a seat belt, can have devastating effects on the rest of a 
teenager’s life and the life of his family and friends. Reducing 
accidents and disease is one way to ensure that we have 
resources to do other things in health care. 
 
And in the true Saskatchewan way — because when accidents 
happen, people require treatment and rehabilitation over many 
years — we have developed an innovative program called the 
acquired brain injury project that identifies people with brain 
injuries and works with them. This program, like so many 
programs in Saskatchewan, was the result of needs assessment, 
analysis, policy development and collaboration with the end 
result an exciting and innovative solution. 
 
Mr. Speaker, identifying the problem and working 
collaboratively towards a solution is the Saskatchewan way. 
Developing programs based on strong science are always better 
than just throwing money at a problem. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the introduction of seat belts and the later 
implementation of the mandatory use of seat belts was a major 
step in reducing the carnage and devastating injury associated 
with accidents. This is another example of how a problem was 
identified and a solution reached that helped us reduce accidents 
and injuries. We need to apply that scientific method to our 
problems and seek solutions. 



March 19, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 117 

We need a health system that meets the needs of all residents in 
the province through the provisions of the services that they 
need. We need tertiary hospitals that provide the best diagnostic 
and acute care that is available for treating people who have 
complex medical conditions that require the attention of 
specialists and subspecialists. We have those in Regina and 
Saskatoon. And we need to work hard to ensure that those 
facilities stay state-of-the-art. 
 
We also need smaller hospitals around the province that provide 
surgical and acute services as well as provide a place for 
visiting services to come in and meet the needs of the residents. 
We need other types of centres and facilities that provide good 
emergency and acute services according to the needs of the 
local community. 
 
And we need to continue to build on our system of emergency 
responders, ambulance services, air ambulances, and medical 
evacuation systems throughout the province. These kinds of 
initiatives will address many of the concerns of the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the pioneers of this province were independent 
people. There are many seniors now who were with us in 1905 
when this province joined the Dominion of Canada. Many of 
these same seniors have told us that they wish to remain 
independent as long as possible. And we have listened to them 
and have provided increased funding to home care. This helps 
people stay in their homes, come home from hospital early, or 
even in some cases have care at home that was previously only 
available in a hospital. 
 
I’d like to see primary health services around the province of 
the kind which were so eloquently described by the CEO (chief 
executive officer) of the Prince Albert health district, Mr. Stan 
Rice, in the Leader-Post yesterday. The title of this article is 
called “Defining primary health care.” 
 

The federal/provincial/territorial ministers advisory 
committee on health services offers this definition (of 
primary health care): “primary health care is the 
foundation of our health system. It is the care provided at 
the first level of contact with the health system — where 
people first enter the health system and where all health 
services are mobilized and co-ordinated. It includes 
education and activities to maintain health, as well care for 
common illness, minor injury and management of ongoing 
problems.” 

 
Mr. Rice goes on to say that single client and client family 
needs are complicated. And that’s the truth. Health needs are 
very complicated. Mr. Rice says that the formation of health 
districts helps coordinate health services. I think we know that 
now. And he reinforces many of the things I’m saying today, 
that co-operation and collaboration are essential to meet the 
needs of any person or group of people. 
 
People have heard me talk about primary health services before, 
like Mr. Rice, and although this is not a new model I believe 
that this model is the wave of the future. And it will provide 
many services for Saskatchewan residents across the province, 
both in rural and urban settings, and will meet many needs that 
are currently unmet. 

For many communities it will provide an enhancement to 
current services. A primary health centre can be located in a 
hospital, in a clinic, or in a variety of settings. 
 
Primary health services will mean that many nurses with 
additional training as advanced clinical nurses, or ACNs, will 
work as a team with a doctor. There may also be nutritionists, 
dieticians, social workers, physiotherapists, and perhaps a 
dentist. People would have access to a wide variety of services 
in one location. Services could be much better coordinated. 
Now that’s innovation. 
 
While there are many programs we can provide, we also need to 
provide long-term care for people whose medical needs can no 
longer be met in the community. 
 
We need to ensure we have the appropriate number of beds for 
those people of all ages, and that our facilities are flexible to 
also provide respite, palliative care, transition beds, special 
units for Alzheimer patients, and other groups of people of 
special needs. 
 
Our system has to look to the future, while at the same time 
meeting the needs of our residents now. And that’s a tall order. 
A goal like that can only be reached by working collaboratively 
with all interested sectors across the province. 
 
Like I said before, Mr. Speaker, I am an optimist. And I believe 
that Saskatchewan people can achieve anything they set their 
minds to. 
 
My experience in the health system has taught me that our 
health is of prime concern to each of us and it is my opinion 
that the concerns of our constituents merit better attention than 
having them used as a political football. 
 
It is very difficult to design and implement a system that meets 
the health needs of our citizens balanced with what we can 
afford as taxpayers, given the constantly changing nature of 
technology and medical practices. The job of the government is 
to ensure that we are agents of this balanced change. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that I decided to run for 
public office to contribute to the betterment of health services in 
our province. I felt that my experience would be of assistance 
and I was pleased to become a member of this New Democratic 
Party and this government. 
 
Our government has a commitment to medicare and we have 
the people’s mandate to continue to build a Saskatchewan that 
we and our grandchildren can afford and, most importantly, that 
not only meets our needs today but well into the future. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to open my 
response to the Speech from the Throne by commenting and 
complimenting the member for Saskatoon Eastview on a very 
fine maiden speech, and a thoughtful speech it was. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



118 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 1999 

Mr. Trew: — I know that that hon. member brings a great deal 
to this Legislative Assembly and to the Government of 
Saskatchewan and therefore to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I was listening with a great deal of interest to her remarks, 
particularly as they revolved around health care, health care 
being, simply put, the biggest issue certainly in the north end of 
Regina, in Regina Coronation Park, the area that I am honoured 
to continue to represent on behalf of the people there. Health 
care is huge. It’s a concern and it’s one that I’m delighted to say 
we have moved on and moved in very significant ways. 
 
Not insignificantly is the recent report of the task team on 
surgical waiting lists. And the Minister of Health and Associate 
Minister of Health both have been commenting on that in the 
last couple of days. And I’m very pleased to see some of those 
positive moves that are going to be taking place so that we can 
reduce waiting lists for people. Because after all that’s what 
health care is all about is how the system impacts on 
individuals, whoever they are, and particularly how it impacts 
on us and responds to our needs when we need it. And so I’m 
pleased with that. 
 
I’m also more than a little bit pleased, now that the Regina 
General Hospital and the Pasqua Hospital are up and running in 
their renovated state, their built-on state, to say that I’m pleased 
that Regina has now got an MRI (magnetic resonance imaging). 
It’s the first time we’ve ever had that. And certainly I could 
argue that we should have had that some years ago but the hard 
truth is, this is when we got it. And I look forward to all of the 
wondrous things that that will do to help medical professionals 
deal with my constituents and all of the people of certainly 
southern Saskatchewan. 
 
Also pleased, this should take some of the pressure off of the 
existing MRI in Saskatoon because currently Regina and 
southern Saskatchewan people have gone to Saskatoon for MRI 
tests. 
 
As — I don’t know whether to say as significantly because I’m 
not a medical doctor — but at the risk of being medically 
unsound, I’m going to say as significantly there’s a number of 
other improvements that have taken place. One is we’ve got a 
spiral CAT (computerized axial tomography) scan in both the 
General and the Pasqua Hospital. CAT scan, in layman’s terms, 
the old existing CAT scans, a person would lay out on the table 
and the machine would take pictures much like slicing a carrot. 
And I’m told that from start to finish it would take about an 
hour until your physician could see the images of your body, 
the X-rays if I could describe it that way, out, and then decide 
what is the appropriate method of treating. 
 
Well, this is all fine and good except when you’re in an 
emergency situation. The emergency could be caused by a 
vehicle accident or it could be something that comes in the 
normal course of our lives anyway. With the spiral CAT scan, 
the machine actually revolves around the person and takes 
pictures. I’m told it’s less than 15 minutes from the time the 
patient gets on the table until the physician or surgeon can be 
looking at the X-rays and determining, and determining, what 
the course of action is. 
 
Now we’ve got a spiral CAT scan in both hospitals in Regina 

— both of the major ones — and that’s a major, major 
improvement to health care particularly to emergency health 
care in southern Saskatchewan. 
 
The other thing that I’m delighted with is that we’ve now got a 
second cath lab for open heart surgery. Again that doubles the 
effective capacity to do open heart surgery in southern 
Saskatchewan, from one to two. For years we had one cath lab; 
now there are two — both of them located at the Regina 
General Hospital. 
 
(1145) 
 
And I can’t . . . I hear the Tory Party saying, is it up and 
running yet? And of course you know the answer to that, yes it 
is. Yes it is. Even the Conrad Black press couldn’t ignore that 
the second cath lab is up and running. Even the Conrad Black, 
even the Conrad Black media couldn’t ignore the fact that 
we’ve now got zero wait list with respect to open heart surgery 
or heart procedures in southern Saskatchewan. 
 
This is part of . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . well now the 
question is, is the MRI up yet? You know I really look forward 
. . . I thought you had an opportunity to speak in this Throne 
Speech debate just the other day. And it’s really, really 
interesting because I have already addressed the MRI and I 
invite the member to listen. 
 
The MRI is being installed at the Regina General. It’s a matter 
of a short period of time and the MRI will be up and running. 
And I very much, very much look forward to the wondrous 
things that that will do. 
 
Something that I have not heard any of my colleagues mention 
is the two First Nations healing centres that are now built in to 
the two hospitals in Regina, Mr. Speaker. And it is very 
important because medical healing is more than simply 
injections or slice-and-dice surgery, if you’ll have it that way. 
 
There’s also a mental health component to it, and mental health 
and spiritual health often fall very closely together. And it’s 
really, really heartening to see that the Regina Health District 
and the Department of Health, the government have worked so 
diligently to make these two First Nations healing centres, 
Aboriginal healing centres a reality — one at the General and 
one at the Pasqua Hospital. 
 
And I’m really pleased to tell you that these healing centres are, 
or spiritual healing centres, are being utilized and being used 
and it’s just one more step in how health care has improved. 
 
Just the other day, again in this report on the task team on 
surgical waiting lists, with that and attached to that there’s 
going to be improvements in cancer treatment. One of the 
things that has been a problem is cancer treatments. The wait 
from the time of diagnosis until the start of treatment has been 
longer than we would like and the target is to reduce that time 
and get it to a more acceptable level. 
 
I’m really pleased with that, and I’m really pleased, Mr. 
Speaker, with what is happening respecting home care in the 
province, where there has been a virtual doubling of the dollars, 
the funding. Because home care cannot exist without funding. 



March 19, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 119 

Any health procedure cannot exist without funding. And I’m 
delighted to tell you that the numbers of people utilizing home 
care has just risen dramatically. 
 
And this allows, as the Minister of Health said in question 
period, what it allows is for people to spend much more time at 
home as opposed to being in a nursing home. Now I hear that 
the old Tory Party calling for . . . or crying for new nursing 
homes to be built. And I find it real interesting because I have 
an opportunity and make use of that opportunity to visit nursing 
homes from time to time. 
 
Invariably what I find when I’m talking with families of people 
in a nursing home, invariably what they say is this nursing 
home — whether it’s the William Booth nursing home in my 
constituency, whether it’s Pioneer Village or the Santa Maria in 
other parts of Regina, it doesn’t matter where — invariably 
what they say is this nursing home does a terrific job; they’re 
really looking after mom or dad or grandma or grandpa, 
whoever, my neighbour, whoever it is. Really a good nursing 
home. That’s universal. 
 
And then the next comment is, you know, God willing, I won’t 
have to spend any time in a nursing home. And I know that 
most of us feel that way, Mr. Speaker. Most of us do not wish to 
spend the twilight of our lives in a nursing home. 
 
Home care helps enable people to live independently, to remain 
in their own homes, whether their home is a house or an 
apartment or a seniors’ high-rise — that’s immaterial. They can 
stay in their own homes much longer and maintain 
independence, which all of the health studies, all of the credible 
health studies in the universe say prolongs quality of life and 
the longevity of life. In other words, we’ll live longer, we’ll be 
healthier, we’ll be happier, the more independence we can 
maintain. 
 
So we’ve got the priorities basically correct. I’d love to tell you, 
Mr. Speaker, that there’s never any problem in health care. It’s 
just not based on any reality. Unfortunately there are some 
problems. 
 
But what amazes me is that there are 35,000 Saskatchewan 
residents that deal with the health care system each and every 
day of the year — 35,000. And all that we can get is one or two 
— that’s all the Conrad Black media can come up with — is 
one or two a week where there’s a problem. 
 
And what amazes me, Mr. Speaker, is as easy to get along with 
as I am, I can’t look you in the eye or anyone else in the eye and 
say, you know of the last 35,000 individuals that I spoke to, 
there were no problems. 
 
I’ve had disagreements with people. I’ll bet you that there’s 
people out there that would love to — I have to use 
parliamentary language — but would love to not say nice things 
about me, out of the 35,000 last people I spoke to. And I do 
maintain that one on one I’m a pretty reasonable guy to talk to. 
 
Now why should it be hugely different in the health care field 
when we’ve got so many people in such a critical situation 
presenting themselves to the health care system, people who are 
in all states of health, from frankly dying to curable, and 

somehow everyone has a different expectation of what the 
health system can do for them. 
 
Sometimes communications are not as good as they should be 
and sometimes treatments go off the railway track, if I can use 
that metaphor. But it’s amazing that there aren’t a lot more 
problems with respect to health care than what the Tories and 
Conrad Black media can come with. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, I have a note here under this. I wanted 
to talk a little bit about now, having addressed health care, at 
least my opening remarks on health care, I wanted to talk a little 
bit about a quote out of the newspaper, and it’s a Murray 
Mandryk article. And what he says here, and I’ll just quote, I’ll 
quote one paragraph from Murray Mandryk, where Murray 
writes: 
 

The unspoken message from the New Democrats here is 
one designed to malign the Saskatchewan Party as nothing 
more than a repeat of the evil, corrupt Tories of the 1980s. 
 

He goes in brackets: 
 

(Come to think of it, it hasn’t even been all that unspoken 
. . . 
 

Well that’s what Murray Mandryk writes. We’re not all that 
unspoken in our criticism of the Sask Party, the old Tories, the 
1980 Devine Tories. And it’s true. Why would we be unspoken 
about it, Mr. Speaker. Why would we be silent about the 
Saskatchewan Tories and their record. 
 
This ragtag group of people, Mr. Speaker, that haven’t had the 
decency to say we’re sorry. That haven’t had the decency, that 
haven’t had the decency to cut the ties with the Tory Party — 
have not had the decency to cut the ties with the Tory Party. 
The financial support, the financial support of the Saskatchewan 
Party is the old metro fund of the Tory Party. Imagine that, Mr. 
Speaker. And they wonder why it is that we call them Tories. 
 
I always thought if it looks like a dog, it barks like a dog, it 
probably is a dog . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, exactly. If 
you hit it with a stone and it yelps, that’s a little extra 
confirmation, it’s a dog. 
 
How is it, how is it, how is it that all of this . . . and I’m going 
to outline a bit of this little problem to show that they’re not the 
Tories. It seems to me that one of the things you’d want to do is 
not take Tory money. Cut the ties. Two things — apologize, but 
cut the financial ties, cut the financial ties. 
 
I want to quote a few things here. The question is, what 
financial ties? And I’m coming to that. I’m coming to that. 
 
I want to quote again from Mr. Mandryk who says, and I quote: 
“Of course interim leader ”. . . I can’t use the name. I guess I 
could because it’s a quote, but I won’t. Everyone knows who 
the leader of the . . . everyone who cares knows who the interim 
Leader of the Saskatchewan Party is. But he: 
 

. . . said last August that the new party was not taking the PC 
(Progressive Conservative) metro fund with it. What’s 
important to note though is that the interim leader’s response 



120 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 1999 

was in the present tense — not the future.  
 
The member for Canora is your interim leader that made that 
quote — your seatmate, your seatmate actually. It’s interesting 
that you would ask who made that statement when it’s your 
seatmate that made the statement printed in the Leader-Post, 
November 13, 1997. 
 
Now the Sask Tories have done polling recently and there is 
media speculation about how that polling got paid for. There is 
considerable speculation that the metro fund paid for that 
polling. There is considerable speculation that the PC metro 
fund paid for that. There is considerable speculation in the 
media that that’s what’s happening. 
 
You know, it’s interesting isn’t it? If it looks like a dog, if it 
runs like a dog, if it smells like a dog, and you throw a rock at it 
and it yelps, it’s likely a dog. 
 
I want to talk about the secret PC fund here for a minute. I want 
to talk . . . My goodness, lo and behold, I have actually one of 
my favourite reporters, Murray Mandryk, I’m quoting from 
again here. And amongst other things, I’m going to quote, I’m 
going to quote a paragraph here that says from Mr. Emsley, and 
he says, quote: 
 

“It’s a private fund,” said Emsley, believed to be involved 
in the new Saskatchewan Party, although he would neither 
confirm nor deny his involvement when asked. 
 
He said, (quote), “We’re not obliged to talk about it.” 
 

Well that’s interesting, that’s interesting that Mr. Emsley 
wouldn’t want to talk about it because here’s something about 
Mr. Emsley. MLA accountability — and this is printed in the 
Leader-Post again, November 2, ’98: 
 

MLA accountability statements filed with the Speaker of 
the legislature offer another connection to the past. All 
eight members of the Saskatchewan Party hired a Regina 
company called Charlton Communications to provide 
advertising services during ’97-98. The amounts ranged 
from $500 in the case of . . . (the member for Saltcoats) to 
$12,000 for . . . (the member for Souris-Cannington). 

 
The officers of Charlton Communications all had close ties with 
the Devine government, Mr. Speaker. I want to repeat that 
because of the case that we’re building, and why it is that we’re 
not so silent about the opposition Tories. I repeat from the 
paper: 
 

The officers of Charlton Communications all had close ties 
to the Devine government. Company president Mary Lynn 
Charlton was the executive assistant to former Finance 
minister, Lorne Hepworth. 
 

Corporate secretary Doug Emsley — remember Doug Emsley? 
Remember Doug Emsley. He was the . . . Who was Doug 
Emsley? He was Devine’s assistant principal secretary. And oh, 
he is also the keeper of the PC (Progressive Conservative) trust 
fund. Oh, did I read that right? Keeper of the PC trust fund. Oh. 
It seems to me there’s some pretty close ties here. It seems to 
me that the Sask Tories have only run up a flag of convenience. 

This is the difference. A flag of convenience. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Step outside and say that. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, the member for Cannington asked 
me to step outside and say that. I just want to share with the . . . 
I just want to share with the hon. member that I have been 
attending events around the province. And I have been saying it 
as loudly as I possibly can that the Tories are flying a flag of 
convenience. I say it at every opportunity I get and not because 
I want to just wail upon the Tories. 
 
It is easy to do that, but what’s fundamentally at stake here, Mr. 
Speaker, is we have to understand the past to understand where 
we’re going. And what I mean by this is that when you look at a 
group of Tories that haven’t said I’m sorry, that haven’t cut 
their financial ties with their old ship of state, the Tory Party, 
that simply fly a flag of convenience. Why would we think that 
the Tory Party has changed at all? 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it is important, it is fundamentally important 
that the people of Saskatchewan at every opportunity 
understand that this is the same old, same old, tired, tired group. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we’ve got May 26, 1998. I’ve got a story. 
This one is in the Leader-Star News credited Mark Wyatt. 
“Tories got $185,000 from big trust fund.” 
 
And it reads: 
 

The Progressive Conservatives grabbed another $185,000 
out of a multimillion dollar trust fund before the party went 
into hibernation last year. 

 
It goes on: 
 

The Conservatives used the secret fund to amass over $2 
million while the party was in power during the 1980s. The 
party has been dipping into the fund, which is operated by 
an arms-length board of trustees, throughout the 1990s to 
fund election campaigns and ongoing operations. 

 
Well I just want to finish this by reading the last paragraph of 
this “Tories got 185,000 from big trust fund.” 
 
The last paragraph says: 
 

Former PC executive director Tom Lukiwski said the party 
executive received the money in two or three installments 
to help pay for operating expenses. The final installment of 
$30,000 to $40,000 was received during the final months 
of 1997, after the vote to put the party into . . . 
(hibernation). 

 
Into “hiatus” is what the quote properly says, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There’s another story in the Leader-Post, Friday, November 14, 
that says, “Dissolve Tory trust fund.” “ Dissolve Tory trust 
fund.” 
 
There’s another story Wednesday, November 12. “PC trust fund 
ignores party vote.” Ignores party vote. 
 



March 19, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 121 

So Mr. Emsley runs the trust fund. Mr. Emsley, who does 
communication work for the Sask Tories. Isn’t it interesting, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’ve heard some heckling from across the way, but I haven’t 
heard not one member say, oh, we’re different. Not one. Not 
one saying, oh, we’re different. We’ve changed. We’ve seen . . . 
Not one has said we’re sorry. Not one member has said we’re 
sorry. 
 
And in fact, I look and two of the members sitting there right 
now ran — when Grant Devine was leader — ran for the 
Tories. One is a former Tory leader . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . It’s three, is it? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Trew: — I thought so. Three. Change my two to three. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we need people to understand that the new 
Saskatchewan Party that says it has no plans to dip into the two 
and a half million dollars of secret political donations, but that 
same one-time Tory is still in charge . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Where did the PC metro fund come from? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Where did it come from? 
 
Mr. Trew: — Yes, very, very interesting, and I can tell you that 
having been in opposition for the second and final term of the 
former Tory government, there is some very good question 
about where the PC fund came from. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, we’ve got — I can’t stress this 
enough — we’ve got a Saskatchewan Party, Saskatchewan Tory 
Party that says: we’re not the Tories; we’re not the old PCs; 
we’re a new party. And members opposite are kind of chuckling 
at this, Mr. Speaker, and they’re laughing about this. They say, 
yes, well . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Where did you come 
from? Take a look in the 1998 Regina phone book. Take a look 
there — where did you come from. What do we have on page 
642? Interestingly, at the top it says “Plumbing — Political.” 
Plumbing, political. Well let’s see what the plumbers did with 
the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Here we have “Progressive Conservative Party of 
Saskatchewan” . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Their address, 
yes — 1637 Victoria Avenue. Okay. Then we have in the same 
book, same page, “The Saskatchewan Party.” What’s the 
address? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Same address. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Oh, must be a typo: 1637 Victoria Avenue. I 
thought that’s the same address. Well. Maybe . . . well let’s 
check the phone number. Maybe there’s a difference there. 
Progressive Conservative Party of Saskatchewan: 359 1055. 
The Saskatchewan Party: 359 1638. Yes, different phone 
number. Thank goodness you did that. At least had some 
decency. Same address, same head office, same people working 
there. 
 
Isn’t it interesting, isn’t it interesting that the Saskatchewan 
Party formed in the dead of the night, first opportunity they had, 

Mr. Speaker, in the morning, they had a press conference. What 
did we find out? Who was the chief of staff under the Tories? 
Who was the chief of staff under the Tories? Reg Downs, yes. 
Who’s your chief of staff . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, 
same guy, Reg Downs. Who is your executive director? Who 
was the executive director of the . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. Order. I must remind 
the hon. member from Regina Coronation Park to address his 
comments through the Chair and not across to the floor. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And the question is 
who is Tom Lukiwski? Former executive director of the 
Progressive Conservatives of Saskatchewan, now executive 
director of Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Didn’t change a thing. Didn’t change a thing. They haven’t 
changed a thing, Mr. Speaker. This phone book just blows me 
away — an interesting attempt at plumbing, plumbing up their 
failing political futures. Trying to stick a finger in the hole in 
the dike. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, in question period earlier today I heard 
the member from Melfort-Tisdale was raising some question 
and saying that Alberta somehow was the place that we should 
be living. Alberta — a place that we should live. Can you 
imagine? Alberta? And he was holding up Alberta as a place 
that was somehow a better place to live. 
 
Well he was arguing, the member from Melfort-Tisdale was 
arguing that Saskatchewan needs to reduce the E&H (health and 
education) tax from 7 to 5 cents and he was arguing for a 20 per 
cent reduction in income tax. And how is it that you would 
compare that . . . how do you square that with reality? 
 
We had Grant Devine an ag economist — pardon me, an 
agriculture economist — was Leader of the Conservative Party. 
Grant Devine introduced tax cuts. What was the offshoot of 
that? 
 
Let me put it another way, Mr. Speaker. If tax cuts were alone 
going to make any economy grow, Saskatchewan should have 
an economy three times the size it does, three times the size it 
does. 
 
The Tories were in office from 1982, April 1982, to October 21, 
1991. They had all kinds of opportunity to reduce taxes. It 
seems to me that the flat tax wasn’t exactly a tax reduction. I 
know as I fill out my income tax now, I look at that flat tax and 
I remember where it came — from the Tories, from the Devine 
Tories, Mr. Speaker. That’s where it came. 
 
But they did, they eliminated the gas tax. If that was going to 
somehow get Saskatchewan going, surely we could have been 
going. Well eliminating the gas tax in the ’80s did get things 
going because from 1987 to ’89, in their second term of office, 
Saskatchewan lost 30,000 people. Moved out more than moved 
in — 30,000. Just incredible. People were not saying this was a 
good time. 
 
Back to the member from Melfort-Tisdale, Mr. Speaker, who 
was arguing in question period for lower taxes. And my 
question is, if we have to compete with Alberta, I want Alberta 



122 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 1999 

to try and compete with this. How is it that between 1992 and 
1997 Saskatchewan had the highest rate of economic growth in 
all of Canada — higher than Alberta? 
 
How is it that with respect to nominal gross domestic product, 
Mr. Speaker, in that same ’92 to ’97 period, nominal gross 
domestic product, Saskatchewan’s GDP grew 30.9 per cent; 
Alberta’s grew 26.3? Saskatchewan advantage. 
 
How about real per capita, real per capita GDP? Why don’t we 
. . . you want to talk real dollars, real per person GDP, real per 
person GDP, real gross domestic product per person. Well let’s 
look at that. Saskatchewan’s grew from ’92 to ’97 by 20.3 per 
cent; Alberta’s grew by 13 per cent. Tick another Saskatchewan 
advantage, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What about personal income growth? Personal income. I don’t 
know how it gets any better than what goes into each person’s 
pocket. Personal income ’92 to ’97 — Saskatchewan’s personal 
income grew by 11 per cent. Alberta’s grew by 9.3 per cent in 
that same time. Tick, Saskatchewan advantage. Average weekly 
earnings, Mr. Speaker? From 1992 to 1998 Saskatchewan’s 
average weekly earnings grew by 14.5 per cent, Alberta’s by 13 
per cent. Tick, Saskatchewan advantage. 
 
(1215) 
 
Earlier today it was mentioned, earlier today it was mentioned 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I don’t blame them for being 
touchy about it. Nobody likes to hear the truth. 
 
Earlier today it was mentioned that Saskatchewan may not have 
a great job creation record, Mr. Speaker. And I want to just 
point out in Tory Manitoba . . . I’m looking for the youth 
employment numbers because it just struck me how different it 
was. What I’m looking for, it was something like 2,000 jobs 
created in Manitoba versus 7,000 here, and I’m not finding it in 
that. Maybe I was looking in the wrong place. 
 
Youth employment growth — here we are, finally. I’m looking 
in the wrong place. Yes. Saskatchewan’s youth employment 
increased, from 1992 to ’98 our youth employment increased 
7,100 jobs. In that same period Manitoba’s youth employment 
increased by 2,300 jobs. I’m not arguing that 7,100 jobs is 
enough. I’m just saying that, Mr. Speaker, 7,100 jobs in NDP 
Saskatchewan versus 2,300 jobs in Conservative Manitoba, 
seems to speak, seems to speak volumes about the time frame 
of 1992 to 1998. That’s a five- or six-year growth period. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it is amazing we get the Tory job numbers, 
Mr. Speaker . . . the Tories would have us go back to the old 
days. The Tories would have us go back to those dark, dark 
Devine days in a nanosecond if they could, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What’s their record? What is their record after nine years? Eight 
deficit budgets. What happened with the ninth budget? Do you 
remember? 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the ninth budget we had to pass after 
we formed government October 21, in the fall of 1991. Why? 
Because the Tories ran . . . Why did we have to pass the budget 
in the fall? Because the Tories ran from this legislature. They 
prorogued the session without having passed the budget. It was 

the first time, Mr. Speaker, in the history of Saskatchewan; first 
time that that had happened. 
 
The Tories couldn’t defend their legislative proposals, couldn’t 
defend their budget, couldn’t defend their Fair-Share 
Saskatchewan Program, could no longer garner the support 
from their own members on this government side of the 
legislature. That was 1991 and I remember it so well. 
 
What a discredited and dispirited crew they were then. Just, Mr. 
Speaker, it was an interesting time to be in this House. It would 
not have been a great time to be in this House as a 
Conservative. But that’s the reality. That’s the reality. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that the Chinese philosopher Confucius 
summed it up well for me. Confucius said: fool me once, shame 
on you; fool me twice, shame on me. Mr. Speaker, that was 
Confucius. 
 
A fortune cookie that I happened to have picked up just recently 
puts it in a different way. The fortune cookie says — for the 
member of Kindersley’s benefit — the best prophet of the 
future is the past. The best way to see the future is look at the 
past. 
 
Cool Hand Luke, — remember the show, Cool Hand Luke, Mr. 
Speaker — Cool Hand Luke was the story . . . Paul Newman 
starred in Cool Hand Luke. Paul Newman starred. And Cool 
Hand Luke was really all about the ’60s and how there was 
discord, if you like. There was problems everywhere, people 
complaining, rebellion all over the place. There was through the 
’60s a generational problem. 
 
Anyway in the scene that I think most of us would remember, 
Cool Hand Luke, Paul Newman was brought before the warden 
and he was just massively bloodied and he was bowed and he 
had been beaten within an inch of his life. The warden said: 
what we have here is a failure to communicate. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to tell you that what we have here is 
a failure to excommunicate the Saskatchewan Party from the 
Tory Party. That’s what we have — is a failure to 
excommunicate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, I started my debate talking about 
health care and how proud I was of some of the changes that we 
have here — the MRI; the two new spiral CAT scans; the 
second cath lab; the two First Nations spiritual healing centres, 
one at each of the hospitals in Regina. I talked about home care. 
I talked about the improvements in cancer treatment that are 
going to be coming; the improvements that are coming to the 
waiting list, the shortening of waiting lists. And I look forward 
to that with a great deal of optimism for the future. 
 
I think that health care has been improving. The services have 
certainly been improving. Our government has tried to put, 
wherever possible, the money into the delivery of services as 
opposed to putting the money into the bricks and mortar. And I 
think that’s our best hope in the short, medium, and long run for 
delivery of health services. 
 



March 19, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 123 

Didn’t talk yet about social services. But I do want to say how 
very proud I am, Mr. Speaker, of the work that we’ve done 
particularly with the child action plan and some of the 
legislation that we’re introducing in this legislature to deal with 
child abuse, prostitution. I’m pleased that our government is 
trying to do what we can in that troublesome area. 
 
I think the best sort of a capsule I can put on this, is I’ve 
actually had a call from a social worker about two weeks ago in 
my constituency office. This social worker called, Mr. Speaker, 
to say thanks for our help. Never had that happen before in the 
Department of Social Services. 
 
What we had was, one of my constituents is a client who has 
difficulty paying bills. And it’s not just with paying the bills, 
but difficulty actually remembering to take the bill to the social 
worker so that the bill can be paid. And from time to time — 
not trying to cast aspersions on it — but it happened to be the 
city of Regina water department in this instance that after a 
considerable number of months decided it was time they got a 
little bit of payment for the water bill. 
 
And anyway the constituent came into my office and was quite 
concerned about the water bill. We simply phoned over to the 
department — the social worker was grateful to get the 
heads-up that this water bill needed to be paid — made the 
arrangements, paid the bill. And the offshoot of it is, my 
constituent is happy; the water bill was paid so the city of 
Regina is happy; and the social worker, believe it or not, called 
us to say thank you. 
 
I think this is . . . in some ways it’s not typical of civil servants, 
but in many ways I think it is typical. I think that we’ve got a 
very dedicated group of civil servants, be it health care 
professionals, be it Social Services, be it Education, Highways 
workers, any department, Justice department. Throughout the 
piece, we’ve got a huge number of civil servants, Mr. Speaker, 
that do good work day in and day out. And it’s really a tribute 
to them that Saskatchewan is what it is today. It’s a tribute to 
these people that any of the systems work at all. 
 
And so I want to, I guess, sort of publicly acknowledge those 
civil servants and specifically this social worker who really 
made our day by calling and saying thank you when the natural 
inclination of course for most of us would be no, don’t call me, 
get out of my life, I’ve got other things more important to deal 
with. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think I’ve said just about everything I want to 
respecting this Speech from the Throne. It has been my honour 
and my pleasure to represent the good people of Regina 
Coronation Park. I should close by speaking a little bit about 
Coronation Park and just describing so people can understand 
where it is . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . yes, my constituency 
organization does wonderful medieval feasts. 
 
Coronation Park is bordered by Albert Street on the east side. 
So we have the west side of Albert Street down to the Canadian 
National rail line and over to McIntosh Street. Incidentally on 
that rail line, we have a brand new underpass — Lewvan Drive 
and the CN (Canadian National) rail underpass. That’s 
something that the city of Regina and the north end of Regina 
has wanted and needed since before I moved into the city in 

1977, Mr. Speaker. It’s a very, very welcome addition, as is the 
new pavement from there all the way to the north end of my 
constituency. Come up McIntosh on the west to the northern 
outskirts of the city, and that’s my constituency. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can see a great deal of jealousy from members 
opposite; jealousy at knowing what a great constituency 
Coronation Park is; knowing that it is full of working people. 
There are some retired people. There are some young people. 
It’s just, just a fabulous part of Regina. It’s a fabulous part of 
the province of Saskatchewan. And I know that we are doing 
what we can in Regina Coronation Park to pull our load at 
every, at every single turn. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s my honour to vote for this Throne Speech. I 
will of course be voting against the amendment and for the 
Speech from the Throne. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You almost caught me 
off guard. I didn’t think he was going to sit down there. He’d 
been going on and on and on for so long that we thought he was 
going to keep on going the rest of the day. He talked about a 
number of things that I want to speak to today; about jealousy is 
one of them, about jealousy about things like new pavement. 
Well, well, well. Yes, we are jealous of new pavement because 
we haven’t seen new pavement out in rural Saskatchewan for so 
long we don’t know what it is. Have no idea what it is . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . It goes right by his house, he says 
from his seat. 
 
We have no idea what new pavement is. There’s no highway 
construction. Worst highways in all of the province in rural 
Saskatchewan — worst highways in all of Canada, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
(1230) 
 
If you look at the NDP record. It’s interesting that the member 
stands up and all they want to talk about is the past. All they 
want to talk about is the 1980s and all that kind of stuff. 
Everybody that stands up in the NDP, that’s what they want to 
do. Where is your record, where is your record? 
 
I’ll indicate there’s eight key areas in the economy of 
Saskatchewan that we are either bottom of the pack in Canada 
or second lowest in all of Canada: job creation, taxes, health 
care, welfare numbers, crime, highways, population growth, 
retail sales. Bottom of the pack or second from the bottom, each 
and every case, in each and every one of those areas of our 
economy — bottom of the pack. 
 
Job creation. Let’s start with that — job creation. Absolutely 
the worst in Canada in terms of creating jobs. Even the 
Lieutenant Governor couldn’t even spit out the $30,000 . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Now the hon. member will, as a 
veteran member, will recognize . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Well, the hon. member will be advised that it is highly improper 
to draw the Lieutenant Governor into debate in the Assembly 
and I’m sure that he’ll want to continue without that kind of 
reference. 



124 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 1999 

Mr. Boyd: — Said 30,000 jobs has been created in 
Saskatchewan — 30,000 jobs. The fact of the matter is, is it 
isn’t even anywhere close to that. About 6,400 less I think the 
number is, 6,400 jobs less than the 30,000 figure that they’ve 
been trotting out since they got into government. They were 
going to create jobs all over the place. We were going to have 
new industry, new everything. You haven’t even lived up to the 
first promise you made, let alone the most recent ones in that 
area. 
 
We’re the only province in all of Canada that have actually lost 
jobs over the past year, Mr. Speaker — the only province in all 
of Canada. Whenever you look back in the history of this . . . or 
in the history of Canada, and want to look at an economic 
basket case, generally speaking you look to the East, 
unfortunately in places like Newfoundland and the Maritime 
provinces. 
 
When you want to look to a poor job creation record in the 
1990s, the late 1990s, 1999 primarily, where do you look to 
today? Where’s the economic basket case of Canada? 
Saskatchewan. The least number of jobs created, the absolute 
worst job creation record in all of Canada belongs to you — the 
NDP. Even Glen Clark, even Glen Clark in BC (British 
Columbia) has a better record than you people, and we all know 
where he is today. 
 
From January, 1998 to January of 1999, Mr. Speaker, there 
were actually . . . according to Statistics Canada, the only 
reliable source that we have because you can’t believe their 
numbers any longer. They said 30,000, didn’t happen. Statistics 
Canada says 4,900 fewer jobs in Saskatchewan. The only 
province, the only province in the whole Dominion of Canada 
to have less jobs than we do today is the economic basket case 
of this country. Saskatchewan NDP-ruled waste and 
mismanagement has created this problem. 
 
In contrast, Mr. Speaker, they always say we want to talk about 
Alberta. Well let’s talk about a couple of other places. Let’s talk 
about a couple of other provinces. If you don’t want to hear 
about Alberta — even though they created 38,600 jobs last year 
— let’s talk about Manitoba. How many jobs were created in 
Manitoba versus Saskatchewan? Four thousand nine hundred 
less in Saskatchewan, 11,300 more in Manitoba. 
 
Even Newfoundland . . . as I said if we always wanted to look 
back to the history of Canada, the unfortunate circumstances 
that Newfoundland has, living on the Rock, as they refer to it 
as, Mr. Speaker, they have a lot of problems there. They simply 
don’t have the kind of resources or development that we have 
going for us here in Saskatchewan. They don’t have 40 per cent 
of the arable farmland in the country. They have a resource, 
primarily the fishing resource, that is depleted. They had to shut 
down large numbers of their fishing industry and the packing 
plants there. 
 
But even in Newfoundland — what was formerly known as the 
economic basket case of all of Canada — even in 
Newfoundland, how many jobs did they create last year? At the 
same time we were losing 4,900, Ms. Associate Minister of 
Health, the same time that we were losing 4,900 jobs, 
Newfoundland created 6,100 jobs — 6,100 jobs. If my math 
serves me correctly here, that’s 11,000 net difference — 11,000. 

Eleven thousand net difference even though they have a higher 
tax rate in Newfoundland than they do in this province — and 
half the population; even though all of those things are going 
against that province of Newfoundland. Even though they have 
all of those kinds of concerns, they still created more than NDP 
Saskatchewan. Still created more than NDP Saskatchewan. 
 
An absolutely shameful record you people have in job creation. 
Shameful record when it comes to creating new wealth and new 
opportunity for the people of this province. Nothing comes even 
close to your record in this debate. Nothing comes even close to 
the economic basket case of Saskatchewan when it comes to job 
creation in this country. 
 
When it comes to the second area that you guys seem to have a 
lot of difficulty taking responsibility for, and that’s the whole 
area of taxes. Newfoundland, in spite of all its difficulties, has 
the highest record when it comes to taxes. Saskatchewan is 
running a close second now however. 
 
Saskatchewan has the second latest tax freedom day in Canada, 
July 2 — July 2. The average Manitoba family of four, the 
average Manitoba family of four takes home 4,396 more dollars 
to their family in a year than a Saskatchewan family does. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s over a month’s wages. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Over a month’s wages — exactly — for every 
family. It’s like working an extra month in Manitoba what they 
would get paid here in this province. A shameful record. A 
shameful record. 
 
And you wonder why and you wonder why there isn’t 
economic development in this province? And you wonder why 
there isn’t economic development in this province? You know 
what’s happening, Mr. Speaker, in my constituency these days? 
Business is literally draining out of this province into Alberta. 
 
I’m on the west side. We’re so close we can smell the money 
there. It’s literally draining into Medicine Hat. Drive down to 
Medicine Hat some time — and I suspect most of you do to 
make some of your purchases anyway — drive to Medicine Hat 
one of these days and look at the parking lot, look at the parking 
lot at the Medicine Hat mall there. Just take a look there. 
Two-thirds of the people there are from Saskatchewan, and the 
other third wish they were. Because they’re doing exactly the 
same thing there. There’s just business draining to that 
community every day. 
 
The chamber of commerce in Swift Current did a little study 
awhile ago to find out how much business they were losing 
from their community to Medicine Hat — $20 million is what 
they came up with. The chamber of commerce in Swift Current 
says $20 million of business activity on a yearly basis is 
transferred from their community to the community of 
Medicine Hat. 
 
Do you think those people wouldn’t like to make their 
purchases in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker? Do you think they 
don’t want to make their purchases there? Do you think they 
want to hop in their car and wheel over to Medicine Hat to buy 
something? No. The fact of the matter is, is they don’t have a 
lot of choice, they feel. They feel that the barriers in terms of 



March 19, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 125 

the taxes here in Saskatchewan, they have to do something to 
try and balance them off. 
 
And another phenomena that we’re seeing . . . Your 
constituency is far enough away that they probably don’t drive. 
You’re right, Madam Minister. You’re right, Madam Minister. 
You’re right. Moose Jaw, they’re close enough though. 
 
The fact of the matter is, what also is happening in my 
constituency is something I’ve never seen before in the last 
long, long time. We’re actually seeing farmers picking up, 
moving their farming operations and basing them in Alberta, 
paying taxes in Alberta, and still maintaining their farming 
operation in Saskatchewan to take advantage of the Alberta 
advantage. That’s what’s happening, Mr. Speaker. They’re 
making their decision with their feet. They’re making their 
decision with their car. They’re making their decision with their 
home, their residence. They’re picking up and they’re moving 
to Alberta and they’re saying, I can’t stand to pay the taxes 
here. I don’t want to be the last one in Saskatchewan to pay 
those taxes because I simply can’t afford it any longer. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, that’s the reality that we’re left 
with in this province — the second-highest taxes in all of 
Canada. 
 
In health care — where’s our record in health care? Let’s 
examine some of the things in terms of health care. 
Saskatchewan has the longest waiting lists in the country to see 
a medical specialist or receive treatment. 
 
Saskatchewan averages 17.1 weeks — 17.1 weeks — before 
you get in to see a specialist. That’s 44 per cent longer than the 
national average of 11.5 weeks. The national average is 11.5; 
ours is 17.1 — 44 per cent difference. Thirty-eight per cent 
longer than in Alberta, 38 per cent longer than in Alberta; 49 
per cent longer than in Manitoba; and 68, a staggering 68 per 
cent difference than in Ontario. Ten point two weeks in Ontario. 
 
Saskatchewan has the dubious record of having the highest 
infant mortality rate in the entire country — 8.4 per 1,000 live 
births or 50 per cent higher than the national average. Fifty per 
cent higher than the national average — that’s your record, Mr. 
Member from Albert South. That’s your record, Mr. Member 
from Albert South. 
 
I’ll get to our record soon. I want to talk a little bit about your 
record first. 
 
At the same time, at the same time Saskatchewan is spending 
more per capita on health care than any other province, you 
have the worst record in terms of bed closures. You have the 
worst record in terms of infant mortality and you have the worst 
record by far — by far — in terms of waiting lists in this 
province in all of Canada 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Now the hon. member will 
recognize of course that in carrying on debate in the Chamber 
the appropriate direction for the debate is through the Chair, and 
I’m sure the hon. member will want to conduct his debate 
consistent with the rules and direct his comments to the Chair 
rather than to other hon. members. 
 

Mr. Boyd: — Absolutely, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Let’s talk about welfare in Saskatchewan. Let’s talk about our 
welfare numbers in this province. From 1991 to 1997 the 
welfare rolls in Saskatchewan swelled from 53,400 to 79,700, 
an increase of nearly 50 per cent — 50 per cent. The national 
average was actually an increase of about 22 per cent. 
 
Do you know, Mr. Speaker, do you know, Mr. Speaker, that the 
single largest economic driving force in Saskatchewan is the 
farm economy? The single largest driving force of our economy 
in Saskatchewan is agriculture, Mr. Speaker — agriculture, Mr. 
Speaker. There are 55,000 farm families in Saskatchewan. 
 
Unfortunately in NDP Saskatchewan, we have more people 
today on social services, unfortunately, than we do in the farm 
community. Is it any wonder we’re having problems? Is it any 
wonder we’re having problems in NDP Saskatchewan? In NDP 
Saskatchewan, what is our record? What is our record? 
 
During the same period of time in other provinces they’ve 
decreased their numbers, Mr. Speaker — have decreased the 
number of people on social services. 
 
I was down on a CPA (Commonwealth Parliamentary 
Association) tour this spring — last spring, pardon me — down 
to Ohio. We were talking to people about the welfare reforms. 
One of the conferences that we attended was about welfare 
reform. And they had implemented a welfare reform program of 
trying to encourage people to move from the welfare cycle to 
the job cycle. And I remember one Democrat senator standing 
up and saying, oh yes, but there’s more people on the streets 
today. 
 
The fact of the matter was, the member from the governing 
party got up and said yes, we do. We do have more people on 
the streets today, but you know what they’re doing, Mr. 
Member? They’re on their way to a job. That’s the difference. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1245) 
 
Mr. Boyd: — They’re on their way to a job. They’re on their 
way to a meaningful employment. They’re on their way to 
changing their lives and the lives of their families from one of 
dependency to one of security. From one of meaningless toil in 
a lot of cases to one of joy, to one of saying to their family 
members . . . The talk around their table no longer is 
subsistence; it’s how we can provide more for our families. 
 
Yes, the Saskatchewan Party — and I want to make this 
extremely clear, Mr. Speaker — yes, the Saskatchewan Party is 
not about just kicking people willy-nilly off of welfare. It’s 
about providing hope. It’s about providing a program for them 
that says to them, yes, we want you to be a productive member 
of society. Yes, we want you to be a meaningful part of this 
society in Saskatchewan. Yes, we want to provide you with 
hope and training for a meaningful job in Saskatchewan. 
 
And yes, we will do that, and we’ll do it with compassion. 
We’re not about to kick people off who simply have no 
alternative. We’re about providing them with hope, and where 



126 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 1999 

is the hope today, Mr. Minister? Where is the hope today? I 
don’t see the hope — 79,700 people unfortunately see no other 
alternative in NDP Saskatchewan than a social services cheque. 
 
I’ve always heard it said that the kindest and most 
compassionate thing — and you go back to the Bible itself — 
the kindest and most compassionate thing you can do for a 
person that is down, that’s having a hard time, Mr. Speaker, is 
just not simply hand them a cheque, but to teach them to go out 
and how to earn a cheque. That’s the kindest and most 
compassionate thing you can do. 
 
Yours is about holding them on the cycle. Yours is about 
maintaining them on that cycle. Yours is about trapping them 
on that cycle. Ours is about hope, Mr. Speaker. Ours is about 
changing that mentality that somehow or another, that somehow 
or another in NDP Saskatchewan their only alternative is a 
social services cheque. Our is about employment. Ours is about 
hope. Ours is about dreams for their families and for 
themselves. That’s the difference between NDP managed 
Saskatchewan and a Saskatchewan Party government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — That even the Minister of Finance in question 
period today, Mr. Speaker, recognized that it’s going to happen 
soon. Even the Minister of Finance recognized it too. He said 
you’re not government yet. That’s true. We’re not government 
yet but we’re soon to be government. As soon as you and your 
Premier screw up the courage to call the next election, the 
Saskatchewan Party are going to summarily boot you from 
office. 
 
And I’ll give you a little bit of evidence as to why I think that’s 
happening. Not only is the polling showing that, but there’s 
some interesting developments been happening in the last little 
while. 
 
We’ve had occasion, Mr. Speaker, as you know, to attend a 
number of functions this week in the start-up and the run-up of 
a legislative session. There’s lots of banquets; there’s lots of 
public functions that all members attending and they recognize 
a really interesting phenomena. And I’m sure members that 
were elected in ’91 when the turnover of the government, I’m 
sure they recognize exactly the same. 
 
There were bureaucrats coming up to us. They’re one of the 
first to smell the winds of change. I don’t know what it is about 
people in the bureaucracy but they seem to have this sense 
when they know something is impending, when there’s an 
impending change. 
 
They’re coming up to us at the functions in the last little while 
and they are saying to us, I hope when this government changes 
that you won’t fire me. I hope, I hope you won’t fire me, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s what they were coming up to us and saying. 
 
I even had at the Lieutenant Governor’s . . . I even had at the 
Lieutenant Governor’s banquet the mother of one of the 
employees come up and say, I hope you won’t fire her. We’re 
not about to just willy-nilly go around and boot everybody out 
of the bureaucracy here in Saskatchewan. 
 

There are I believe lots of capable and lots of very, very 
qualified and very, very good people in the bureaucracy, but 
obviously they’re a lit bit concerned. Obviously they know that 
there’s some changes coming. And the minister, the minister 
smiles. Well I’ll tell you, Mr. Minister, some of the people were 
from your office that were a little worried. 
 
The other area that we have difficulty in Saskatchewan today, 
Mr. Speaker, under NDP- ruled Saskatchewan is crime — worst 
in all of Canada, worst in all of Canada. You know, Mr. 
Speaker, Regina has the worst crime rate of any major Canadian 
city in 1997. Saskatoon had the dubious record of coming in 
third. Regina has the highest property crime rate and second 
highest violent crime rate in all of Canada — shameful record. 
 
Saskatoon has the highest homicide rate and the third highest 
property crime rate and the fourth highest violent crime rate. 
Almost exclusively, almost exclusively those two cities, those 
two cities are managed by NDP constituency offices. Almost to 
a person Saskatoon and Regina over that time period has NDP 
MLAs representing those constituencies. 
 
Now unfortunately that’s what we have — highest murder rate, 
highest rate of property crimes and violent crime in all of 
Canada belongs to the minister . . . or belongs to the Premier’s 
constituency and the Deputy Premier’s constituency — which 
neither of them happen to live in unfortunately. 
 
Let’s talk about highways here in Saskatchewan. The time is 
relatively short so I’ve got to move on. Let’s talk about 
highways. Worst in all of Canada. Saskatchewan’s highways, 
bar none, are the worst in all of Canada. The NDP spends about 
58 per cent of the money collected on fuel taxes for 
maintenance, highway maintenance and construction — the 
second lowest in all of Canada. 
 
The Alberta government spends 95 per cent; the Manitoba 
government spends 100 per cent of the money collected in fuel 
taxes for highway construction and maintenance. Undoubtedly 
if any of you have cared to take the time to drive around 
Saskatchewan in the last while you’ll see the destruction, the 
absolute destruction, Mr. Speaker, of the highways in this 
province. 
 
Population growth, Mr. Speaker, we’re the second worst in all 
of Canada — unfortunately once again. Unfortunately once 
again the second worst in all of Canada. From 1991, when the 
NDP took office, Saskatchewan has the second lowest rate of 
population growth in the entire country. Only Newfoundland is 
lower. The second lowest population growth in all of Canada. 
 
From ’91 to ’98 Saskatchewan population grew by 36,700 
people. During the same period, during the same period, do you 
know what Alberta’s growth was? Three hundred and 
sixty-seven thousand, eight hundred. Ten times — ten times the 
growth in Alberta. Ten times, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What they have . . . they can’t build houses, they can’t add on to 
the cities of Alberta quick enough. Have you been out there 
recently, any of you members? Have you driven through 
Medicine Hat? Have you driven through Lethbridge? Have you 
driven through Taber? Have you driven through Red Deer? 
Have you driven through places like Hanna? Oyen? 



March 19, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 127 

Oyen, Alberta, Mr. Speaker, I remember Oyen, Alberta — we 
used to go quite frequently as young people out to Alberta. 
Oyen, Alberta used to be nothing more than a dot on the map — 
a couple of elevators, a few houses. Oyen, Alberta is going to 
rival Kindersley in a few years time in terms of population size. 
Oyen, Alberta is probably in as economic disadvantaged type of 
area of all Alberta as you can imagine, right in the middle of 
some of the most semi-arid land in all of Alberta; virtually no 
resources around there. They even have growth there. They 
even have growth there. 
 
In all of Saskatchewan we don’t have that kind of growth. Even 
in communities like Oyen, Alberta they’re experiencing growth. 
 
And the minister says the Alberta advantage. And unfortunately 
that Alberta advantage has contributed . . . has resulted in 10 
times the population growth of Saskatchewan. When it comes 
to retail sales, Mr. Speaker, retail sales were the second worst in 
all of Canada. The second worst in all of Canada. Retail sales 
grew by .2 per cent in 1998, the second worst in the entire 
country. 
 
Alberta’s sales grew by 4.8 per cent, Mr. Speaker, 24 times 
higher than Saskatchewan’s rate of growth. Manitoba’s retail 
sales grew by 2.4, 12 times faster than Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, is it any wonder, is it any wonder that the people 
of Saskatchewan are looking for change? Is it any wonder that 
they’re looking at the Saskatchewan Party and saying we need a 
way up? Instead of the Saskatchewan way, an NDP way, we 
need a way up in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. We have to 
change some of these kinds of things. We have to change some 
of these kinds of things. 
 
We put out The Way Up a few months ago as you recall, Mr. 
Speaker, as a road map for Saskatchewan for the future, for 
hope and for dreams and for opportunity. It says to the people 
of Saskatchewan that we don’t have to be the worst any longer. 
We don’t have to have the worst job creation. We don’t have to 
have the worst health care. We don’t have to have the worst 
highways. We don’t have to have the worst population growth. 
We don’t have to have the worst crime. We don’t have to have 
the worst welfare numbers. 
 
We want to have change, Mr. Speaker. We want to see . . . there 
is going to be meaningful change in the province of 
Saskatchewan. That’s why we are talking about easing the 
taxation burden for each and every individual, each and every 
family, whether you’re a farmer, whether you’re a business 
person, whether you’re a blue collar worker, whether you are a 
welfare recipient in Saskatchewan. 
 
They want to see changes, Mr. Speaker. They want to see a 
hope. They want to see opportunity. They want to see dreams. 
They want to see at least some of the things that the rest of 
Canada is experiencing. 
 
They want to see the kinds of things that are developing in other 
provinces. They want to see change. They want to see some 
change but what do they get from this government? 
 
They get tired-out rhetoric, talking about everything that 
happened a decade ago. They aren’t talking about the kinds of 

agenda that you people have opposite. They are saying to us it’s 
time to make some significant changes in Saskatchewan before 
we have nothing left in this province, Mr. Speaker. That’s what 
they are saying to the people of this province. 
 
They are saying that we need to have taxes reduced. They are 
saying that a 7 per cent PST, when our neighbour to the west of 
us has zero per cent, has to change. 
 
They are saying — even the Finance minister is saying this a 
little bit these days — that we have got to reduce personal 
income taxes in this province or we are going to move so far out 
of adjustment compared to Alberta that there won’t be a single 
soul left here pretty soon, Mr. Speaker, if we don’t make some 
changes in that area. 
 
They are saying to us, change the welfare mentality in this 
province to one of wanting to go to work each and every day 
and saying to them that yes, there is a different way of moving 
ahead in this province. 
 
They are saying to us that we can no longer have the Brian 
Topps of this province running this legislature. We can no 
longer have the NSTs and the Channel Lakes and the Guyanas 
happening in Saskatchewan. They are saying we want to see 
meaningful change in that area. 
 
Brian Topp. The members opposite will recognize that name. 
When it came time to analyzing and looking into the most 
scandalous affair in the last number of years here in 
Saskatchewan, Brian Topp, the Premier’s right-hand man, 
wrote the report and the members opposite sat there and took it. 
 
The message from Brian Topp was to them. And he said take it, 
move ahead with this or walk away. That was the message. 
 
Is it any wonder, Mr. Speaker, is it any wonder in 
Saskatchewan people are saying no to this government. Is it any 
wonder in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, that the changes that we 
are seeing are coming forward. Is it any wonder that the 
Saskatchewan Party is at 51 per cent in the polls in rural 
Saskatchewan and climbing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Is it any wonder, is it any wonder that we are 
moving in on you faster and faster each and every day. Is it any 
wonder that you are going to be kicked from office. Is it any 
wonder that member after member after member there opposite 
is going to lose. Is it any wonder that that’s what we’re going to 
see. 
 
The election is impending, Mr. Speaker. There’s an election 
coming real soon. The Premier of this province says June. And I 
say to you that there will be such a massive change in June that 
the members opposite if they haven’t woken up and realized it 
now, will . . . soon will. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan are saying to us it’s almost over. 
It’s almost over for the NDP. We’ve only got a little while 
longer to wait. We’ve only got a little while longer to wait. 
June’s going to spring up eternal in Saskatchewan. Just as every 
farmer knows that the new year brings new hope, the people of 



128 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 1999 

Saskatchewan know that a new year, a new beginning for this 
province with the Saskatchewan Party at the helm will bring 
new hope for this province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, there’s lots more that I want to say about this 
subject in the next . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. The hour for adjournment 
having arrived, the debate will cease at this point. Order, order. 
And I want to . . . Order. Before adjourning I wish to extend to 
all members a welcome back to the Assembly and with the hope 
that you’ll have an enjoyable weekend in your constituency, 
and to spend some time with your families. 
 
Having said that, the House now stands adjourned until Monday 
afternoon at 1:30 o’clock. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 1:01 p.m. 
 
 
 


