





























































Hansard: May 03, 1999


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 957 
 May 3, 1999 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
rise again today in this House on behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan to present a petition. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call on federal and provincial 
governments to dedicate a greater portion of the fuel tax 
revenues toward road maintenance and construction so that 
Saskatchewan residents may have a safe highway system 
that meets their needs. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition has been signed by the good folks 
from Archerwill, McKague, Tisdale, Melfort, Frobisher. 
 
And I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
petitions on behalf of citizens that are concerned about the state 
of our highway system in the province. And the prayer reads as 
follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call on federal and provincial 
governments to dedicate a significantly greater portion of 
fuel tax revenues toward road maintenance and 
construction so Saskatchewan residents may have a safe 
highway system that meets their needs. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Those who’ve signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
communities of Langenburg, Churchbridge, and Yorkton. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — This afternoon, Mr. Speaker, I present petitions 
requesting that the unsafe and confusing entrance to the city of 
North Battleford be changed by moving the intersection of 
Highways 40 and 16. 
 
Your petitioners this afternoon come from Richard, Meota, St. 
Walburg, Cochin, Debden, Cut Knife, Battleford, and North 
Battleford. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the petition presented at the last 
sitting has been reviewed and found to be in order. Pursuant to 
rule 12(7) the petition is hereby received. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to all members of the legislature, I’d like to 

introduce one of my constituents, Mr. Gary Carlson, who’s in 
the west gallery. 
 
Mr. Gary Carlson is a member of the citizen’s advisory council 
on the Saskatchewan anniversaries, planning for the year 2005 
— well 2000 and 2005 — and I’d like all members to welcome 
him here to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Prairie West Regional College Graduation 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Friday night I 
had the pleasure of attending a graduation in the community of 
Outlook. The graduates were from many surrounding 
communities and were graduating from a number of courses 
sponsored by the Prairie West Regional College. About 50 
students graduated from such programs as pre-employment 
welding, office education, agriculture machinery technician, 
emergency medical technicians, truck driver training, and 
bridging to the workplace. 
 
Some of these students, Mr. Speaker, will now have the 
necessary skills to move into the workplace. Others will use 
these skills to enhance the business they are already in. Either 
way, Mr. Speaker, these folks should be commended for 
furthering their education and I wish them every success in their 
endeavours. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Violence Against Women Awareness Week 
 

Ms. Stanger: — May 3 to 9 has been proclaimed Purple 
Ribbon Violence Against Women Awareness Week. This week 
was requested by the Saskatchewan Battered Women’s 
Advocacy Network — SBWAN for short. It is fitting that this 
week ends on Mother’s Day. The purple ribbon campaign 
commemorates women who are experiencing violence or have 
died at the hands of their partner, and it encourages the public to 
eliminate violence. 
 
SBWAN is a provincial group that looks at addressing the 
needs of abused women and children, especially rural and 
northern victims of domestic violence. SBWAN will be holding 
a purple ribbon awards dinner in May in the year 2000. Those 
who have made an outstanding contribution to the issue of 
violence against women will be recognized. 
 
Studies show that almost half the women in Canada feel unsafe 
while walking in their own neighbourhoods. Many are worried 
about being at home alone in the evenings. And women have 
every reason to worry for their safety. Almost everyday we hear 
of violence against women from friends or family, or in the 
news. The numbers are staggering and unacceptable. Violence 
in any form should not be tolerated. Keeping communities safe 
is a priority of this government. That is why we were the first in 
North America to proclaim The Victims of Domestic Violence 
Act. 
 



958 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 1999 

Our work in government has changed to address issues more 
holistically. In 1997, Saskatchewan developed . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The hon. member’s time has expired. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to rise on 
behalf of the official opposition in recognition of Violence 
Against Women Awareness Week. In light of recent events 
from Taber and Littleton it’s becoming more evident that 
violence in our society is increasing. Over the past couple of 
weeks members in this House have spoken on the importance of 
children’s safety in schools. This also true for women and 
children who do not feel safe in their own homes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, too many Canadian homes have become places 
where women and children suffer physical abuse and emotional 
trauma. Domestic abuse is a leading cause of injury to women 
in our country, and it occurs among all racial, ethnic, religious, 
and economic groups. This violence too often extends beyond 
the home and into the workplace. 
 
Mr. Speaker, violence in the home is prevalent, unforgivable, 
and often deadly. For too long domestic violence has been 
swept under the rug, treated as a private family matter that was 
nobody else’s business. 
 
Fortunately that is changing. More and more women are getting 
out of their abusive situation and going to shelters where they 
can receive treatment and education on how to cope with abuse. 
But there needs to be a review of the home studies that are 
utilized for custody and access proceedings. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, I would like to encourage any man, 
woman, or child who is currently in an abusive situation to get 
help because no one should feel unsafe in their own home. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join with 
my colleagues across the floor and in the official opposition to 
say that one of the good developments in society the past two 
years has been our sensitization to the issue of violence in the 
home. 
 
However, that said, we have to all concede that the prevalence 
of violence in our families and in our communities is still all too 
frequent, and we have to all commit ourselves to its total 
eradication. 
 
I think this is a good day for us to offer our congratulations and 
best wishes to those who dedicate themselves to the women’s 
shelters and other programs in our community to end family 
violence. 
 
Both genders and all age groups have to commit themselves to 
this issue. It has to be a zero-tolerance issue for us all. The 
ending of violence in our homes and in our communities has to 
be a major priority. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Forestry Development Program in Zenon Park 
 
Mr. Langford: — Mr. Speaker, last Friday my constituency 
got some more good news about the forest. Following the big 
announcement last week about the expansion of our forest 
industry, I was happy to be present with the Economic 
Development minister when he announced an $8 million 
investment that will create 300 jobs. 
 
The announcement was of a partnership between Suntec 
Products of Zenon Park and James Smith Cree Nation in my 
constituency. The partnership will build a new sawmill in 
Zenon Park and a value-added manufacturing facility at James 
Smith. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the new forestry development program was 
announced, we stressed that local people and local companies 
would play an important role. We pledged that the First Nations 
people would be both planners and workers. This part of the 
strategy will give much needed employment for James Smith 
members and it will keep many more jobs in our local 
communities. 
 
I congratulate Suntec Forest Products and the James Smith Cree 
Nation for the exciting partnership. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

New Dean Appointed at College of Law 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, today I’d like to recognize and 
congratulate one of the many brilliant minds at the University 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Professor Beth Bilson, a long-time faculty member of the 
College of Law was recently appointed to a five-year term as 
dean. No other woman has ever accomplished this feat before at 
the U of S (University of Saskatchewan) College of Law, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But Beth Bilson is certainly qualified to take on this job. She’s 
been with the faculty since 1979 and has a degree in Law, a 
Bachelor and Masters in History, and a Ph.D. (Doctor of 
Philosophy) from the Faculty of Laws at the University of 
London. 
 
Upon becoming dean in July, Beth Bilson has a number of 
goals. She realizes that the legal profession is changing and she 
wants the college to change with it. For example, she’d like to 
see a broader range of programs for students since not all 
lawyers work in the traditional law firm any more. She also 
thinks that a work study program would benefit students. 
 
Beth Bilson was up against tough competition from across the 
country, but in the end a 10-member search committee chose to 
recommend her to the U of S board of governors. 
Congratulations to Dr. Bilson on your appointment to this 
prestigious position, and we wish you much success. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



May 3, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 959 

Goodsoil Highways Employees Redesign Vehicle 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I have 
very good news from Goodsoil. Mr. Speaker, Edward Stoebich 
of Goodsoil used to be a seasonal employee with Saskatchewan 
Transportation and Highways. It wasn’t that Mr. Stoebich 
didn’t want to work in the winter, the problem was that he just 
couldn’t. Ed lost his right hand and forearm in 1974 in a 
work-related accident. This loss meant that he could no longer 
manoeuvre all of the levers that he used in winter driving. 
 
But Ed’s co-workers came up with a plan so that he could work 
all year long. They encouraged employees at the Prince Albert 
Highways repair depot to redesign a vehicle for his use. Derald 
Sewchuk and his fellow mechanics set to work on the project 
and installed push buttons to do the same work on the levers. 
They mounted a control box in the cab to operate the box-lift, 
sander, snowplow, snowplow wing. There is now a foot clutch 
to put the vehicle in gear and it shifts automatically. 
 
Ed is happy to be out on the road during winter even though he 
says it’s harder work than during the rest of the year. I’d like to 
congratulate all of the people involved in this project in 
Goodsoil, and the Department of Highways staff. And I wish 
Ed the best of luck with his work in the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Nipawin Students Compete in Skills Canada 
 
Mr. Renaud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
congratulate the team of Ashley Price and Buck Scarf, two 
students from L.P. Miller Comprehensive School in Nipawin, 
who recently won the Provincial Ford CAA Student Auto Skills 
Competition. 
 
This is the third straight year that automotive students under the 
guidance of instructor Tim Paetkau have brought home 
provincial honours to L.P. Miller school. This winning duo also 
marked the first time that a female automotive student, Ashley 
Price, had been among the competitors. 
 
Ashley and her partner, Buck, will now represent Saskatchewan 
at the national competition in Toronto next month. In fact this 
team will try and repeat L.P. Miller’s national championship of 
last year. The Skills Canada competition allows students to 
demonstrate skills in technologies and trades. Students are able 
to test skills against industry standards and peers. Winners and 
runners-up of the provincial competition progress to the 
national competition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would again like to congratulate everyone 
involved at L.P. Miller on their show of dedication and 
excellence in winning their third straight provincial Skills 
Canada competition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Lake Diefenbaker Potato Corporation 
 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

today my question is for the Minister responsible for the Sask 
Water Corporation. Mr. Minister, it has been reported in the 
media over the last two days that Lake Diefenbaker Potato 
Corporation’s gone into receivership. 
 
The Royal Bank froze their accounts, and KPMG was 
appointed as receiver. In plain English, Mr. Minister, that 
means the company is broke. In all likelihood it means 
bankruptcy. It also has the potential to cost taxpayers a lot of 
money thanks to the NDP (New Democratic Party). 
 
Mr. Minister, only three months ago the NDP lent Lake 
Diefenbaker potato company 5.8 million of taxpayers’ dollars. 
Now the company is broke. 
 
Mr. Minister, is this $6 million investment going to turn into 
another Channel Lake? Will the taxpayers of Saskatchewan 
have to ante up another $6 million to pay for another disastrous 
NDP deal? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First of all I 
want to be absolutely clear that the Lake Diefenbaker Potato 
Corporation is a privately held corporation. And it is our 
understanding to this point in time that discussions are currently 
still ongoing between the secured lenders and the Lake 
Diefenbaker Potato Corporation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Minister, that is not what seems 
to be being reported in the news today and in the information 
we get. 
 
Mr. Minister, just last Tuesday the Saskatchewan Party asked 
you what status the NDP’s investment in the Lake Diefenbaker 
Potato company. Do you remember what you said, Mr. 
Minister? You said everything was fine, a few cash flow 
problems, but otherwise everything was fine. 
 
Wrong again, Mr. Minister. Now we find out that Lake 
Diefenbaker Potato company is broke, going under, and the 
NDP’s $6 million investment is in jeopardy. 
 
Mr. Minister, how is the $6 million gambled in the Lake 
Diefenbaker Potato company secured? Is it true that the Royal 
Bank and the federal Farm Credit Corporation have claim to the 
company’s assets ahead of Saskatchewan taxpayers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I don’t know if the member had the 
opportunity to listen to the news this afternoon but there were 
corrections the media made this afternoon. The reports this 
morning were not . . . the reports, Mr. Speaker, this morning 
were not entirely accurate and I’d again say to the member that 
discussions are still ongoing between the secured lenders and 
Lake Diefenbaker Potato Corporation which is a privately held 
corporation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Minister, it looks like you sold 
some billings to Lake Diefenbaker company by loaning them $6 
million — and you can correct me if I’m wrong, Mr. Minister 
— and if we understand right, no down payment, no security on 



960 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 1999 

the loan, and now it looks to us like the company may be 
bankrupt. 
 
If so, it looks to us like the Royal Bank gets its money, Farm 
Credit gets its money, but Sask Water may get nothing. So 
thanks to your NDP government’s mismanagement, 
Saskatchewan taxpayers may be out $6 million. And it would 
be just another bungled NDP business deal, Mr. Minister. 
 
First, Mr. Minister, we had Guyana; then we had Channel Lake. 
Mr. Minister, is this another Guyana/Channel Lake deal where 
the taxpayers of Saskatchewan will lose $6 million? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, again I’m going to remind 
the member this is a privately held corporation, but there are 
discussions taking place between Farm Credit Corporation, the 
Royal Bank, and we have one observer there on behalf of Sask 
Water as well. But the Farm Credit Corporation, the Royal 
Bank, and the owners in Lake Diefenbaker Corporation, to the 
best of our knowledge, are still involved in discussions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Minister, then explain to us how this works because you tried 
the other day and we thought you had. How are we secured? 
How is this money secure? Is the Royal Bank ahead of us? Is 
Farm Credit ahead of the Government of Saskatchewan? 
Explain to us how our $6 million is secure and that the 
taxpayers’ dollars of Saskatchewan can be retrieved if a 
bankruptcy is in the works. Explain that, Mr. Minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Minister, Sask Water, and through 
the SPUDCO (Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development 
Company) division, has always believed and the people in the 
Lucky Lake-Riverhurst area believe that we should get involved 
in the potato industry. There was a large infrastructure 
developed there — some $120 million of irrigation 
infrastructure. Roughly 80 million . . . roughly $65 million, I 
should say, that was built by their government in the 1980s. 
 
It seemed only logical that you become involved in some other 
crop other than I should say wheat or canola. Anyway, now that 
there’s a crop out there we believe that we should work with the 
growers out in that area to try and find a resolution to this 
problem. 
 
But again I say to the member that the Farm Credit Corporation 
and the Royal Bank are still involved in discussions to try and 
find, to work out to the best of our knowledge. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Minister, I agree with you to a point. We hope that they are not 
bankrupt. These people have worked hard on this project and 
we hope it is not going under. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, you still did not touch on the question I 
asked. If by possibility, they are going under, hypothetically 
going under, according to you, how are we secured? Is the 

Royal Bank going to get their money before we do as the 
Government of Saskatchewan? Is the Farm Credit Corporation 
ahead of us on the list? 
 
Are we last, Mr. Minister? It’s a very easy question — just 
explain to us how the security works on the loan for $6 million 
that you made to these people. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The buildings 
are secured by a mortgage and a debenture. And it still is 
premature to speculate as they’re still . . . as the Royal Bank and 
Farm Credit Corporation are trying to work this out, it’s 
premature to speculate on what the outcome might be. 
 
But the province holds security by way of a mortgage and a 
debenture. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Minister, unless I do not understand at all what you’re trying to 
answer here — what you did . . . what you’re saying is we have 
no security. We have a debenture and a mortgage, and we’re 
last on the list. And what that tells me if this bankruptcy 
actually is going to happen and is happening, the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan are out very close to $6 million. 
 
And that’s not a hard question to answer, Mr. Minister. All you 
have to explain to us is are we at risk of losing $6 million. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Again, Mr. Speaker, I’ll repeat: this is 
extremely speculative. The discussions are ongoing between the 
Farm Credit Corporation, the Royal Bank, and the main 
stakeholders in the Lake Diefenbaker Potato Corporation, and 
to speculate on what the outcome of that might be at this early 
date is just not appropriate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, they 
say a week is a long time in politics. Last week you were telling 
us everything at SPUDCO was just fine. You said the NDP’s $6 
million investment in Lake Diefenbaker Potato Corporation was 
safe. But just seven days later the company may be in 
bankruptcy and the taxpayers could be out $6 million. 
 
Now let me get this straight, Mr. Minister. The NDP built some 
potato storage facilities for $6 million. Then you sell the 
property to Lake Diefenbaker Potato Corporation with very 
little or no security. Within a few months the company is broke 
and the NDP government and the taxpayers may be out $6 
million. 
 
Can you explain that, Mr. Minister. Is it another Channel Lake? 
Is this another case of the NDP’s uncanny ability to make bad 
business deals. How is it possible seven days ago the 
investment was sound, and today the company may be broke. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, we have always said that 
we’re prepared to work with the growers in the Lake 
Diefenbaker area. And the member again . . . I mean this truly is 
the month of May because he keeps referring to may, may, 
may. 



May 3, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 961 

I repeat that the Lake Diefenbaker Potato Corporation is 
working with the Farm Credit Corporation, with the Royal 
Bank, and we have an observer there as well. But it’s premature 
to speculate on what the outcome of this may be. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, I 
guess then a follow-up would be, is the government, are you, 
Sask Water, willing to put more money into this project to keep 
it from going under? Are you willing to sink more taxpayers’ 
dollars in what may be a venture going down already? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, Sask Water is prepared to 
consider any reasonable option. We support the growers and the 
farmers out in that area. If somebody comes forth with a 
reasonable proposal, and I understand, as I’ve said earlier again, 
work is being done between Farm Credit and the Royal Bank to 
try and find some resolutions to this problem. So if there is a 
reasonable workout that can be arranged, we are certainly 
interested in considering that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Milgaard Settlement 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 
the Minister of Justice. Mr. Minister, we understand that a 
compensation settlement has been reached between your lawyer 
and David Milgaard’s. Can you confirm if this is the case and if 
so, what are the terms of the compensation package? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. All I can 
confirm is that discussions are ongoing as they have been for 
quite some time now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Well hopefully these discussions will go 
further than discussions in the past while have gone. 
 
Mr. Minister, David Milgaard spent 23 years in prison for a 
crime he did not commit and no amount of money will ever 
fully compensate him for this injustice. And you owe him to 
find out what went wrong. You owe it to every Saskatchewan 
citizen to ensure this can’t happen again. 
 
When Donald Marshall’s wrongful conviction was overturned 
in 1990, the Nova Scotia government held a royal commission 
into the matter. Now that you appear to be on the verge of a 
settlement with David Milgaard, will you hold a public inquiry 
into the wrongful conviction of David Milgaard? Will you 
commit to do that today, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the commitment around an 
inquiry was made in July, 1997, and that commitment still 
remains. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Treatment Centres for Gambling Addiction 
 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question is for the minister responsible for Gaming. Madam 
Minister, your government VLTs (video lottery terminal) are 
taking hundred of millions of dollars out of families’ pockets. 
Still you have no real plan for dealing with the serious problem 
of VLT addiction. 
 
Madam Minister, I recently received a call from a women in my 
constituency, distraught and struggling with VLT addiction. 
This person recently lost her entire paycheque, about $700, in 
just three hours. 
 
She realizes what this addiction is doing to her and her family. 
She is crying for help. She wants to go to a gambling addiction 
treatment centre. She called your gambling help line; she tried 
calling both Health ministers’ offices. She has been told that 
there’s no gambling treatment centre in Saskatchewan and she 
can only go to an out-of-province centre through a referral from 
your Health department. 
 
Madam Minister, why is your government making it so difficult 
for VLT gambling addicts to get help? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — I thank the member opposite for the 
question. And I want the member to know it’s totally incorrect 
that this province is doing absolutely nothing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we looked at developing a VLT program for 
Saskatchewan, we took this issue very seriously. There were 
many hours of debate and there was much presentation to us on 
the fact that many people were going outside this province to 
use the VLT machines. They were coming back with the same 
kind of addictions the member spoke of. So very quickly we 
realized that we had to develop a comprehensive approach to 
gaming addictions in this province. 
 
With that in mind, there are many things the Health department 
is doing in conjunction with community people and supports 
. . . to offer supports to the young people and their knowledge 
and information on gaming and those people who have 
addictions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have one of the . . . according to the recent 
CanWest report, one of the highest per capita commitments to 
gaming addictions treatments and programs anywhere in this 
country. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Madam Minister, the subject is treatment centre. 
There is no specific treatment centre for gambling addicts in 
Saskatchewan. Addicts are often referred to district drug and 
alcohol treatment centres, and that’s if they are available. And 
these treatment centres do not really provide the type of 
treatment needed to people addicted to VLTs. 
 
Madam Minister, do you have a specific process for referring 
people to out-of-province treatment centres? How many 
referrals do you make every year? And wouldn’t it be more 
effective to provide more of these services within 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Madam Minister, the NDP created the problem of VLT 
addiction. Why aren’t you doing more to solve the problem of 



962 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 1999 

VLT addiction? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
gaming addiction is like many of the other addictions in that we 
have, through studies and other results across Canada, known 
that an addictive personality may have one or more addictions. 
 
Unlike other addictions, Mr. Speaker, this one doesn’t require 
removal from the drug or the alcohol or whatever pervades the 
person’s system. This requires treatment within the community 
to be most effective. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have community-based programs and we have 
those developed through the community approach, close to 
where the people live so they can access those. We have found 
no results anywhere that show that taking someone away from 
the activity or away for inclusion in some type of a treatment 
facility is at all effective. That person needs to have the ongoing 
supports of community counselling and the availability of the 
services provided with their own health district. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Retention of Nurses 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mary Schmidt of 
Regina wants to know just how the Health minister is going to 
get more nurses. She says that in her unit one nurse is going to 
North Carolina and another is off to Alberta, and that’s in 
addition to the two or three nurses who are due to retire this 
summer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister has ignored the voice of nurses. The 
nurses have said loud and clear that unless their workplace 
drastically improves, they are quitting or leaving. 
 
Madam Minister, nurses have seen your offer and are voting 
with their feet. Don’t you realize that nurses don’t trust you? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well thank you. Mr. Speaker, the 
member may not know this but I understand from reports from 
Manitoba that the Manitoba nurses’ association recently signed 
a tentative agreement which gives their nurses a little over 13 
per cent. 
 
As the member may know, we have a memorandum of 
understanding signed between the Saskatchewan Association of 
Health Organizations and SUN (Saskatchewan Union of 
Nurses) that indicates that over the next three years nurses in 
this province will be entitled to a compensation package of 
about 13.7 per cent. In addition, Mr. Speaker, we have made a 
significant commitment to implement pay equity with a 
minimum of 8.5 per cent of base payroll or $20 million, and 
that begins in 2001. 
 
Mr. Speaker, districts across the province have numerous 
recruitment and retention strategies. As people will know, in the 
Regina Health District they have recruited 106 nurses. And 
other, other health districts are actively involved in recruiting 
and they’re bringing people in from various parts of Canada as 

well as the US (United States). 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
minister knows full well that this issue is more than just about 
money. It’s about many other things — working conditions to 
say the least, Mr. Speaker. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, the list just keeps on growing. We 
recently talked to Karen Luepke, a coronary care nurse at the 
Pasqua Hospital. She’s heading off to Australia. Mr. Speaker, 
Karen has been a nurse for three years and already the NDP 
health care reforms and the wellness model are driving her out 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
She told us that she is working a lot of overtime and can’t see it 
getting any better. She says there are so many nurses in their 
late 40’s and 50’s who will be quitting soon and doesn’t see 
how the NDP will get the nurses we need. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question for the minister. Madam Minister, if 
you’re not prepared to improve working conditions and give 
nurses what they need, why should they stay and work in a 
province where the NDP have little or no respect for the nursing 
profession? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, our government is 
committed to ensuring a stable and secure workplace for 
registered nurses and RPNs (registered practical nurses) as well 
as other health care providers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the memorandum of understanding, there were 
three significant commitments. And in that commitment there 
was . . . or in that memorandum of understanding, there was a 
commitment to convert casual to full-time jobs; secondly, to go 
to a seniority system where minimum qualifications were met; 
and third, to have binding, independent assessment committees 
that would make recommendations that were binding on the 
employer when it came to nurses’ workloads and nurses’ work 
duties. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that those are significant. They are 
significant in improving the workplace for registered nurses and 
RPNs in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Mr. Speaker, it’s not just in Regina, nurses in 
Saskatoon are getting fed up as well. Maureen Ryan from 
Saskatoon has told us that if the new contract doesn’t solve the 
problems, then she is off to Alberta. A nursing recruiter at 
Capital Health has told her that Alberta is trying to recruit 
between 700 and 1,000 nurses. 
 
Maureen already had a job offer from Edmonton, and the way 
she sees it working as a nurse in Saskatchewan will only get 
worse. 
 
Mr. Speaker, she tells us that many of her friends have already 
left the province, and unless the contract they get addresses 
their issues instead of those issues that the government has, 
even more will go. 



May 3, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 963 

Mr. Speaker, can the minister admit that nurses are leaving 
Saskatchewan for better working conditions elsewhere? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, all the member has to do 
is scan any newspaper in Canada, whether it’s The Edmonton 
Journal, The Edmonton Sun, The Calgary Herald, The Calgary 
Sun, or The Winnipeg Sun or the Winnipeg Free Press. Just go 
across the country and every single health authority in this 
country has a problem. And I would just say to the member that 
it doesn’t matter where you go RNs (registered nurses) in this 
country, and RPNs in this country have issues in the workplace. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we don’t have a threatened strike as they do 
in Alberta. We have a memorandum of understanding that deals 
with recruitment and retention, deals with binding independent 
assessment committees, deals with seniority, deals with the 
conversion of casual to full-time jobs. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, last year we made a commitment to increase 
the workforce by 195 RN positions and we did that, Mr. 
Speaker. We are just seeing that happen in other parts of the 
country. Mr. Speaker, we also increased the number of training 
spaces in our post-secondary institutions and other countries — 
or other provinces are just beginning to do that. 
 
We think that we’re a bit ahead of the game, we know we have 
a long ways to go, Mr. Speaker, but we think that we can 
dramatically improve working conditions and workplace issues 
and the pay for nurses. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Health would 
have us believe that because of her NDP’s heavy-handed 
treatment of nurses, the nursing crisis is getting better. Even as 
the NDP was turning our nurses into criminals, the minister was 
crowing about the latest nursing recruits to Regina. Well if the 
minister wants to talk about numbers she could talk about how 
many nurses have retired or quit. Or how many nurses have 
switched to casual in the last few months to avoid mandated 
overtime. Or even how many nurses the NDP laid off since they 
came to power. 
 
Madam Minister, the nurses we talked about today are just 
some of the nurses that are trying to escape your health reform. 
 
Madam Minister, if you’re doing such a great job why are so 
many nurses trying to leave the province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I just wanted to remind 
my Liberal brother that if he were to read newspapers in 
Newfoundland, New Brunswick, or Nova Scotia where there 
are Liberal governments, they face the same questions, point 
number one. 
 
Point number two, I want to remind my Liberal friend — if he’s 
not my brother, my friend — that it was the federal Liberals that 
cut $200 million out of transfers to the province for health care 
and post-secondary education. 
 
Now this year they’re started to return some of that money — 

this year, some three years later. But we’re not going to get 
back to the amount of money that was cut by his Liberal 
cousins in Ottawa. 
 
I know it’s very easy to stand up and be a critic, but you need to 
look at what your Liberal governments are doing elsewhere in 
this country, including Brian Tobin who sent nurses back to 
work, Mr. Speaker, and with not much of a contract. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 
the Premier. In 1995, Mr. Premier, you said the pain would be 
gone after health care reforms were completed during your first 
term. People trusted you then, but the pain is still there. 
 
You said there are no more rural hospital closures, yet you are 
at it again, this time calling it conversions instead of closures 
even though the results are the same. Mr. Premier, you said 
you’d virtually hired 200 nurses last year. But hospital beds are 
being closed this year because of nursing shortages. 
 
You retroactively cancelled GRIP (gross revenue insurance 
program) even though you signed the contract. 
 
You said you would create 30,000 full-time jobs but fell far 
short when you ran out of patronage appointments. 
 
In effect, Mr. Premier, your “trust me” ranks up there with 
“read my lips,” as one of the big political whoppers of the last 
10 years. 
 
Mr. Premier, nurses have seen your past record. After all of this, 
why on earth should they ever trust you now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to that 
member opposite that when it comes to standing up for health 
care, we know where the Liberals have been historically. Those 
of us who have been around for a while know that when 
medicare was being established it was the Liberal opposition of 
that day that fought tooth and nail against medicare. 
 
But I want to talk to him about another Liberal flip-flop. You 
remember the days of Otto Lang and Jean-Luc Pepin when they 
were shutting down the rail lines in rural Saskatchewan — 
shutting down the rail lines by the year 2000. The members in 
the official opposition remember those days, the meetings. They 
announced the shutdown of the rail lines. 
 
Then in their platform they have an article that says now that 
the Liberals federally have shut down the rail lines, we demand 
you keep all the elevators open. Well you think about that. 
Think about that for a moment, of a political party that’s full of 
flip-flops. And I’ll tell you the reason you’ll stay as third party 
in Saskatchewan, is because of the inconsistency in your 
platform. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, order. All hon. members 
may want to save some comments till tomorrow. We don’t have 
to cover it all today. Order. 
 



964 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 1999 

Hon. Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to ask leave of the 
Assembly to move first reading of Bill No. 44, The Midwifery 
Act. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 44 — The Midwifery Act 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I’d move that Bill 44, The 
Midwifery Act, be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Ward: — Convert for motion debatable, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Item no. 1, question 65 is converted to notice 
of motions for returns (debatable). 
 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 

Precedence of Business — Tuesday, May 4, 1999 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 
my colleague from Regina Centre: 
 

That notwithstanding Rule 8(3), the order of precedence of 
business after the daily routine on Tuesday, May 4, 1999, 
shall be as follows: Written Questions; Motions for 
Returns (Not Debatable); Government Motions; and 
Government Orders. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 25 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Serby that Bill No 25 — The 
Education Amendment Act, 1999/Loi de 1999 modifiant la 
Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation be now read a second time. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I’m delighted to stand today and 
make a few comments on this Bill. It is one that I think there’s 
many people around this province watching because though it 
looks like a small, rather insignificant Bill, there are some 
possibilities of changes in there that could bring a lot of 
contentious issues forward. 
 
When we’re talking . . . we look at the Bill, it talks about 
changing the word “supporter” to “taxpayer.” And when we 
look at section 53 of the amendment, it is definitely talking 

about the establishment of a school division. 
 
I know the members opposite are aware that in my constituency 
we had a new school division established last year, and it was a 
separate school division with a Protestant faith. 
 
And it is one that the people of my constituency were proud to 
have established, and they feel very strongly that it is their right 
to do so. And this Act definitely allows a separate school 
division to be established on a faith basis. 
 
But what we are rather alarmed about is that part of the 
amendments also talk about a prescribed form for allowing a 
taxpayer to have a support given to a school division of his 
choice. And we know that through the municipality Acts, that 
all it takes is for a taxpayer to come into the municipality and 
ask for the declaration so that he can change his support after 
the school division has been established. 
 
So we see that in many cases people will decide to send their 
children to a separate school because that is what they prefer; 
that is their choice in raising and educating their child. 
 
There has been a number of people brought forward . . . their 
fear that what will happen is this prescribed form will actually 
mean that the taxpayer has to declare the religion that they are 
at that time, rather than the supporter of that school division. 
 
So at this time we’re looking at the ideas that people are 
bringing forward to us. We are getting many phone calls from 
different people saying, is the government trying to do through 
regulations what has not been intended in the Act? Is it 
something that has to be clarified? And we feel strongly that it’s 
something that the government should be looking at. 
 
I would like to speak to the Minister of Education, and we have 
an appointment to do so. And so before we have this 
opportunity to discuss it further, I ask that this motion be 
adjourned for this time. 
 
I move that this debate be adjourned at this time. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 41 — The Municipal Revenue Sharing 
Amendment Act, 1999 

 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of Bill No. 41, The Municipal Revenue Sharing 
Amendment Act, 1999. 
 
As members will know, The Municipal Revenue Sharing Act 
establishes the level of provincial assistance to be allocated to 
both urban and rural municipalities. Accordingly these 
amendments give legal effect to decisions announced in the 
1999-2000 budget. The Bill provides for a method of 
calculating the funds available this year to both the urban 
revenue-sharing pool and the rural revenue-sharing pool. 
 
The Bill provides for an increase this year to the total amount 
available for the urban revenue-sharing pool by $7.5 million 



May 3, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 965 

and for rural revenue sharing by $2 million, which builds on the 
$3 million increase to the rural revenue-sharing pool last year. 
This represents an increase globally to urban and rural 
municipalities of 18 per cent over last year’s amount. 
 
The $10 million increased funding, including $500,000 for 
northern municipalities, will go toward a new municipal 
infrastructure program. When the northern share of the 
infrastructure program is added to the $1 million for water and 
sewer infrastructure announced in the budget, the total amount 
of provincial funds available for northern water and sewer 
infrastructure is $1.5 million this year. 
 
The new infrastructure funding represents the province’s 
portion of a provincial municipal infrastructure program to be 
cost shared on a 50/50 basis by the province and municipalities. 
The program will result in $20 million of new municipal 
infrastructure spending annually, which will create an estimated 
400 seasonal construction jobs. 
 
My officials have been consulting with SUMA (Saskatchewan 
Urban Municipalities Association) and SARM (Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities) on program 
implementation. These discussions are nearing completion and 
grant application forms will be sent to all municipalities very 
shortly. 
 
With respect to the unconditional revenue-sharing grants for 
urban municipalities, it has been decided to maintain the grants 
at their 1998 levels. In other words, each city, town, and village 
will receive the same grant amount as last year. This 
distribution strategy is supported by the Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association. 
 
For rural municipalities, the normal distribution formula for 
unconditional equalization and road preservation and 
construction grants will be applied. This distribution strategy is 
supported by the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities. Amendments confirming the ability to specify 
funding distribution in regulations make up the remainder of 
this Bill. 
 
In closing, the total revenue-sharing funding of $60.1 million 
represents a significant level of financial support to 
Saskatchewan municipalities. I urge all members to support this 
Bill. 
 
Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 
41, The Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment Act, 1999. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Yes. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, The Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment Act, 
1999, having been introduced before, we’ve had an opportunity 
to make contact with various municipal associations to try to 
figure out exactly what financial implications there would be 
for municipalities. 
 
The feedback thus far that my colleagues have received has 
been of a positive nature. And we have a number of questions 
that we want to pose regarding very specific sections of this 

Act, Mr. Speaker, and that will most definitely be much more 
beneficial to the minister and to us if we do that in Committee 
of the Whole. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, we know that Saskatchewan has 
generally a high taxation load, but nowhere is that more 
dramatic than in the case of property taxes where our property 
taxation is the highest in Canada. 
 
And I don’t think that this Act is going to do anything to 
alleviate the pressures we have for very high property taxes, and 
I’d like specifically to encourage the minister to look at one 
group that I think is key to some of the future prosperity of our 
province that I think is being ignored in this Act. And that is 
that there has been a move in the last 10 years for younger, 
retiring people to build permanent residences at our lakes. 
 
Traditionally those people have tended to leave the province 
and of course take their money with them. Now they are 
building in the Qu’Appelle Valley, in Long Lake/Last Mountain 
Lake, and in Jackfish Lake and in the northern lake country. 
 
This is an important economic engine for our province and we 
want to encourage these people to remain where they are. 
 
However just before I came into the House, I received a call 
from one of these people, a younger retired citizen who has 
built a permanent residence at Jackfish Lake, and his taxes are 
now 2,500 a year. And for that 2,500 a year, he is required to 
put in his own septic tank system, he is required to haul his own 
water, he is now required to haul his garbage and to pay tipping 
fees to whatever municipality he hauls it to. 
 
There is a volunteer fire department at a village 20 miles down 
the road, and when he called it once he was charged $800 for 
the call. And there are police services that are half an hour, 45 
minutes away. There is also a road which has not been much 
improved since the days of the buffalo and the Red River cart. 
In short, he’s paying $2,500 city taxes for which he receives 
little or no service. 
 
Now I know the minister has told us many, many times that 
property taxes are not directly related to services. But it’s . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Ad valorem. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Ad valorem system, that’s right, Madam 
Minister. But it seems to me that in some general sense, all 
taxes must bear a relationship to services. I mean why else do 
we pay taxes if not to finance the public services. 
 
And that relationship between taxes and services has now been 
totally lost sight of for property taxpayers in those areas for 
which they receive virtually no services whatsoever. And of 
course they’re also taxed something called a view tax. They are 
taxed for the fact that their homes overlook a lake and a valley. 
Something for which this minister cannot take credit. 
 
So I think that if we want this province to grow and develop, 
one of the things we’re going to have to do is to encourage 
people to remain here. Having the highest property taxes in 
Canada acts as a disincentive. We want these people to build at 
our lakes, we want them to retire in Saskatchewan rather than, 



966 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 1999 

say, retire to Vancouver Island. The policies of this government 
are acting as a disincentive. 
 
I think also that it is important that taxpayers feel they are being 
dealt with fairly, and when they pay $2,500 in property taxes 
and receive no services, they do not feel that they are being 
treated fairly. And I think this is an issue that the government 
must seriously address, that they must bring taxation back to a 
level which reflects those municipal services they are paying. 
 
And that in turn requires that this government take its fair share 
of responsibility for the education tax load. They can no longer 
push education costs down onto the municipalities because that, 
Mr. Speaker, is leading to a backlash against property taxes and 
even against education. So if we want to strengthen the 
education system in this province, the only way it can be done 
is for the provincial government to assume its proper share of 
responsibility. 
 
These are the real issues in property taxation and I am afraid 
that, Mr. Speaker, these issues have not been addressed in this 
amendment. This is tinkering, this is band-aid. There are some 
very, very serious issues to do with property taxation but they 
are not being addressed in the legislation before us. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 42 — The New Generation Co-operatives Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise today to 
move second reading of The New Generation Co-operatives 
Act. This new legislation supports innovation for our strong 
co-operative movement. It provides co-operatives with new 
tools and a new legal framework. It represents the first step in 
continued consultations with the sector on legislation for the 
new century. 
 
As all members know, Saskatchewan co-operatives have played 
a key role in the development of the province. Co-operatives are 
an important part of our economy, controlling over $9 billion in 
assets. They are some of our largest businesses, as well as some 
of the smallest. 
 
The sector has grown to over 1,500 co-operatives; each is the 
creation and the reflection of the members who own and control 
it. They are involved in virtually every area of our economy 
from child care and community clinics to retail and financial 
services. 
 
But perhaps nowhere, Mr. Speaker, do co-operatives play a 
more important role than in rural Saskatchewan where 
agricultural industry is so important. Roughly 400 co-operatives 
are based in this sector with the overwhelming majority of them 
operating in rural Saskatchewan. Virtually everywhere 
agriculture has developed, so too have co-operatives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today’s changing market economies and 
globalization are forcing organizations, including co-operatives, 
to examine and if necessary change their structure and function. 
The internationalization of markets and increased competitions 
are forcing producers and co-operatives to rethink their roles. 
 

Today many producers and co-operatives are looking for ways 
to integrate themselves into a global economy to create and 
capture greater returns for themselves and their members. 
 
(1430) 
 
The agricultural industry is continuously evolving and 
changing, bringing with it new challenges as well as opening up 
new opportunities. Agriculture today is very different from 
agriculture 20 years ago. 
 
As a result, Mr. Speaker, co-operatives involved in agriculture 
are also changing. They are changing in order to face the new 
challenges being presented to them. But they are also changing 
in order to benefit from the new opportunities the agricultural 
environment is creating. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government is introducing this legislation to 
assist our producers and agricultural co-operatives to adapt to 
rapid changes taking place in that industry. 
 
Simply put, this legislation represents another way 
Saskatchewan producers can co-operate under changing 
economic conditions to create businesses that benefit their 
communities. It is designed to provide the capacity for new 
co-operatives to emerge in agriculture-related activities 
including short-line railways. That is why this legislation is 
targeted to the agricultural community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill is rooted in Saskatchewan’s existing 
co-operative legislation. In addition, the approach taken in this 
Bill is consistent with that found in the new federal and 
Manitoba co-operative Acts. It will not affect co-operatives that 
are incorporated under the existing Co-operatives Act unless 
they choose to continue or amalgamate under this legislation. 
 
This legislation establishes the legal framework and safeguards 
that will help create an environment conducive to the 
development and operation of these new generation 
co-operatives. This legislation also will set out the governance 
rules pertaining to these co-operatives and enhance their ability 
to organize and function effectively. Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, 
it will ensure that these co-operatives observe the co-operative 
principles as stated by the international co-operative alliance. 
 
The objectives of this legislation are to enhance access to 
non-member capital and non-par value shares, protect the rights 
and interests of members and investors, ensure appropriate 
accountability and reporting practices, allow for flexible and 
efficient business operations, and provide a clear range of 
alternatives regarding their optimal capital structure to best 
serve the needs of their members. 
 
As just noted, a key new feature in this legislation centres on 
access to capital. In some instances, co-operatives may find 
themselves requiring capital that is beyond the capacity of their 
members to provide. This legislation will provide co-operatives 
with the ability to access non-member capital. This feature will 
enable co-operatives to rethink the range of their business, 
renew their current business, and take advantage of new 
opportunities. 
 
As a result, the capital structure of these co-operatives can 



May 3, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 967 

consist of two types of shares: common shares and preferred 
shares. As well, a special class of preferred share issued only to 
members is highlighted in this legislation. Common shares will 
be issued solely to members whereas preferred shares may be 
issued to non-members. Extensive new provisions will provide 
the legal framework and safeguards to support non-member 
capital. 
 
Additionally, Mr. Speaker, we have taken steps to ensure 
members maintain ultimate control of their co-operative. Under 
this legislation, only members can approve the issuance of 
preferred shares to non-members; only members can enact and 
change the by-laws; only members can allow directors on the 
board who are non-member shareholders. Non-member 
shareholders may have a maximum of 20 per cent 
representation on the board. Members and non-members will 
vote separately. And if non-members are given the right to vote 
to elect directors, then no one person can hold more than 10 per 
cent of the issued preferred shares. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these features protect the democratic nature of 
co-operatives and ensure that the membership maintains 
control. At the same time, these features allow members the 
ability to access capital to meet their needs. The assumption that 
share transactions take place at par value is sometimes seen as 
limiting. By providing for non-par-value preferred shares, 
members may benefit through the increased value of their 
shares. 
 
Another distinguishing feature of this legislation is a special 
class of preferred share that can be issued only to members. 
This special share, Mr. Speaker, is associated with the unique 
character of these co-operatives. These shares entitle or oblige 
the member to market a portion of their product to the 
co-operative. 
 
Mr. Speaker, because this legislation allows for greater 
organizational and capitalization flexibility, there are also 
provisions that provide both members and non-members with 
voting rights and remedies. The effect of such provisions is to 
require that the directors of a new generation co-operative 
secure the support of members and shareholders for 
fundamental changes to the organization or its capital structure. 
Existing businesses will also be allowed to amalgamate, 
continue, or register under this legislation provided that they 
operate on a co-operative basis and engage in agricultural 
activities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill is designed to allow co-operatives to 
choose the tools they consider necessary to compete in a global 
agricultural marketplace. We will continue to work with the 
co-operative sector to review, update, and improve The 
Co-operatives Act, 1996, to address the needs of all 
Saskatchewan co-operatives. This legislation is only the first 
step in that important process. The development of new 
legislation will take place over the next few years in close 
consultation with the co-operative sector. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I noted earlier that co-operatives have a long 
history in this province. They have helped shape the 
Saskatchewan society we enjoy, and they have allowed 
Saskatchewan residents to respond innovatively to many needs 
and opportunities. This government wants to ensure 

co-operatives have a supportive and enabling environment that 
encourages their continued growth and development. With the 
guidance and participation of the co-operative community, our 
government presents this Bill today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act respecting New 
Generation Co-operatives and making consequential 
amendments to other Acts. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
pleasure for me to rise and comment briefly on The New 
Generation Co-operatives Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it certainly is true and we concur completely when 
the minister said that co-operatives have played a very 
significant role in the development of our province. Over the 
years we’ve seen co-operatives take a leadership role, initially it 
seemed in rural communities providing services to the people of 
their community in a large number of areas. From retail and 
fuel and financial services, all of the areas that were essential to 
the growth of many, many rural communities, we’ve seen the 
co-operatives be very instrumental in that development. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as times changed in our province we have seen the 
co-operatives move to larger urban centres and to be very 
competitive and successful in that area. And indeed not all that 
many years ago we’ve seen the co-op take major leadership 
roles in development of heavy oil and a number of major 
projects in this province that have helped secure the economic 
future of our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s also true that the world is changing. And new 
alliances and strategic alliances and business partnerships have 
to be allowed in order for the co-operatives to move forward. 
And hence we have seen the move towards what have been 
called the new generation co-operatives. 
 
And we support that very, very much, Mr. Speaker. And we 
believe that while this is a fairly massive bit of legislation that 
does a lot of work in creating a new framework for 
co-operatives to operate in, the feedback we’ve received to date 
has been very positive, and any of the concerns that have been 
raised to us are more of a technical nature and we feel very 
confident that we’ll be able to address those issues in 
Committee of the Whole, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 43 — The New Generation Co-operatives 
Consequential Amendment Act, 1999/Loi de 1999 apportant 

des modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The New 
Generation Co-operatives Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise today to 
move second reading of The New Generation Co-operatives 
Consequential Amendment Act, 1999. 
 
This legislation introduces amendments to bilingual legislation 



968 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 1999 

that are a consequence of the introduction of The New 
Generation Co-operatives Act. These amendments, Mr. 
Speaker, will ensure that co-operatives incorporated, continued, 
or amalgamated under that Act are treated like any other 
co-operatives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of an Act to make 
consequential amendments to The Co-operatives Act, 1996 and 
The Interpretation Act, 1995 resulting from the enactment of 
The New Generation Co-operatives Act. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 35  The Land Information Services 
Facilitation Act 

 
The Chair: — I would ask the minister to introduce his 
officials please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’m pleased to 
have with me today Ron Hewitt, who is the assistant deputy 
minister of registry services division; as well as Darcy 
McGovern from legislative services. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. I have a number of questions on 
this. I think the concept of putting the whole program together, 
and as it’s called, it’s a facilitation Act, is going to be welcome 
by most people in Saskatchewan who spend lots of time 
wondering why their land titles wasn’t going through the 
system as they hoped. So I think the idea has full support, but 
we do have some questions about the project and how it’s been 
developed and how it’s travelling along. 
 
So to start off with, what was the original budget for the land 
title’s computer project, the original budget? 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you for that question. Originally the first 
computerization project for land titles was sometime back in the 
mid 80s. But I don’t think you were asking about that particular 
budget because it never ever did get off the ground. But the 
most recent project is the one that we’ve been working at since 
1995-96, and all of the amounts have been set out in the 
Estimates as we’ve gone along. 
 
About a year and a half ago or so it was decided that this project 
should have a broader scope which would include more than the 
land titles. It would include the Saskatchewan geomatics and all 
their geographical information system as well as some of the 
base for some common services. And so the project as it related 
to those particular parts did expand the cost of the project. 
 
Also when we were looking at those things, it became clear that 
the project would make more sense, when we’re taking part of 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation and tying it in 
with part of Saskatchewan Justice, that we would use a Crown 
corporation. 
 
And so in light of those expenses, there was an increase in the 

original estimate which it did only include land titles. 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, and I guess you managed not to 
answer my question because I asked what the original budget 
was. So I’ll give the first two figures and I’ll ask for the third 
one. 
 
This project started off, I believe, as some 20 million and then 
moved up to some 30 million. And I guess my next question is, 
and I hope I can get a dollar figure on this one, what is the 
current budget for this project? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Okay, I think the question that the 
member’s asked relates to the cost that was there. And that cost 
was approximately 31 million when we put the various parts 
together. 
 
That cost has now gone to 45 million. And that includes 
one-third of the cost, about 15 million, relates to the actual 
system, another third of the cost relates to the conversion of the 
paper into electronic form to be part of the system, and then the 
final third relates to the staffing costs and the actual building to 
house all of the documents and do the conversion work. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — So it’s gone from the 20 to the 30 that you 
mentioned to the 45. And can we expect that this now is going 
to be as high as the cost is going to go and that it’s not going to 
go past $45 million? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — That’s clearly what the plan is, that these 
latest estimates are the ones that are the goal. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And I hope this plan works out a 
little better than the first two did. 
 
One of the explanations that’s been put forward for this overrun 
is the cost of inflation. And I guess the question then comes, are 
we to understand that the government expected the rate of 
inflation to be lower than the 1 per cent that it has been? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — What we do know from this particular 
project, and I think that the gist of this question, if I understand 
it correctly, relates to the fact that when you’re dealing with 
these information technology projects, you have to incorporate 
in there some money that relates to the demand on the 
professionals and the kind of services that are there. And so 
practically, yes, there is a factor involved in the project that 
relates to the demand on many of the professionals involved. As 
we know, the demand in this whole field as it relates to the Y2K 
(Year 2000) issue has also been part of this because there are 
many people who are working on that project, which then 
increases the cost for all information technology services. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you for that answer. It didn’t get 
anywhere near the question that I had which asked whether the 
cost of inflation had been used as a factor in this. But if you 
want to talk about the people that are involved in it, you were 
also caught off guard, as you already to some extent mentioned, 
by the high cost of computer experts needed to get this project 
going. 
 



May 3, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 969 

You’re probably the only ones in the world that didn’t know 
that computer consultants were a little bit pricey because 
they’ve been a pricey item for probably the last half-dozen or 
dozen years. I guess can we then assume the government didn’t 
do a lot of research in it before plunging ahead with this project, 
or they should’ve known that computer experts were an 
expensive item. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — What we know in dealing with this 
particular project is that the planning that is required involves 
many people and many parts of a project, so that what we’re 
doing in this particular one does try to recognize the various 
demands. But also we’re very keen on using Saskatchewan 
people and Saskatchewan businesses as we do this work; that’s 
also part of what we’re working, and we’re pleased that we’re 
working with the SHL group who are working out of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I would just 
like to continue with some of the questioning that was put 
forward by my colleague. 
 
Mr. Minister, we are told by people in the legal community who 
have a good knowledge of the problems over at land titles that 
this project is not going smoothly and that the cost overruns 
may be much higher than even you are admitting to, perhaps as 
high as up 50 million going back to when the project was first 
conceived. Will you confirm that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — This project has been worked through 
every year in estimates and there’s been questions involved. 
The project has evolved and changed as the technology has 
changed and also as we’ve decided what other parts should be 
included in this. Practically our estimate now is that it will cost 
45 million as I explained before. We don’t anticipate any huge 
increase in that cost as we continue to work on this project. 
 
I would say that part of our difficulty that we’ve had in dealing 
with the legal profession involves the old system which was a 
paper-based system, and as we’ve gone into a transition we’ve 
had to take some of those people to work on developing the 
new system. 
 
What I would say is that we’ve very pleased how closely we 
have worked with lawyers, especially the law society and the 
Canadian Bar Association. And we’re happy to have them on 
board as we work to develop a very good system for 
Saskatchewan citizens, which includes all of the lawyers who 
work with us. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, other 
provinces have had their land titles systems computerized and 
you have stated here today that some of the perceived costs 
were not accurate because of this, this, and that. 
 
Did you ever consider simply using the technology that was 
already in place in other provinces instead of starting from 
scratch in Saskatchewan? That would have been less expensive, 
don’t you think, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well the simple answer to that question is 
that we did look very carefully at all of the other provinces and 
their systems, but we made a decision not to use some of those 

systems because they were based on technology and the 
systems that would not serve Saskatchewan people well. And 
basically what we were dealing with is the next generation of 
information technology to provide the information that people 
need. 
 
And now with our tie-in to the geographical information system 
we will provide something that other provinces are actually 
coming to us and saying, what are you doing, and they’re quite 
interested in looking at what we have and what we are 
developing. And it’s our hope that eventually, especially some 
of the provinces on the Prairies might come and use what we’re 
doing. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, how many 
consultants have you hired to work on this project and at what 
cost? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Right now we have about four people who 
are consultants to the project. We have our own staff from 
within Saskatchewan Justice who have also been working on 
the project. We’re going into the next stage with the contract 
with EDS Systemhouse, but that hasn’t started yet. But right 
now the answer is four outside consultants and then our internal 
staff that have been seconded to the project. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Minister, we understand from some fairly 
reliable sources that your main consultant has recently left the 
project on stress leave. Is that true? And if that is so, has it set 
the project back and added to the huge cost overrun? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — This rumour doesn’t seem to have any 
basis in fact at all; we don’t quite know what you’re talking 
about. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, we’ve 
also heard that the head of SPMC’s (Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation) mapping division has resigned in 
protest over this project. Is that true? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — No. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Well, Mr. Minister, can you tell us who from the 
Department of Justice has been put in charge of this project? 
And what is their qualifications as far as their knowledge of 
computer systems? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I’m very pleased to say that the person 
from Justice who’s in charge of this is Mr. Ron Hewitt, who’s 
here with me. And his work in the whole registry services 
business for quite a number of years gives him a broad-based 
understanding. 
 
Also what we’re basing a lot of our work on is the very 
successful program that we developed in the Personal Property 
Registry services, which I’d have to say is the envy of every 
province in Canada — what a good system we have here. And 
Mr. Hewitt was the person in charge of developing that project. 
 
He has many people who have broad computer skills working 
with him and we’re quite proud of the team of people that we 
have working on this. 
 



970 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 1999 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister what will 
be the budget of this new Crown corporation that you’re setting 
up? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — In the next . . . or in the first full year of 
the corporation we anticipate the annual expenditures to be 
around $16 million. So that’s for next year and over the 10-year 
sort of plan, it looks like there’ll be a couple of years where the 
expenditures will go up into the low twenties — 22 million — 
but over the longer term it’s about 16, 17, 18 million. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, just one 
more question. How many employees of the Justice department 
and SPMC will be transferred to this Crown? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — There’ll be about 270 employees — 50 
from Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation, 
geomatics division, and about 220 from the Saskatchewan 
Justice land titles operation. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 35 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Schedule agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Before I do that, 
I’d like to thank the officials who are here with me today, and 
also all of the officials in Saskatchewan Justice and the 
geomatics division of Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation for all of the hard work that they’ve done so far. I 
look forward to the continued hard work as we continue 
building this project. 
 
And with that, I would move that we report this Bill without 
amendment. 
 
Ms. Julé: — I’d just like to thank the minister also and his 
officials for answering our questions today. Thank you. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
(1500) 
 

Bill No. 30 — The Cemeteries Act, 1999 
 
The Chair: — Same minister but new officials so I would get 
him to introduce his officials please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. The officials that I 
have with me today are Linda Ens, who’s here on my right, 
senior policy analyst in legislative services; and behind her is 
Andrea Seale, Crown counsel in legislative services; and over 
to my left is Mr. Al Dwyer, who’s the registrar of the consumer 
protection branch. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clause 2 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’m sorry, I’m 
having trouble following my line of reasoning from some 
chirping from the sidelines. However, I am reminded . . . I am 

reminded of former Premier Blakeney’s famous comment that 
the cemeteries are full of people who have predicted the demise 
of the Liberal Party. So I think those are very wise comments 
for us all to keep in mind this afternoon. 
 
I would like to ask the minister, though: I’ve had a number of 
calls on the issue of frankly old abandoned cemeteries where 
there has been no interment for many decades and those 
cemeteries are falling into disuse and now there aren’t even 
really any families left. Is the department looking at the issue of 
what we do about maintaining those cemeteries which no . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. The hon. member has . . . Clause 
1, which is a general discussion clause, has been agreed on and 
we’re into clause 2, which is very specific. I would assume that 
the member would like to go back to clause 1 and a general 
discussion. Now I’m going to ask leave of the committee to 
allow that, but . . . Okay, I will ask . . . I will let the question go, 
then. Did you catch it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you for that question because it is a 
very important question in Saskatchewan. If you’ll note, section 
35 of the Act deals with abandoned and neglected cemeteries. 
And the basic plan under this new legislation is to make it 
easier for municipalities and other concerned parties to identify 
some of these cemeteries. Some of them are abandoned. Then 
those will . . . we’ll arrange for them to go to the care and 
control of the municipality or other organization that may want 
to do that. The neglected ones we will have some rules like 
present municipal government legislation which allows for 
cemeteries to be cleaned up and then the cost charged to the 
owner. So it’s much like we do on the municipal tax base. And 
there’s quite a number of rules around that particular issue, but 
the basic plan is to do it in a way that allows for the local 
community to have some say and some control on these 
cemeteries. 
 
But that was clearly part of what the process was here. And if 
you have members or others who are concerned, I would 
suggest that we’ll be continuing now to work on the regulations 
that more specifically deal with some of these issues; and if you 
could encourage these people who contact you to contact our 
department, then they can be participants in how we develop the 
rules in their area. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 93 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 31 — The Funeral and Cremation Services Act 
 

Clause 1 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 
welcome, Mr. Minister, to your officials this afternoon. Just 
really one question I need some explanation on, Mr. Minister, 
and it’s to do with the viewing of the body prior to cremation. 
What was the need here? What were you trying to fulfil by 
changing this in the Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think the main issue here is to be 



May 3, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 971 

absolutely certain in this age when more and more bodies are 
being cremated that there is a visual identification of the body. 
And so practically, I think the important part to note is that in 
the legislation it confirms that there should be clear visual 
identification but it doesn’t say that it has to be done in a 
funeral home with all of the trappings of that. It can be done at 
other points in the process. 
 
But as along as there’s clear visual identification by somebody 
who actually knows the person or sometimes it could be done 
by a doctor or somebody else. 
 
But the very important point is that bodies wouldn’t be 
cremated before they’ve been identified properly. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess the 
concern that was brought to us in a number of cases about this 
provision that it was mandatory, and I think the people that 
were bringing this concern to us was that a member of the 
family may have to identify someone that has been badly 
mutilated in an accident of some kind or other and, if I 
understood you right, you said maybe possibly even a doctor as 
long as someone like that identified the body. And I think that 
would satisfy the concerns that have been brought to us if that 
was the case. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Yes, it is possible for family members to 
nominate somebody else to do the job for them, and for exactly 
the reason that you’ve raised. And clearly, if there are some 
concerns around that area, well please let us know. But the way 
the legislation is set up, it’s set up so that this can be delegated 
to somebody else to save the family the trauma of that kind an 
identification process. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. That’s all the 
concerns that we have at this time. Mr. Minister, I just want to 
thank your officials this afternoon. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 121 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I will make that 
motion in a minute. I would first like to make a special thank 
you to the members of the working group on funeral, cremation, 
and cemetery legislation because one of the reasons that we are 
able to come forward with very comprehensive legislation in 
this area is the hard work that all of these groups have done. 
And I think it would be appropriate to mention them here in the 
legislature and for the record. 
 
First we have consumer groups: the Consumers’ Association of 
Canada, Saskatchewan Seniors Mechanism, Regina Council of 
Churches, the Memorial Society of Saskatchewan, Senior 
Power, and the Saskatchewan Genealogical Society. And we 
have industry people and organizations: Saskatchewan Funeral 
Services Association, Western Canada Cemeteries Association, 
Prepaid Funeral Services Council, Saskatchewan Crematoria 
Council, Dignified Transfer, The Loewen Group, Arbour 
Memorial Services Inc., Remco Memorials Ltd., Yorkton 
Memorial Gardens, and National Selected Morticians. 
 
And then some specific parts of government who are very much 

involved in part of this working group: Saskatchewan 
Association of Urban Municipalities, Saskatchewan Association 
of Rural Municipalities, Saskatchewan Health, Municipal 
Affairs, Culture and Housing, the Last Post Fund, and last but 
not least the main coordinating crew which were the people 
from Saskatchewan Justice including those people here but 
some others also that have been working within the department. 
 
And I would like to thank all of these people for their hard work 
as we have updated the industry legislation for funeral services, 
cremation, and also cemeteries. I think it’s important to note 
that it was 1936 for some of the funeral services legislation and 
this is an update that will help that industry. 
 
And with all of that I would like to move that we approve this 
Bill without amendment. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
(1515) 
 

Bill No. 37 — The Snowmobile Amendment Act, 1999 
 
The Chair: — I would ask the minister to introduce his 
officials please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chair, before I introduce my 
official, I would if I could have leave to introduce two people in 
the Speaker’s gallery. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Before we start, I would like to 
introduce Chris and Jeannie Brewer who are with the 
snowmobile association for the province and welcome them 
here for the working of the committee. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 37 — The Snowmobile Amendment Act, 1999 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairperson, I would like to 
introduce the staff who are with us here today: Anna Lapierre 
from SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance), the assistant 
VP (vice-president) of licensing and registrations, seated to my 
right; also on my left, Bob Herbison, who is a program 
specialist with SERM (Saskatchewan Environment and 
Resource Management), seated right to my left; seated 
immediately behind me is Elizabeth Flynn, SGI lawyer on the 
litigation issue; and behind me and to my right, Bruce Kush, 
with SGI, manager of vehicle registration. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. Welcome, 
Mr. Minister, and to your officials. A few questions regarding 
the Act and the very specific sections, Mr. Minister. But I guess 
before I begin with that, we’ve been talking with the 
snowmobile association — and no doubt your department has 



972 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 1999 

been as well — for a number of years. And there’s been 
different positions taken by the snowmobile association, by 
individuals who represent various snowmobile clubs. I know 
I’ve had the opportunity to talk with the snowmobile club in my 
area responsible for a particular portion of the trail, and they’ve 
had concerns for a number of years now, Mr. Minister. 
 
I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, this seems to be a bit of a 
compromise, and probably maybe a much more beneficial one. 
But could you indicate how you arrive at this form of trail fees 
versus . . . I think the initial intent a couple years ago was to 
look at registration and look at trail fees that would be 
incorporated into registration. 
 
We’ve moved away from that now to a voluntary permit fee. 
What kinds of things have taken place to move yourself and 
your department in that direction? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I think the 
issue the member raised is an important one. Because I think 
there has been a lot of debate on the issue of how do you fund 
trails, and it has been a moving target. 
 
But I think what has happened here is the process has been very 
excellent, and I just want to thank the member opposite. 
Because I know members of your caucus and members of the 
Liberal caucus were involved as well in meeting with 
snowmobile associations. And I must say that this is a very, 
very well organized group throughout the province. 
 
Sometimes we think of it particularly in the forest belt where 
you don’t get the wind as much, where snowmobiles are used 
extensively for recreation. But really when you think about it, 
you really can go from one border to the other in the province 
on groomed trails. 
 
But what was arrived at after a great deal of discussion and 
debate — and I know the member opposite was involved at 
various levels — was a system whereby those people using the 
trails would pay the fee. 
 
And in fact as a result it’s a true user-pay concept. Those who 
use the trails will pay the fee, and those who might not want to 
use their snowmobile in such an endeavour, don’t have to pay 
the fee. 
 
So when it came down to fairness as to how you would apply 
the fee for the trail grooming and marking, it was based on 
those people who actually go and use the trail and not those 
who choose to use their snowmobile in a different manner. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, as 
you’ve indicated, snowmobile owners and the snowmobiling 
industry is a very strong industry in this province. It contributes 
a great deal to the economic conditions of this province. And I 
know in my area we’re very glad to see the organization of 
snowmobile clubs and their continued livelihood. 
 
Mr. Minister, in your comments when you introduced this Bill, 
you indicated that when it was a voluntary program, 
approximately 6,000 voluntary fees of $25 were made over the 
last year or two. And now you’ve indicated I think in your 
remarks that the fee is going to be $45. 

Two questions, Mr. Minister. Who set the fee from 25 from 45? 
And do you still expect the same number of voluntary 
contributors, now that we’ve seen such a tremendous jump from 
25 to 45? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — The member is correct. I think it’s a 
good . . . a good question to put is on a voluntary basis, how 
many people do you think will actually be involved? 
 
But I think if my recollection in talking to the association when 
it was planned as a mandatory program, I think they had set a 
goal of about 4,500 people that they expected. Then when it 
was changed to a voluntary program, actually they ended up 
with more people coming on board and that’s where the 6,000 
came from last year at $25. 
 
What I want to say and it’s interesting that the $45 fee is not in 
regulation or in legislation. This is something that’s arrived at 
by the snowmobile association. And actually on their numbers 
they’re expecting more than 6,000 volunteer payments to be 
made next year. 
 
I don’t want to go out on a limb and say what kind of a 
percentage increase, but I think if you were to talk to the 
association, they’re expecting something in excess of 6,000 
voluntary permits to be sold at $45. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. For clarification, 
Mr. Minister, I know your department and the snowmobile 
association is interested in safe, quality trails and so is everyone 
in Saskatchewan. And I guess how we would arrive at that 
would be to see more people on those trails paying a permit. 
And I wonder if $45 is not going to create the opposite. 
 
And the second part of my question, as I look in section 20.4, it 
says that the trail manager is responsible for the setting of the 
trail permit fee. Okay. So I understand this Bill, you have 
created the position called the trail manager for the province of 
Saskatchewan, and that person will be responsible for all trails. 
And it says that he will . . . or he or she will set the trail fee. 
 
Mr. Minister, is that true? And secondly, do you expect then to 
see different permit fees in different parts of the province 
because this trail manager may decide that an area that is not 
being used as much may need a higher trail fee or a lower trail 
fee, whatever the case may be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I think what might be a little 
confusing to the member opposite, and I don’t say that in a 
disparaging way, because it’s confusing a little bit to myself, 
but there is only one trail manager for the province. It’s not that 
there’ll be a trail manager in each zone or region or each club. 
And the trail manager, while the description, the job description 
says that their description is establishing trail permit fees. 
Obviously this will be done and enforced by the trail manager, 
but it will be done as a resolution, as I understand it, of the 
Saskatchewan Snowmobile Association. So it will be a 
consistent fee throughout the province on all of the trails and 
arrived at only after a great deal of discussion and debate. 
 
And the $45 while, I mean, I agree with the associations that 
they would probably sell in excess of 6,000 next year, I think 
that only time will tell. But my view is that $45 to travel on a 



May 3, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 973 

well-upgraded and improved trail when you’re running a 5 or 6 
or up to $10,000 machine, really is not very much money when 
you consider what you’re putting into the quality of machines 
that we have or the clothing that we use on the trail. And I think 
the signage as well is hugely important. That has to be paid for 
as well. 
 
So when you think of all the other things that go into 
snowmobiling, $45 for your permit that will go towards paying 
for the condition of the trail and signage and the safety aspect is 
probably not onerous when you consider that, in some cases, 
you will have more than one person paying the fee in terms of 
families. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, if we 
see a fund of somewhere between 275,000 and $300,000, if 
your estimates are correct, snowmobiling association estimates 
are correct, that’s a significant amount of money that is going to 
be in this fund. 
 
Couple of questions. Will the trail manager assign portions of 
that fund to the local snowmobile clubs for the actual operation 
of a section of trail that they’re responsible, or will this be done 
from a centralized maintenance team where the trail manager’s 
responsible for all areas of the province? That’s question no. 1. 
 
And secondly, you did mention that the fund is not only to deal 
with trail maintenance but it is also to deal with safety. Has 
your department . . . or has there been a recommendation from 
the snowmobile association regarding the percentage of the 
fund that should be spent on the trails and the percentage of the 
fund that should be spent on the safety program. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I’ll ask the second . . . answer the 
second half first; but as it relates to the percentage on trail 
upgrading and grooming versus signage, that’s totally at the 
discretion of the Saskatchewan Snowmobile Association. 
 
And I just want to say, as it would relate as to how the money 
will be allocated, it will depend on project development and 
what kind of projects each of the various regions or clubs are 
designing. So this will be something that will be negotiated. 
 
For example, if you had a very aggressive development of trails 
in your area versus my area down in the southwest part of the 
province. You would then probably see a bigger expenditure 
going to your area versus an area where there’s no development 
of trails. 
 
So it would depend as well on the aggressivity of the 
development program in a given area as opposed to a per capita 
basis. So this will be worked out through the snowmobile 
association. And again I say this is very much self- monitored 
by the association and we try to keep as little red tape and 
government regulation or government control in the program as 
possible which I think reflects the view of this government 
trying to remove the amount of regulation and red tape for 
individuals. 
 
And I mean I say this sincerely. This is only going to work if 
the snowmobile owners and associations are in control of it. I 
personally believe that this is not a kind of program that would 
be well run out of an office in Regina. 

(1530) 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. While I agree with 
you that the snowmobiling association is probably the best 
group that can give you advice and can enforce this program, I 
guess a couple of questions that come from your response just 
now is, who will administer the program? I notice you talk 
about volunteers not actually acting as police officers but 
volunteers at the local level reporting people who do not have 
the permit. 
 
Will there be a fine system in place or will it be a system of I 
guess an honour system that says please pay, please pay, and at 
the end of the snowmobiling season if the person hasn’t, will 
that just be forgotten about or will there be an enforcement 
mechanism? Will there be a fine system that will be put in place 
to deal with this? 
 
The other part, Mr. Minister, is very specific to an individual 
snowmobile club and I’ll use the Preeceville Snowmobile Club 
as the example. If for some reason they’re looking to ensure 
that they can operate their groomer and operate all the things 
necessary for that area, will they have to apply to the trail 
manager of the province to be able to say we require X number 
of dollars to maintain the portion of our trail or will they be 
applying to your department or will they be applying to the 
snowmobile association who in turn puts it through the trail 
manager? How will an individual snowmobile club make 
application and receive funding? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — The process is as follows. Now the 
association will have sold 6,000 or 8,000 or 10,000 
memberships or fees or collected fees, they now have this pool 
of money. They have established a criteria whereby your local 
association now makes an application or a request to the 
provincial body and then the funds would be delivered or given 
out. And it would be based on a formula of number of 
kilometres of trail, kind of upgrades, and the amount of signage 
that would done in any given area. 
 
As it relates to the policing aspect, you’re right. In the Act the 
power is not given to the association to levy fines or penalties. 
But I know, as well, living in a rural area and watching how 
enforcement of some of these things goes on, that if you’re out 
there riding on the trail and you don’t have a permit, there’s 
moral persuasion that is very, very effective in dealing with 
your neighbours and friends. And I think in the vast majority of 
cases, it will be an honour system. 
 
In those rare events — and I think it will be rare — where you 
have continuous use by someone who doesn’t have a permit, 
what can and, I think in those rare occasions, will happen is the 
RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) can be notified by the 
association and under the summary offences Act charges could 
be laid for use of a trail where you haven’t got authority to ride. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, do I 
understand the Bill correctly to say that unless it is my own 
private land, that any snowmobiles on these registered trails or 
these trails that will be created in the province must be 
snowmobiles that are registered? And if that’s true, then the 
permit is . . . well I guess in terms of $45 versus the registration 
of a snowmobile is relatively inexpensive in comparison. 



974 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 1999 

Will there be a problem, or does the snowmobile association in 
this province see that there might be a problem with 
snowmobiles who will obtain a permit but not have a registered 
snowmobile? Or is that of any concern to the department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well if the member remembers the 
issue of liability and collision, the two parts of the insurance, 
what will be mandatory is the liability side, not the collision 
side. And of course this is for the safety of the operator but also 
others who may be using the trail. 
 
The issue of liability is an important one because we feel when 
it comes to the effect on family or individuals, it was important 
to keep that in place, and therefore we have maintained the need 
and the position that liability is mandatory if you’re using the 
trails. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, the 
second part though is that will . . . do you expect that people 
will be travelling on the trails with the permit only and not 
having a registered snowmobile — that is, one that is carrying 
liability only. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — This would fall into the same 
category as somebody riding without a permit — not the same 
section but another section. They would be monitored, they 
would be told that they needed to be registered. And if they 
failed to do that, the individuals from the association would not 
have the power to fine but they would have the power and 
authority to recommend to the RCMP, and the RCMP would 
have the power to enforce that portion of the Act. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
would conservation officers have that same power as the 
RCMP? Will that be able to be reported to the conservation 
officers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — There would be a slight discrepancy 
here in that if they have peace officer status, they would have 
the authority to enforce the law. So it’s not that everyone would 
be able to, but if they have peace officer status then they would 
have the authority to enforce the Act. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — A couple of final questions, Mr. Minister. 
Will SGI or any other government agency or department obtain 
any revenue from any of the collection of the fees or any of the 
revenues that you see coming through in the fund? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — No, there’s no impact on 
government in terms of a revenue source; it would all go to the 
snowmobile association. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Good, thank you very much. Mr. Minister, 
obviously the fund is to ensure that we continue to improve our 
trails, and continue to ensure that snowmobilers have a place to 
travel safely. The goal of course is to have, I think, a cross 
province-wide trail system in place very quickly and to ensure 
that we attract the kinds of tourists from other states, from other 
provinces, that will obviously spend their money here. 
 
Do you think, Mr. Minister, that the introduction of this trail 
fund will bring about a completed system in this province? And 
I’m asking a very hypothetical question, Mr. Minister. I’m 

asking you to look into the crystal ball. In your consultations 
with the snowmobile association, how many years do you think 
will it take before we have in place across Saskatchewan, a trail 
system that will be the envy of all of the other provinces and 
states? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — The issue of snowmobile trails is a 
very, very important one as it relates to tourism. What we do 
know is that in some areas in the United States — for example 
in the Yellowstone area which had been an area for snowmobile 
use, there have been many, many restrictions put on individuals 
who use that area. And they are looking for areas in Canada to 
run their machines, and Saskatchewan is seen as one of the best. 
 
I’m not going to name particular parts of the province, but 
you’ll realize this is why the trails are being developed quickly 
because many of the communities see this as a lifeline for some 
small communities, restaurants, motels. 
 
It really is a booming industry, and one that is, I think, little 
understood by those people who aren’t involved in the actual 
industry itself. 
 
And that’s why this is so important for you and I to 
communicate to the public. Because many areas of the United 
States have simply taken the option of moving away from 
snowmobiles which I think will not benefit their economy. 
 
So when these people come to your part of the world or to the 
areas in the province where we have some excellent, excellent 
snowmobiling, they will be charged the same fee as residents at 
the present time. But because it’s such a new system, there may 
be reciprocity agreements. And that’s probably not the right 
expression, but whereby if one jurisdiction, for example in 
Manitoba, had a higher rate than ours, we may charge them the 
same rate as their province over time. 
 
But at the present time, the flat fee of $45 would apply to 
residents and non-residents, and as I understand it, that would 
apply to non-Canadians as well as Canadians from other parts 
of Canada. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, one 
area that I didn’t touch on a few minutes ago and I should have, 
is I’ve had a couple of comments from individuals regarding the 
section that deals with the trail manager, and I want you to 
clarify. 
 
As I understand the Bill, the minister will appoint the trail 
manager. In other words, then he is an employee of your 
department and not the snowmobile association, and therefore is 
I guess not going to be paid by the snowmobile association. 
Will the payment of this individual’s salary for the year, will 
that be coming out of other provincial revenue or will it be 
coming out of the trail fund? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — It’s my understanding that the trail 
manager will be able to access expenses from the fund — not 
from government, but from the fund. But in terms of an actual 
salary associated with this, this is not a salaried position. So this 
is a position that will be . . . a person that will be appointed to 
do the operations of trail manager. But it’s not seen to be a 
full-time job, this aspect of it. And while expenses will be paid 



May 3, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 975 

from the fund, there is no salary associated with it. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Are you then expecting this person to be a 
volunteer and receive no remuneration? Or are you suggesting 
an honorarium as being part of an expense even thought it’s 
part-time. I find it strange that you’re going to have someone in 
charge of a $300,000 fund, and that person is not actually going 
to be receiving any remuneration? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — There is the provision to be able to 
pay a salary if that were to be needed and the individual did not 
have another salary. But it’s the kind of situation where we 
expect that this is not a full-time job or that there will be a full 
salary scale needed. And in the initial phase we believe that 
probably paying expenses is what it will take to get the job 
done. 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, I need a couple of other 
questions there. You’re going to have a person who is going to 
be in charge of seeking applications from snowmobile clubs in 
the province. How is that person going to determine whether or 
not they’re going to allocate the $25,000 requested by the 
Preeceville Snowmobile Club? And I just throw that out as an 
example. 
 
I mean I think snowmobiling season starts in this province, you 
know, on November 1 or earlier. We’re looking at least five 
months, maybe six months. That’s not full-time, yes, but I think 
during that period of five months, it’s going to be more than 
full-time if this individual is indeed trying to ensure that we 
have correct signage on all trails, that he has communication 
with all the volunteers who have volunteered to act as 
administrators of this program. 
 
I mean I think that this is going to be more than a full-time 
position, Mr. Minister. And I guess when you’re saying that 
he’s entitled . . . he or she is entitled to expenses, if that person 
claims expenses of $5,000 for an honorarium for the month, is 
that acceptable to you and will that be paid for the period of five 
or six months that this person is on the job? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — The issue here is that the 
decision-making process is that the snowmobile association has 
an executive director. That’s a paid position and that is a 
full-time job. They also have a board of directors and advisers 
who are paid their expenses for going to meetings. And many of 
these people work extremely hard in terms of work they do with 
the association. 
 
And so the new person that we’re talking about, the trail 
manager, when that individual is appointed, will be seen to be 
in the same ranking, I would expect, as a board member who 
gets their expenses. But there will be a lot of volunteers. 
 
Or on the other hand, it may be somebody who has an income 
and doesn’t request an income supplement. But on the other 
hand, if it were an individual who had no other source of 
income, it’s certainly within the purview of the fund to be 
allowed to pay some salary for a period of time during the 
busiest part of the year. So this will be . . . because it’s such a 
new organization and new operation, much of this will have to 

be worked out. 
 
But I know in the past we have had organizations, for example, 
the Provincial Action Committee on the Economy, which I 
established when I was first appointed Minister of Economic 
Development in 1991, which was a very, very high level group 
of people who at our first meeting when we were talking about 
per diems and as a board of directors that passed a motion 
saying they didn’t want any. 
 
And believe it or not in this day and age, as strange as it may 
seem, sometimes people just do things because they think it’s 
the right thing to do. 
 
And at this given point in time, while there is the ability to pay 
remuneration to people for the work done at this point in time, 
only expenses are talked about. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I did 
not want to in any way downplay the number of volunteers and 
the number of people that work very hard in this province and 
including the members of the snowmobile association. We 
know that there’s a tremendous number of volunteer hours that 
are put in. And I’m sure there are many people on boards of 
directors who meet occasionally. 
 
The distinction that I’m trying to make is: I think that this 
position is one that is going to be full-time for the period of at 
least five months, and that we shouldn’t cloud this over by 
suggesting that somebody is going to volunteer for the entire 
five months of the year and do all these kinds of things and not 
be looking at some sort of cost. 
 
I guess, Mr. Minister, my final question will be connected to 
that. It’s indicated that you’re appointing the trail manager. Will 
you be relying on the snowmobile association for 
recommendations, for advice on who that person might be who 
understands the snowmobiling association, who has a good 
relationship with all parts of the province, and who can do the 
job? Will you be relying on the snowmobile association for 
advice in that appointment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well I just want to make it clear 
because I think in setting this up and because we haven’t 
appointed how this will exactly work, I think you might 
conceive that this will not be an individual but the term, trail 
manager, could actually be an association. 
 
And so without saying who that association might be . . . And 
I’m just . . . I’m not being coy at all, but I’m just saying that the 
thought of the snowmobile association being the manager in 
legal terms is a very open possibility. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. I think 
that answers all of the questions that I had on behalf of 
individuals in this province who have communicated with the 
official opposition. I want to thank you and your officials for 
providing us with those answers. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to ask 
some questions on a matter which is, I think, related to the 
scheme of the Act, but perhaps not directly addressed. And that 
is that without an effective registration system, importation of 



976 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 1999 

snowmobiles from out of the province in a tax-free jurisdictions 
is a serious problem. Recently the major snowmobile dealer in 
North Battleford had to close and relocate to Lloydminster. And 
it was simply because of the sales tax issue. 
 
Now I want to know what is the government doing to track the 
purchase of snowmobiles in Alberta coming into the province? I 
am told that at one time we were even paying insurance claims 
on snowmobiles for which no sales tax had ever been paid. 
How are we going to track the importation of snowmobiles? 
And how are these registration provisions going to help ensure 
that snowmobiles in the province have paid the provincial sales 
tax? My concern is here not so much for the revenue of the 
government as for the fact that it is very, very difficult for 
dealers in the western edge of the province to compete at all. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well I think the issue here is an 
important one. And to the member opposite, obviously this is an 
ongoing problem with goods and services, or goods in 
particular where the sales tax applies, being brought into the 
province, and the fee . . . or the sales tax not being paid. 
 
But first of all, I just want to say, and I don’t mean this in any 
political way, but the sales tax going from 9 to 6 per cent 
certainly gives less incentive for people to purchase out of 
province. And when compared to Manitoba at 7 per cent on that 
side of the province, there’s no incentive. So getting the sales 
tax down is a huge important part of that, and we’re moving I 
think as a community in the right direction. 
 
Having said that, when we talk about the registration process, 
all of the machines that are registered — the 6,000 — will have 
the sales tax paid. So the argument from the snowmobile 
association is the higher they can get the permit level, meaning 
the machine running on the trails has to be registered . . . The 
registered machines aren’t the problem — they will have to 
have the sales tax paid. So that’s presently at 6,000; if we can 
move that to 8 or 9 or 10,000, what we know is those machines 
will have the taxes paid. 
 
Having said that, I think it’s very, very important that the 
association, along with SGI and the Department of Finance, 
work very, very closely together to see that our small business, 
the people that you talk about who sell machines, are not put at 
a disadvantage with their counterparts — and here I’m talking 
particularly in Alberta — to not be put at a disadvantage for the 
payment of the sales tax. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Yes, thank you. Can the minister tell me if 
there is any attempt, however, to track the implications of 
snowmobiles into this province from Alberta. And as you’ve 
correctly said, that’s now really the only border at which this is 
an issue. Is there any attempt to find out the extent of the 
problem, how many snowmobiles are coming in from Alberta, 
and to inform those people who are bringing in snowmobiles 
that the sales tax is owed on those purchases? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — On the issue of sales tax collection, 
these are probably questions better asked to the Minister of 
Finance but I mean I can take a shot at it. I was just told that at 
the present time 20,000 snowmobiles are registered in the 
province. So when I say 6,000 bought permit fees, for sure 
those are a block that we know about, but in total we have 

20,000 machines registered and are tax paid. 
 
Now again, in the Department of Finance, we have ways and 
means of checking goods that are brought into the province to 
make sure sales tax are paid. And while this is a difficult 
problem, snowmobiles and Sea-Doos are easier and more 
visible to enforce sales tax than other goods that we may deal 
with. 
 
But this is an issue that we work on on a constant basis and 
Finance has the ability to be pretty vigilant — especially on a 
commodity like a snowmobile — to be able to enforce the sales 
tax provision. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Seeing as you have an official from SGI here, 
may I ask if it is standard procedure before any insurance claim 
is paid on snowmobiles to check to see if in fact the sales tax 
has been paid on that machine? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — It’s almost the reverse onus. In 
order to be registered, the sales tax would have had to have 
been paid. So in fact if there is any claim, it could only be on a 
machine that was registered and that sales tax had been paid. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Are you saying that you cannot insure a 
snowmobile which is not registered, because of course not all 
are required to be licensed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Yes. This is an issue again that 
comes up in the general insurance side as it would relate to 
someone insuring a washer and dryer or any commodity. At the 
present time insurance companies do not have a system of 
reporting whether or not sales tax has been paid, although it’s 
an interesting argument that you put forward. 
 
I’m not sure whether or not we would want to go in and start 
that process of another level of investigation or checking out the 
residents of Saskatchewan. But it may be something that 
warrants a look at. And I’m not quite sure whether you’re 
urging that to happen or whether you’re saying it’s an option 
that you may look at yourself if you were to be in a position of 
power in the province. 
 
But it’s an interesting concept, but one that we haven’t . . . 
certainly haven’t agreed to move on at this point in time. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would just like to 
say on behalf of my constituents that we do indeed appreciate 
the sales tax coming down to 6 per cent level and that does 
make it easier for businesses in the western part of the province. 
 
However I say the issue of competition as opposed to taxes, the 
one that actually concerns me the most, and the reality is that it 
is very difficult to be a snowmobile dealer in the western part of 
Saskatchewan today. And I would ask the government to ask 
their officials to be more creative. 
 
Maybe the suggestions I’ve raised are not the best ones, but I 
ask the government to be more creative in coming up with ways 
that will preserve business in western Saskatchewan when they 
are up against this unfair competition of the provincial sales tax. 
Thank you. 
 



May 3, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 977 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I couldn’t agree with the member 
more. I mean it’s sort of . . . having the second lowest sales tax 
in Canada which we have in Saskatchewan at 6 per cent, it still 
leaves a problem for those people — and I come from the 
southwest corner of the province on the Alberta border — there 
still is an issue enforcing the sales tax in that area. And it will 
be for the next while because when you have a province like 
Alberta with 90 per cent of Canada’s oil, with advantages that 
other provinces don’t have, and I say this quite sincerely — it 
doesn’t matter whether you’re a Conservative, Liberal, or NDP 
— when you stack up against the province that has 90 per cent 
of the Canada’s oil, life is just a little bit easier. 
 
It’s sort of like being left with 10 sections of land by your father 
and then a young individual competing. I mean it’s not easy. 
 
But having said that, bringing the sales tax down from 9 to 6 
per cent has helped. But I couldn’t agree more that being 
vigilant to make sure that our small businesses are protected in 
those areas where they’re vulnerable because of that unlevel 
playing field is extremely important. 
 
And I can make the commitment to the member opposite that 
your idea — and I say this sincerely to you — we’ll check out 
ways and means and maybe in a private time we could even 
have an arrangement where you might want to talk to people in 
SGI to explore this option further. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 14 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
(1600) 
 

Bill No. 38 —The Litter Control Amendment Act, 1999 
 
The Chair: — I would ask the minister to introduce his 
officials please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have with me 
today Stuart Kramer, deputy minister of SERM; and behind me, 
directly behind me, Steve Arnold, environmental engineer from 
the environmental protection branch; and next to him Victor 
Chang, acting director of environmental protection. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and welcome once again, 
Mr. Minister, and welcome to your officials once again. Mr. 
Minister, I was quite amazed how quickly this Act came into 
play after some discussion in the House not too long ago about 
the bootlegging of cans from Manitoba into Saskatchewan. 
However, I’m very happy to see that you did put an amendment 
on an existing Act to take care of this as much as possible. 
 
Mr. Minister, I notice in the amendment part that there’s an 
indication that there will be some enforcement officers in place 
that will be guarding against the bootlegging of cans from 
Manitoba into Saskatchewan. Are there going to be extra 
enforcement officers put in place or are you intending to see 
that existing people at the depots are in fact those enforcement 

officers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. With respect to 
the hon. member’s questions, our conservation officers will be 
enforcing this legislation. RCMP, municipal police, and finance 
officers that are patrolling for tobacco smuggling and such like 
will also have the ability to enforce this legislation. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Well, thank you, Mr. Minister. That is indeed very 
interesting. You named about four different groups of people, I 
think — four or five — that will have the authority to enforce 
this legislation. And so I’m wondering how they have been 
given direction to carry out their duty to guard against the 
bootlegging of cans? Has there been specific guidelines given to 
them? Have there been specific areas for any of them to guard 
against the bootlegging? How will this take place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Mr. Chairman, our conservation officers 
will lead on this — the enforcement. And basically the 
containers coming in from out of province, half-ton trucks piled 
up with cans and whatnot, is fairly obvious. Up until now we 
have not had the ability to stop the containers from coming in. 
SARCAN has been able to put on $50-a-week limits on 
individuals bringing containers in, and bootleggers would 
simply get more and more people involved in this ring. 
 
So it’ll be a public education process with a $25,000 maximum 
fine. Hopefully this will deter some of the bootleggers, and at 
the same time families coming back from holidays with a 
couple dozen empty cans in their trunk don’t need to worry 
about being harassed. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, in as far as 
enforcing this, if conservation officers, for instance, notice a 
truck coming in with numbers of cans and they may be coming 
from any individual area of Manitoba . . . Say, for instance, if 
there’s a follow-up truck with more cans coming from the same 
area, how are the conservation officers going to be determining 
what kind of, I guess, travel into this province with these trucks 
carrying these cans is taking place at any specific time? Or how 
are they going to determine their observation to make sure that, 
for instance, the truck doesn’t come in today at 10 o’clock in 
the morning and then possibly again at 5 in the afternoon? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Mr. Chairman, because of the problem 
being around for several years, our SARCAN depots have a 
pretty good idea who is bringing containers in and also even the 
rings that the bootleggers are establishing. $50 a week is about 
500 cans. If the same young person brings in $50 worth of cans 
every week, it’s obvious that the cans are coming from 
somewhere. So we have a pretty good idea who the bootleggers 
are, and we will focus on these individuals. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you. Mr. Minister, how much does the 
province lose each year in revenue to bootlegging of this type? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — We estimate over one and one-half million 
dollars this past year have been lost due to cans from out of 
province. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And with the new 
enforcement officers having the authority they do, do you have 
a financial estimate of how much the province will actually 



978 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 1999 

save, I guess you could say, or how much financial benefit the 
province will gain back? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — We envision very little additional money 
being spent, perhaps as little as $10,000. These officers are 
obviously on salary already and so we’ll be focusing, perhaps 
$10,000 extra money to curtail this trafficking. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you. Mr. Minister, how much onus is being 
put on depot operators to make sure that this enforcement takes 
place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Quite a bit. Actually the SARCAN 
organization, the depots have flagged this for a number of years 
and we’ll be working very closely with them to bring the 
situation under control. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Well I guess I want to know how much 
consultation has gone on with them over this specific Act and 
the way the Act is formulated. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — We’ve had extensive consultation. In fact, 
this legislation is at the request of SARCAN. They’ve had input 
in drafting it and they fully endorse the process approach that 
we are taking. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I only 
have one more question at this time to pose to you regarding 
this Act. 
 
In the Act there’s an immunity clause. And there’s an immunity 
clause that shields the minister or the enforcement officer, but 
the depot operator is not mentioned. Should they not have been 
also protected by immunity since they play such an important 
role in the Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — I believe that we’re talking about the legal 
enforcement of the legislation, Mr. Chairman. And obviously 
employees at the SARCAN depot cannot be directly involved in 
laying charges. They can provide the information to us and we 
will follow up on it. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. 
Minister, we had the opportunity to meet with the SARCAN 
board as a caucus. And we heard very clearly from them that of 
course the Manitoba, east side of Saskatchewan, seems to be 
where the most problems occur. And indeed, as you’ve 
indicated, they have identified various sources and they know 
that the people are coming in. 
 
Has your department been in consultation with Manitoba? And 
is there the development of maybe a western strategy — and by 
western I’m referring to Alberta, Manitoba, and Saskatchewan 
— where we could be all on the same page, and then we 
wouldn’t have to worry about enforcement of regulations and 
rules because we would all have the same type of policy and we 
would all be able to ensure that, you know, deposits and the 
like. 
 
We were led to believe that Manitoba in fact, because they’re 
trying to meet certain levels of recycling, were actually wanting 
Saskatchewan to provide them with the numbers of Manitoba 
cans that were recycled in Saskatchewan so that they could get 

credit for that. 
 
And I find that, you know, rather unusual for a government to 
be looking at saying, well we’re happy that Saskatchewan is 
paying the 10 cents but yet we’d like to also claim the credit 
back in Manitoba. I think we have to push for a western 
strategy. And I wonder if your department is pursuing that and 
whether we can be looking forward to that kind of a plan in the 
very near future. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the hon. member 
certainly raises a good point. And we have in fact . . . I’ve 
personally been to Manitoba to meet with the minister there and 
the minister has been here; in fact we had him tour the Regina 
SARCAN depot. The province of Manitoba has chosen to 
recycle their waste materials in a different way simply by 
levying a surcharge on everything from soup cans to 
newspapers, and that includes the pop cans. 
 
We pointed out that we have over 70 depots, over 300 people, 
many of them with disabilities, employed, and how good this 
program is working. And it is working good because we have 
107 per cent return in our cans. 
 
But we have tried to get Manitoba to see the way we are doing 
it, but they have chosen — not be critical — to pursue another 
path in recycling waste materials. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, I just wanted to 
take a moment to thank the minister and his officials for coming 
in and answering our questions. Thank you. 
 
(1615) 
 

Bill No. 39 — The Wildlife Habitat Protection 
Amendment Act, 1999 

 
The Chair: — I invite the minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Mr. Chairman, I have with us again Stuart 
Kramer, deputy minister; and behind me, Dennis Sherratt, 
director of fish and wildlife. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. Welcome to the minister and his 
officials. This isn’t a very long Bill but it has some interesting 
aspects to it. And there are certain parcels of land that are being 
removed and certain parcels that are being added. And I guess a 
general question, why these particular parcels . . . like what 
consideration was taken into place . . . took place to say these 
are the ones we’ll take out or these are the ones that we will 
add. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Mr. Chairman, I thank the hon. member for 
the question. Each year or periodically we get appeals from 
people who have land within The Wildlife Habitat Protection 



May 3, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 979 

Act. This process was put in the legislation . . . For an example 
if an individual had a quarter section next to his deeded quarter 
and that leased land may have his water supply, he may feel his 
operation would be more secure if he is able to purchase that 
quarter section of leased land to round out his private holdings. 
And we do have that appeal process in there. 
 
And we certainly want to work with landowners. And the land 
coming out of the Act is basically all part of the appeal process 
where individuals for one reason or other have applied to have 
the leased land taken out of the Act. And similarly the land 
going in has been deemed as important wildlife habitat. It’s 
vacant Crown land right now and so we’ve put about 2,600 
acres into the Act. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — What kind of consultation was done with 
provincial bodies, basically wildlife bodies of different sorts, in 
determining this switching that you’ve done? And if you could 
also sort of list the bodies that you consulted, if you did any 
consultation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Mr. Chairman, the appeal process that we 
have was designed with groups like the Saskatchewan Wildlife 
Federation, Nature Saskatchewan, stock growers’ association, 
and they concur . . . When somebody approaches us to appeal or 
to purchase a quarter, this process has been approved by these 
organizations. And basically they are onside wanting to help the 
individual landowners, at the same time protecting the wildlife 
habitat. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. I’m a person that’s always 
concerned when we have out-of-province bodies come in trying 
to tell us what to do in Saskatchewan. Was the world wildlife 
federation one of the bodies that you were involved with 
consultation on this issue? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — No. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And I must say I’m glad to hear 
that and I hope you keep that up. 
 
As you mentioned, this amendment adds some 2,600 acres to 
the Act, and part of the reason behind it is that it’s less 
expensive to conserve our natural areas than it is to try to 
restore them. Do you have a figure or a general cost number 
that you have to say it’s cheaper to go ahead and conserve that 
than to try to restore it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the member is 
probably aware that this is Crown land to begin with and The 
Wildlife Habitat Protection Act is very unique. It does not 
displace the existing agriculture uses such as grazing and 
haying. At the same time, the Act does not allow us in most 
circumstances to sell the land or allow breaking, clearing, and 
draining. And the lessee can continue to graze and hay these 
lands and at the same time to provide a very important role for 
wildlife. And in fact some of the best habitat in Saskatchewan is 
on these Crown lands. 
 
So we already own the land and by simply policy and 
management we’re able to preserve the habitat while at the 
same time accommodating the interests of agriculture. So that’s 
why it’s a very cheap process financially at least, to secure these 

lands. And it’s very well received by public across the province. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — I have a general question dealing with the 
management of these lands. Traditionally our native lands had a 
lot of animals roaming there that would do a lot of what you 
said pasturing, particularly the bison that we had in 
Saskatchewan. And if they didn’t sort of keep the grass down, 
do some work on it, our famous prairie fires from a century or 
three ago would go across the land and clear that off. 
 
Presently we have neither one of those two natural things 
occurring on a lot of this land where it isn’t pastured and, you 
know, we try very hard to control the fires from not going 
across there because of damage they may do to adjoining lands. 
 
Could you comment on the effect that has on the land when we 
no longer have those two main or important aspects taking 
place on that native land? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Well certainly with the advent of 
settlement, prairie fires are almost a thing of the past, thank 
goodness. But to accommodate lessees on these lands where 
trees may grow up, we allow for the clearing of, I believe it’s a 
50-foot or perhaps 80-foot fence line around the property so 
that the trees falling over aren’t knocking the fence down. 
 
We also allow for the use of large mowers to go around the 
existing poplar bluffs, cut off the sapling so that the whole 
quarter doesn’t turn into an aspen grove. And of course mowing 
the hay would also keep the shrubbery from expanding and 
taking over the remaining native grassland. 
 
So that type of management is dealt with on an individual basis. 
And if a lessee would like to do some of this, all he needs to do 
is contact us and we are quite flexible in that regard. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Good afternoon, Mr. 
Minister, once again. 
 
Mr. Minister, in reference to the whole wildlife habitat 
preservation, you’ve made some comments today, and so has 
my colleague, about the best way to use land. He’s made some 
references on this side of the House, he’s made some references 
to what kind of animals would graze naturally. Buffalo are not 
here but we know that deer are in place. Unless a piece of land 
is fenced off where deer cannot pass through, I think in some 
areas of this province there is a number of deer that do graze on 
these lands. 
 
That’s just a comment. And I don’t have as much a concern 
about that as far as fires go as some of the people in this House 
might because of what you’ve mentioned — you know, the 
lessee being able to use a mower, etc. — and that, in addition to 
wildlife grazing, I think does . . . certainly protects that land. 
 
Mr. Minister, is it possible for a specific area of wildlife habitat 
that exists right now to be turned over to the wildlife . . . fish 
and wildlife development fund if there is a dispute, for instance, 
on how that land is being used and there’s no resolve. If there’s 
a request for it to be turned over, would that be considered by 
your department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Generally it is not, but certainly if there’s 



980 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 1999 

individual cases we will consider it; and if there is an active 
case in the St. Brieux area of a half section which we are 
working with the local people as well as the Department of 
Agriculture to see how we might best accommodate the local 
communities’ interests. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m very happy to 
hear that there is ongoing consultation with that group of people 
because from what they explained to me, the area that they’re 
talking about is suited very well for wildlife habitat. 
 
And I think it’s important that when there is a drive for 
economic returns only going on throughout the world, that we 
do look closely at preserving our wildlife habitat and making 
sure that we have got a place in this province where wildlife can 
feel secure and where we can have some beauty surrounding us. 
 
So I thank you, Mr. Minister, that’s all the questions I have 
today. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Ms. Julé: — I want to just take this opportunity to thank the 
minister and his officials. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Mr. Chairman, I too would like to thank the 
very competent and capable people in our department for the 
great job they do; and I would also like to thank the hon. 
members for the very constructive questions. 
 

Bill No. 11 — The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital 
Corporations Amendment Act, 1999 

 
The Deputy Chair: — I invite the Minister of Finance to 
introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. With me to my left 
is Mr. Darcy Cherney, who is the director of investment 
services in the Department of Economic Development and 
Co-operation. And behind him is Mr. Bryon Burnett, who’s the 
assistant deputy minister of that department. And behind me is 
Mr. Marv Wisemiller, who is the senior investment analyst with 
that department. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Welcome, Minister, 
and officials. Mr. Minister, in the statement that was released 
when the second reading of the Bill was introduced, there were 
referrals to the fact that this Act and these amendments are 
required in order to respond to changes that had been made in 
federal legislation, that created an unlevel playing field, if you 
like, in terms of the venture capital programs across the 
country. 
 
Could you outline in summary what changes were made to the 
federal legislation that made these amendments required? 
 
(1630) 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes. I’m advised, Mr. Chair, that the 
amendments that are necessary to be consistent with federal 
legislation would be the amendment to clause 5(c), the 
amendment to clause 5(c.1), and the amendment . . . which is a 
repeal of subsections 13(3) and 13(4). 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. Minister, it was 
mentioned as well that over the past 10 years some $44 million 
has been invested through this vehicle in projects in the 
province. Can you update us in terms of the status of those 
projects at the current time? And I’m thinking in a general 
sense, are they continuing on or are they in existence? Have 
some not succeeded a general overview of the status of the 
projects? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, I’m advised, Mr. Chair, that of the 
pooled funds there were approximately seven projects, and 
about five of those are in place. One has been redeemed and one 
was sold. And then of the employee funds, there have been 
approximately 20, and 10 of those remain in place. And the 
majority of the rest have gone beyond the five-year time limit at 
which point they can be wound up without any tax liability. 
That is not the projects being wound up but the status of the 
investment that is held. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Minister, can you tell me, was the Free 
Press newspaper a part of . . . operate under one of these plans? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes. It operated under a pooled fund. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Can you tell me then, Minister, as we hear 
the fact that the Free Press newspaper organization has wound 
down, can you tell me what the status would be of that impact 
on the investors? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I’m advised that the working ventures fund 
which invested in the Free Press also invested in many other 
projects. And as a matter of fact, despite the failure of the Free 
Press venture, the share price recently went up. 
 
I mean obviously it would have some effect on the value of the 
shares but not so much as to negatively impact them. They still 
have actually gone up in price. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Minister, can you bring us up to speed as 
well in terms of the current status of the fund? What I’m 
thinking of . . . are there enough eligible projects for the fund to 
invest in; is the fund looking for increased investors or have 
there been restrictions placed on the investment pool because 
there is a shortage of eligible projects in the province — those 
types of statistics? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I’m advised that the working ventures fund 
had gone out of the market voluntarily in 1996 because they had 
more money than projects to invest in. But they have now 
entered the market again as they have other projects in mind for 
additional investment and they’re looking to raise more funds 
for investment. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — From your answer, Minister, I take it that 
there have been further projects come forward that are 
requesting investment by the fund — would that be fair — and 
as a response to that, the fund is now seeking further investors? 



May 3, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 981 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, that is correct. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Minister I appreciate 
the answer to our questions. We certainly agree that this 
legislation is mainly housekeeping in nature, and encourage 
investment in businesses and worthwhile projects in the 
province. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’d like to thank the 
officials from the Department of economic development and 
co-operation for their assistance today. And I’d also like to 
thank the member from Melfort and the opposition for their 
co-operation with respect to this Bill. 
 
And with that, I’d like to move that we report the Bill without 
amendment. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill 35 — The Land Information Services Facilitation Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill 30 — The Cemeteries Act, 1999 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill 31 — The Funeral and Cremation Services Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill 37 — The Snowmobile Amendment Act, 1999 
 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the Bill be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 38 — The Litter Control Amendment Act, 1999 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 
 

Bill No. 39 — The Wildlife Habitat Protection 
Amendment Act, 1999 

 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read for the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 11 — The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital 
Corporations Amendment Act, 1999 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
 (1645) 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training 

Vote 37 
 
The Chair: — I invite the minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Seated directly to 
my right is the deputy minister, Dan Perrins. Directly behind 
him is Lily Stonehouse, the assistant deputy minister. Seated 
directly behind me is Mae Boa, the executive director of finance 
and operations. 
 
In the back row is Brady Salloum, executive director of student 
financial assistance branch; Margaret Ball, the assistant 
director, facilities planning; John Biss, executive director, 
university services branch; and Jim Benning, president and 
CEO (chief executive officer) of Saskatchewan 
Communications Network. 
 
Subvote (PE01) 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
Welcome, Mr. Minister, and all of your officials. I look forward 
to, I guess, just getting warmed up in the remaining time that 
we have before we recess, but we’ll gladly continue this later 
on. 
 
Mr. Minister, as I look at your department and I look at the 
expansion that your department has undertaken as a result 
probably of the federal transfers of responsibility for the 
apprenticeship program — responsibilities for job training and 
skills training — to the provincial government, I see a 
department that has almost doubled in size, Mr. Minister, noting 
that the year before, your full-time equivalents were about 223 
and now we’re sitting at around 434. 
 
Could you tell the people of the province and ourselves as the 
opposition the numbers of people that you have added to your 
full-time equivalents? Were these transfers from various federal 
departments? Were there expansions of your existing 



982 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 1999 

departments? And how much further expansion is needed to 
deliver a proper post-secondary program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you. First of all, your 
observations are correct that there has been some major changes 
in our department as a result of the changes in the training part 
of my portfolio actually with the federal government getting out 
of training as of January 1 of this year. It has largely been 
handed to the provinces. 
 
First of all, as of January 1 we took over 114 staff from HRDC 
(Human Resources Development Canada). That is the training 
part of the federal government’s training programs. And also 
we rolled into the Department of Post-Secondary Education, 74 
staff from the New Careers Corporation. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, as far 
as the responsibility is concerned now within your department 
for the skills training and the programs that were previously 
under the federal government, have you taken over complete 
responsibility? Are we looking at any further enhancement to 
the program to enable us to do what the federal is no longer 
funding? Or are we already completely in control of all of the 
skills training and related programs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Yes, largely we are in complete control 
now — the provinces are — of the training with the exception 
of the Employment Insurance payment. That piece remains with 
the federal government. The skills training . . . the skills piece 
and the training is all under the responsibility of the province 
now. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you. Mr. Minister, when we take a 
look at the number of opportunities that now are available for 
Saskatchewan students, could you give us an idea as to the 
number of training and employment opportunities that we have 
for Saskatchewan students? How many people are actually 
involved in the opportunities that your government has now set 
forward? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — If I understand your question accurately, 
26,700 would be the number of students . . . the number of 
training opportunities. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, we note that in the revenue side 
of government, of course there is a significant amount of money 
that’s transferred from the federal government in the CHST 
(Canada Health and Social Transfers) and equalization factor 
and others. Is there any portion of monies that we, as a 
province, obtain from the federal government that is still 
transfers for post-secondary education? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — This money has been withdrawn so 
quickly by the federal government that it’s hard to keep track. 
We believe — well, not we believe . . . Accurately there is only 
37.2 million that we receive under the Labour Market 
Development Agreement. 
 
To be absolutely clear, this isn’t for skills training — just 
because your question was around skills training — it’s solely 
program money. So it’s money delivered for programs, not for 
the actual skills training. 
 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. You must have 
been reading my notes because my next note indicates a 
question about the Labour Market Development Agreement. 
 
Could you explain how that agreement was put into place and 
what role Saskatchewan now is going to play in administering, 
you’ve indicated, $37 million that has been transferred to 
Saskatchewan for the development of this program? What will 
students be able to see in this program in enhancing 
post-secondary education? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Okay. Specifically the LMDA (Labour 
Market Development Agreement), the agreement doesn’t 
enhance any programming. What it does is it provides income 
support; it subsidizes employment and provides career and 
employment counselling and career searches, if you will. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I 
notice in the Estimates you had a section referred to as strategic 
initiatives in the ’98-99 Estimates and there is no such 
allocation of any funding in that area. How will this affect what 
used to take place, and what kinds of things will no longer be 
able to take place because of the removal of funding for 
strategic initiatives? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — First of all, it was a three-year 
federal-provincial program funded largely for projects — that 
three years is obviously completed now — and from those 
projects we’ve learned a great deal of things. But we’ve 
incorporated largely into our career and employment services 
those projects that we found to be beneficial so it’s now . . . it 
now largely falls under our career and employment services. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, one 
of the other departments that you have indicated that was being 
phased out over the last couple years, of course, has been the 
New Careers Corporation. 
 
And we also note that of course the funding of four and a half 
million dollars has also been moved into various other sectors. 
You’ve also indicated in my . . . I think the first question that I 
asked you that the employees from New Careers Corporation 
have also been transferred into the existing departments. 
 
The question is much more general in nature, Mr. Minister. 
New Careers served a great need in many parts of 
Saskatchewan. I’ve had contact by individual communities who 
have said that New Careers Corporation was responsible for 
providing the trainees for job sites in various communities. 
 
And I’ve heard from school division boards who’ve had 
projects that have been completed; I’ve heard from 
communities who’ve had playground equipment constructed. 
Facilities, in fact, have been constructed that used New Careers 
Corporation as the entity, even though the bills and the 
expenses of that corporation were paid for by the local level. 
 
What has replaced that, Mr. Minister, and is there something 
that communities in the province of Saskatchewan can count on 
from the post-secondary and job training and skills acquisitions 
areas very similar to New Careers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Most of the programs and more will be 



May 3, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 983 

included, largely in our Can-Sask career and employment 
services centres. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order. It now being very near 5 o’clock, 
the committee will recess until 7 p.m. this evening. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
 
 



 

 


