





























































Hansard: March 17, 1999


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 37 
 March 17, 1999 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I have a petition to present on behalf of residents of 
Saskatchewan. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to have the Workers’ 
Compensation Board Act amended whereby benefits and 
pensions are reinstated to disenfranchised widows and 
whereby all revoked pensions are reimbursed to them 
retroactively with interest to April 17, 1985. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition come from the 
communities of Melville and Yorkton. I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present today. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
finally show a serious commitment to roads and highways 
in Saskatchewan by urging it to increase its highway and 
road construction and maintenance budget by $300 million 
over the next five years as called for in the Saskatchewan 
Party election platform. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

These petitions come from the Gainsborough, Carnduff, and 
Saskatoon areas of the province. Mr. Speaker, I so present. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, as well to present a petition to the 
Assembly, reading the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to have the Workers’ 
Compensation Board Act amended whereby benefits and 
pensions are reinstated to disenfranchised widows and 
whereby all revoked pensions are reimbursed to them 
retroactively with interest to April 17, 1985. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, the petitions I have in my hand are signed by 
individuals from the Kamsack, Regina, Yorkton areas of the 
province. I so present. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
today to present petitions on behalf of Saskatchewan citizens 
who are very agitated with the Crown Construction Tendering 
Agreement. The petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to end 
its unfair tendering policies and immediately cancel the 
Crown Construction Tendering Agreement. 
 

And the signatures on this petition are from Regina, Mr. 
Speaker. I so present. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to rise 
again today to present a petition on behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call on federal and provincial 
governments to dedicate a significantly greater portion of 
fuel tax revenues toward road maintenance and 
construction so that Saskatchewan residents may have a 
safe highway system that meets their needs. 
 

Mr. Speaker this petition has been signed by the good folks out 
in the Lanigan, Plunkett area. And I so present. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 
petitions on behalf of people that are concerned about the cost 
price squeeze on the farm. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call upon provincial and 
federal governments to immediately take steps to end 
unfair world subsidies and provide farmers with prompt 
relief from declining incomes and act as watchdogs against 
rising input costs which are harming the rural economy. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Those who’ve signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
communities of Webb, Gull Lake, and Herbert. I so present. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I join with my 
colleagues here today in bringing forward petitions. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call upon the provincial 
government and SaskTel being wholly accountable to the 
people of Saskatchewan to immediately take steps to 
provide cellular coverage to this area so that residents can 
travel in winter with some assurance of safety. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed these petitions are 
from the Coronach, Willow Bunch, Rockglen area of the 
province. I so present. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present a petition 
this morning . . . or this afternoon from petitioners from 
Battleford and North Battleford. And the prayer of relief reads 
as follows: 
 

Your petitioners humbly pray that the intersection of 
Highway 40 and Highway 16 be relocated in order to 



38 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 1999 

alleviate the unsafe condition and congestion at the 
entrance to the city of North Battleford. 
 

I so present. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
my pleasure again to present petitions on behalf of people who 
are most concerned with children with special needs. And I 
shall read the prayer as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide essential funding and ensure the delivery of 
scientifically proven diagnostic assessment and 
programming for children with learning disabilities in 
order that they have access to an education that meets their 
needs and allows them to reach their full potential. 
 

And all the signatures today are from the Little Red River 
School on the Little Red Reserve, Mr. Speaker. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 

Of citizens of the province of Saskatchewan petitioning the 
Assembly on the following matters: 
 
To cause the government to end its unfair tendering 
policies and immediately cancel the Crown Construction 
Tendering Agreement; 
 
To have the Workers’ Compensation Board Act amended 
to reinstate benefits and pensions to disenfranchised 
widows; 
 
To cause the government to provide sufficient funding to 
staff and operate the dialysis machine located in Yorkton; 
 
To cause the government to a chelation therapy . . . to add 
chelation therapy to the ensured services covered under 
medicare; 
 
To call on the federal and provincial governments to 
dedicate a greater portion of fuel tax revenues towards road 
maintenance and construction; 
 
To relocate Highway No. 40 to alleviate congestion at 
North Battleford; 
 
To cause the government to provide essential funding and 
ensure delivery of diagnostic assessment and programming 
for children with learning disabilities. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
give notice that I shall on Friday next move first reading of a 
Bill, The Saskatchewan Farm Security Amendment Act, 1999. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 

shall on day no. 8 ask the government the following question: 
 

Regarding the proposed development by American retail 
giant Wal-Mart to construct a retail outlet and parking area 
in Moose Jaw on land used by endangered burrowing owls 
for habitat: when will the Department of Environment and 
Resource Management decide whether an environmental 
assessment is necessary for this and related projects; if an 
environmental assessment or impact study is deemed 
necessary, will Wal-Mart be responsible for the cost; what 
steps is the department taking to ensure that all parties 
involved are in compliance with legislation protecting 
endangered species such as the burrowing owl; has the 
department studied what impact the loss of the birds would 
have on the eco-tourism potential of the city of Moose Jaw 
and similar projects in the Thunder Creek constituency? 
 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 8 ask the government the 
following questions, and Mr. Speaker, they may seem repetitive 
and that’s because I’ve resubmitted these one page at a time: 
 

What number of children were diagnosed as severely 
learning disabled in 1989? 
 

And with your indulgence, I just state straight through to 1998 
on different pages. 
 
Will the minister provide documentation that proves that the 
funding formula introduced in 1989 because of the growing 
numbers of severely learning disabled children has, indeed, 
better served the educational needs of these students than the 
old formula? 
 
And lastly, Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Education: will the 
minister promptly table research that proves that the educational 
interventions offered in the province of Saskatchewan to 
severely learning disabled children are successful, and specify 
and describe what measurements the Department of Education 
is using to determine “success”? 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice as well 
that I shall on Friday next move first reading of a Bill, The 
Trade Union Amendment Act (Repealing Successor Rights). As 
well, Mr. Speaker, to give notice that on Friday next move a 
first reading of a Bill, The Saskatchewan Right to Work Act. 
And, Mr. Speaker, give notice that on Friday next move first 
reading of a Bill, The Democratic Unionism Act. 
 
I so present. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure 
to introduce to you, and to all members of the legislature, a 
delegation here today as part of the celebrations of national 
Francophone Week. They are seated on the east side of your 
gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The members of your delegation, I think in part because I have 
fewer names than the number of people here, are Florent 
Bilodeau and Francine Powers with the Division scolaire 
francophone; Denis Desgagné, Lorraine Archambault, 



March 17, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 39 

Marjolaine Régis, Gracia Bellerose, Joanne Perreault from the 
ACFC (Association culturelle franco-canadienne de la 
Saskatchewan); Thierry Sarny, Reda Loomis, Manon Guy, 
Claire Bélanger-Parker, from the Association 
canadienne-française de Regina; René Archambault from 
OMLO (official minority language office) and Sask Ed. Ron 
Kruzeniski was to be here, but I don’t see him. Denise 
Boudreau, and from the Commission Culturelle Fransaskoise, 
Roger Lepage is here, and Ronald Labrecque, and Treena 
Abramson from the Office of French Language Co-ordination. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask you to join me and all others in welcoming 
this delegation on this important week. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of 
the official opposition, I would also like to welcome the group 
from the French community, the Fransaskois, to the Assembly 
of Saskatchewan and I would ask all members of the Assembly 
to again welcome them and show their appreciation for the hard 
work and the dedication that the people of the ACFC and the 
whole French community have for Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Yes, I also wish to welcome the delegation 
which is here to help us observe la Semaine de la francophonie. 
And they were in North Battleford last week to open L’École 
Père Mercure, which I’ll be speaking of in a minute. 
 
I also wish to introduce to the Assembly, Mr. Joel Peterson, 
who I’d ask to stand, and I would advise hon. members to 
please welcome him as he is the man who has promised to 
turbocharge the Liberal campaign. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Now I am sure hon. members will 
want to come to order and be sure that they clearly hear who are 
the guests being introduced today. 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today I would like to introduce to you and through you to all 
members in the Assembly four special guests from the 
Saskatchewan Applied Science Technologists and Technicians. 
They had been with us, some of them, earlier as we were 
birthing their legislation through this chamber and are certainly 
looking forward to a special ceremony this evening. Many of 
my colleagues will join me in being with them tonight. 
 
But today I would like to introduce to you John Walker, 
president of SASTT (Saskatchewan Applied Science 
Technologists and Technicians), James Hoffman, vice-president 
of SASTT, Charles Brimley from the Canadian Council of 
Technicians and Technologists in Ottawa — and welcome him 
to snowy spring in Saskatchewan — and Neil Johnson, the past 
president of SASTT. 
 
I’d ask all colleagues to join me in welcoming them today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet I 
would also like to draw to the attention of the Assembly, 
through you to my colleagues, the presence in the gallery 
opposite, 32 public servants who are with us this afternoon to 
observe proceedings. They are from the Public Service 
Commission, Justice, Liquor and Gaming, Economic and 
Co-operative Development, Social Services, Intergovernmental 
and Aboriginal Affairs, and Energy and Mines. 
 
They’re the men and women who provide expertise and 
technical support to formulate policy, consult and serve the 
public, and answer questions that are put to us in the Assembly 
from our members opposite. I would ask all members to join in 
welcoming them as they go through the proceedings today and 
then have a tour. And we’ll have information provided to them 
on the role of the Assembly and what is accomplished in this 
noble building. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all colleagues to join in welcoming our 32 
public servants with us today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you and 
through you to the members of the Assembly I’d like to 
introduce a lady who has joined us in the Assembly today, Ms. 
Rose Polsom. And I believe most members are very familiar 
with Ms. Polsom’s efforts. But I would also on behalf of all 
members like to extend to Ms. Polsom our deepest sympathy on 
the recent passing of her dear husband. We trust that you will 
indeed just appreciate our sympathy and God be with you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to introduce to you and through you two constituents of 
mine from the Saltcoats constituency, Lyle and Jean Straker. If 
you would stand. Lyle and Jean Straker are successful farmers 
from the Saltcoats constituency but are also finding it hard 
times to survive on the farm as every other farmer in the 
province is. 
 
So I would ask the Assembly to join with me and welcome 
them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I want to join with 
my colleague, the member for Moosomin, to welcome Ms. 
Polsom to the Legislative Assembly today and to let her know 
that all members feel equally and our hearts go out to her in 
these very difficult times for her. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
Liberal caucus I’d like to welcome a delegation here from 
SASTT today, but in particular Mr. Neil Johnson. Because of 
his presence here today, that makes two of us that were raised in 
that wonderful community of Liberty, Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



40 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 1999 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

National Francophone Week 
 

Mr. Kasperski: — Merci, Monsieur le Président. Je voudrais 
announcer que le semaine du quinze au vingt-et-un mars a été 
officiellement désignée Semaine de la francophonie en 
Saskatchewan. Je suis heureux de souligner à l’Assemblée que 
la semaine est placée cette année sous le théme, “La 
fancophonie canadienne: un passé composé vers un futur 
simple.” 
 
Les francophones de la Saskatchewan ont tout lieu d’être fiers 
de leur passé. Comment ne pas admirer le courage de ces 
premiers colons francophones qui, avant même la formation de 
la province, sont venus de la France, de la Belgique, de la 
Suisse et de Québec pour habiter ce grand pays solitaire? 
Affrontant l’inconnu, ils sont venus chercher ici une vie 
meilleure pour eux-mêmes, leurs familles et leurs descendants. 
 
Ils ont légué à leurs descendants une langue, une culture, des 
institutions que ceux-ci, grâce à leur dynamisme, leur vitaliteé 
et leur vigueur culturelle, ont le ferme intention de préserver, 
d’améliorer et de moderniser pour le plus grand profit de la 
Saskatchewan dans son ensemble et l’edification des siècles à 
venir. 
 
Puissent les Francophones de la Saskatchewan continuer à 
prospérer et à servir nous touts leurs concitoyens. Merci. 
 
(Translation: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to announce 
that the week of March 15-21 has been officially designated 
Francophone Week in Saskatchewan. I am pleased to inform 
the Assembly that the week is being celebrated this year around 
the theme, “Canada’s Francophone Communities — From a 
Rich Past to a Shared Future.” 
 
Saskatchewan’s Francophones have every reason to be proud of 
their past. How can one not admire the courage of those first 
French-speaking settlers, who, even before the creation of the 
province, came from France, Belgium, Switzerland, and from 
Quebec, to live in this great solitary land? Confronting the 
unknown, they came here seeking a better life for themselves, 
their families and their descendants. 
 
Having lived their lives to the fullest, they passed on to their 
descendants a language, a culture and institutions which those 
descendants, through their dynamism, vitality and cultural 
vigour, have the firm intention to preserve, improve and 
modernize for the greater good of Saskatchewan as a whole and 
to build on for centuries to come. 
 
May Saskatchewan’s Francophones continue to prosper and be 
of service to their fellow citizens. Thank you.) 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s my pleasure to rise today on behalf of the official opposition 
to recognize National Francophone Week. During this week we 
recognize and celebrate all francophones, especially those living 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
La Communauté Fransaskoise est très riche en tout ce qui 
concerne la langue et la culture. Cette communauté forte 

apporte à tous et à toutes qui y ont contact une éxperience 
enrichissante et fructuese. 
 
(Translation: The francophone community in Saskatchewan 
celebrates a rich culture and language. This culturally strong 
community brings to each and every person involved a fruitful 
and enriching experience.) 
 
Alors, profite en professeurs et éléves, des ressources 
culturelles que la Saskatchewan a à offrir! 
 
(Translation: Teachers and students, benefit from the cultural 
resources Saskatchewan has to offer you.) 
 
Célébrez la culture Fransaskoise, decouvrez-la et tout ce qu’elle 
a à nous apprendre. 
 
(Translation: Celebrate the francophone culture in our province; 
discover it and all that you can learn from it.) 
 
 Enrich your lives and the lives of your students. The youth is 
the key in preserving the French culture. 
 
On behalf of my colleagues in the Saskatchewan Party, I wish 
an excellent week to all the Fransaskois and Fransaskoise, and 
to every person who participates in this cultural experience. 
 
Merci. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is Semaine de la 
francophonie, National Francophone Week. It is being marked 
in The Battlefords with the recent opening of Ecole Père 
Mercure. 
 
From the very earliest days of settlement in The Battlefords, 
Jackfish, Delmas, and Bresaylor districts, the francophone 
population has been a vibrant and much appreciated addition to 
the rich cultural fabric of the northwest. 
 
Father Cochin was one of the most important figures of the 
story of 1885 and the founder of the community which bears his 
name. 
 
He was followed as priest at St. Rose de Lima Parish in Cochin 
by Pere Mercure. Father Mercure was a tireless promoter of the 
French language. Due to his efforts many young people in our 
area participated in student exchanges in France. Pere 
Mercure’s fight for French rights eventually resulted in the 
Supreme Court of Canada decision which cemented the rights 
of francophones in Western Canada. 
 
The slogan of Ecole Pere Mercure is “Hier Aujourd’hui 
Demain.” With its 20 students the school will help ensure that 
the French population of The Battlefords is indeed not only a 
proud part of our past and present but of our future as well. 
 
I ask all members to join with me in saluting the students and 
staff of Ecole Pere Mercure and of all of our French neighbours 
in this National Francophone Week. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



March 17, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 41 

Saskatchewan Applied Science Technologists and 
Technicians Act Proclaimed 

 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today is one happy 
day for Saskatchewan Applied Science Technologists and 
Technicians or SASTT for short. And that’s because today the 
Act which defines SASTT as a professional association, is 
being proclaimed and celebrated. 
 
The significance of this Act is that now, like architects, 
surveyors, engineers, and other professions, SASTT will at long 
last be able to regulate itself. And self-regulation is a privilege 
delegated to a professional group by the legislature only when it 
has strong professional and ethical standards for members that 
clearly serve the public interest. 
 
And that’s exactly what SASTT does day in and day out across 
Saskatchewan on oil rigs, in mines, hospitals, in agriculture and 
other sectors, they provide environmental monitoring, quality 
inspection of construction sites, geotechnical investigations of 
proposed sites, safety inspections of clinical medical equipment, 
among other duties. Modern tasks and necessary ones for the 
welfare of Saskatchewan people. 
 
And that’s why we celebrate the achievements of SASTT and 
their contributions to Saskatchewan today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

International Year of the Old Person 
 

Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
rise on behalf of the official opposition in recognition of the 
International Year of the Old Person. I’m not sure if my 
colleagues chose me to speak about this for a particular reason, 
Mr. Speaker, but regardless, it is to my delight to rise in 
awareness of this auspicious occasion. 
 
The United Nations General Assembly declared 1999 as the 
International Year of the Old Person as the world population is 
aging and as the change in demographics holds a special social 
economic and spiritual significance. 
 
The United Nations theme is towards a society for all ages, with 
a goal to foster international awareness of the importance of 
seniors’ roles in society and the need for intergenerational 
respect and support. 
 
This theme highlights the importance of initiating dialogue 
between all generations, and the co-operation on seniors’ issues, 
the need to involve seniors in decision making, and the 
recognition that seniors play an important and beneficial role in 
Canadian society. 
 
The International Year of the Old Person, 1999, offers 
community across the country an opportunity to recognize 
seniors and celebrate their achievements and contributions. In 
relation to this event Health Canada has made funds available 
specifically for local Saskatchewan communities in support of 
the International Year of the Old Person. 
 
I would like to commend the United Nations General Assembly 
for attributing importance to seniors all over the world. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

International Women’s Day 
 

Ms. Lorje: — On International Women’s Day, Mr. Speaker, I 
sent a cartoon to several of my women colleagues. It featured a 
cigar chomping CEO (chief executive officer) saying to his 
assembled male executives, “Gentlemen, we must cut expenses 
in half, so I’m firing each of you and replacing you with a 
woman.” 
 
That cartoon is a reminder of the unfortunate reality that women 
still earn on average about 73 per cent of what men earn. 
Nevertheless, the social and economic barriers that have 
restricted women for centuries are coming down. Slowly, but 
they’re changing. 
 
But not everywhere. The leader of the party that dares not speak 
its name, Mr. Hermanson, said last week that he’s having 
trouble finding women candidates because quote, “their 
concerns are with the home and they don’t like dealing with 
conflict.” What an unfathomable comment. 
 
Mr. Hermanson and his macho colleagues should realize that 
women are more than delighted to do battle with quaint and 
archaic attitudes like that precisely because our concerns are 
with the home as well as the workplace and our society. 
Sometimes promoting our concerns does lead to conflict and 
that’s too bad. But I assure Mr. Hermanson that women 
politicians on this side of the House are more than equal to the 
task. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

St. Patrick’s Day 
 

Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s entirely 
by happy coincidence that today we announce Francophone 
Week on St. Patrick’s Day, but it is an interesting coincidence 
nonetheless. In Europe, from which come both cultures, the 
momentum today is towards European union. 
 
Currencies, trading barriers, language barriers, even borders are 
breaking down in part of a world that has spawned much 
conflict in the millennium we are leaving behind. The push 
towards union is difficult but inevitable in a world getting 
smaller, and that is good. However, union does not include loss 
of historical, cultural, and lingual distinctiveness. The heritage 
of language and laughter the Irish have given Canada and the 
world will be with us always. 
 
This day when we celebrate not so much Ireland but the travails 
and triumphs of the Irish far from home we should remember 
descendants of Irish immigrants make up more than 10 per cent 
of Canada’s population. They grace us with their sprightliness 
and their grit not to mention their enjoyment of life. 
 
So on this St. Patrick’s Day and from this member of the Irish 
clan, I wish you all the luck of the Irish. Erin Go Braugh. 



42 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 1999 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Hafford Hospital 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. My question 
is for the Minster of Health. 
 
Madam Minister, one of the communities that is very concerned 
about the future of its hospital is Hafford in the Redberry 
constituency. One week from today the Saskatchewan Party 
will be hosting a town hall meeting in Hafford to discuss the 
future of health care in that community. We have asked the 
Parkland Health Board to release its three-year strategic plan for 
the district so we can see what your government’s plans are for 
the Hafford Hospital. 
 
Madam Minister, the Chair of the Parkland Health Board has 
told us that he has sent it to Regina but they’re not allowed to 
release it until it’s approved or changed by the Department of 
Health. Madam Minister, what kind of local control is that? 
What are you hiding? 
 
Do you plan to close the Hafford Hospital? Will you release the 
three-year strategic plan for the Parkland Health District? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, once again our friends in the Tory Party 
are using this list of 36 rural hospital closures. I want to say to 
everyone assembled, including the people that are listening 
today, that it is not the intentions of this government to close 
any rural hospitals. In fact, Mr. Speaker, what the members 
opposite may not know is that in Hafford we have just added 
five long-term care beds to the Hafford facility. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that these people are prepared to do and 
say anything in order to get themselves a few more seats in this 
provincial Assembly once the election is called. I can assure the 
good folks of Hafford that they will continue to have their 
hospital beds in Hafford. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The ministers 
resort to misinformation whenever they don’t want to provide 
the information. I’d like to clarify two of those misinformations 
— we’re neither friends nor Tories. 
 
Madam Minister, Hafford was one of the communities on the 
hit list . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order, order. Now hon. members 
will recognize . . . Order, order. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Hafford was 
one of the communities on the hit list released by your 
department a couple of weeks ago, yet you refuse to say what 
exactly the plans are for the Hafford Hospital. You’ve put a gag 
order on the district health board. You’ve said no changes will 
be made to rural hospitals without community support. Why 
don’t you tell us exactly what your plans are for the Hafford 
Hospital and see if it has community support? 
 
Madam Minister, before you sewed her mouth shut, your junior 

minister admitted that the NDP (New Democratic Party) plans 
to close more rural hospitals. Which ones, Madam Minister? Is 
Hafford one of them? 
 
Madam Minister, what are you hiding? What are your plans for 
the Hafford Hospital and why won’t you release the three-year 
strategic plans? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. If it walks 
like a duck and if it sounds like a duck, it must be a duck. This 
member was elected under the Tory banner in 1991 and 1995, 
he came here as a Tory and, as far as I’m concerned, he is 
elected as a Tory. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Now I know that these people want to 
be . . . they want to get themselves elected and they will say and 
do anything . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Now hon. members will 
recognize that the question was a difficult time being heard, and 
so it is with the answer. And I’ll ask for the co-operation of all 
members of the House. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, what I have said, and I 
will say it again: this government has no intentions of closing 
any rural hospitals. Now I’ve got a report here from the 
Leader-Post March 3, 1999, and I quote: 
 

Saskatchewan Party Leader Elwin Hermanson couldn’t 
guarantee his party would keep the doors open at all 36 
hospitals with a low average daily bed . . . 
 

In fact he would have to do an evaluation. 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what is their position? We’ve said we’re not 
going to close rural hospitals. What’s their position? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister’s 
denials remind me of the Assiniboia by-election in 1987 when 
the members opposite ran around the constituency saying the 
government of the day was going to close every hospital. Well 
in ’91 the government changed and they did it — they closed 
the hospitals. 
 
Madam Minister, we don’t know what the NDP plans are about 
closing the Hafford Hospital. But one thing in that constituency 
that we do know is going to close real soon and that’s the NDP 
MLA’s (Member of the Legislative Assembly) constituency 
office right after the next election. 
 
Madam Minister, people in Hafford are concerned about the 
future of their hospital. They have a right to know what your 
plans are. Why does the plan have to be sent to Regina first? 
What are you hiding in the three-year strategic study? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



March 17, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 43 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, we have no plans to close 
rural hospitals. What I would like to be able to ask the member, 
as far as I can see from a report in the Moosomin newspaper 
dated Monday, November 23, 1998, the Moosomin mayor asks 
the Leader of the Tory Party, Mr. Hermanson, he said if you’re 
going to go into this election and talk about health care, I think 
you should have a plan. I think you should be talking about a 
plan not a study. 
 
What does Mr. Hermanson say? Quote, “We’ve been able to 
identify some of the problem, but we haven’t been able to 
identify the solution.” 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we aren’t going to close any rural hospitals. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Farm Land Security Board Ruling 
 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Now I’ll ask the 
co-operation of members on both sides of the House to allow 
the hon. member for Saltcoats to be able to put his question — 
including his colleagues. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Justice. Mr. Minister, just a few 
months ago your Ag minister got up in front of the cameras and 
declared the farm crisis over. Well it may come as a surprise to 
the NDP government, but the farm crisis is still with us and it 
may be worse than we thought. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan 
farmers are fighting for their lives through the crisis the NDP 
says doesn’t exist. 
 
And given the woefully inadequate farm aid package the NDP 
negotiated with the federal government, one option many 
farmers are being forced to consider is selling out, except The 
Saskatchewan Farm Security Act makes it impossible to sell 
your farm to anyone living outside Saskatchewan. It’s a 
Catch-22, Mr. Speaker. Farmers can’t survive in NDP 
Saskatchewan and yet the government is stopping them from 
selling their land to the highest bidder. 
 
Mr. Minister, do you think restricting farmers from selling their 
land to the highest bidder is somehow good for the future of 
agriculture in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
say that in Saskatchewan we have had very orderly legislation 
to deal with farmland ownership and I think it’s quite clear that 
during the Tory years this legislation was expanded and revised. 
And we’re actually dealing with legislation from that time when 
some of the members opposite were part of the government. 
 
The Farm Land Security Board is an independent quasi-judicial 
board that has been legislatively charged with the 
administration of corporate and non-resident farmland 
ownership matters. Members of the legislature must respect the 
independence of the board to adjudicate these applications 
without interference. And I would say that if there’s further 

information that can be presented to that kind of a board then it 
should be presented there, but this is an independent board. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Minister, that board appointed by you, your supporters are 
acting under laws of the Government of Saskatchewan. So you 
can change them; you have that power. 
 
Mr. Minister, Lyle Straker is a constituent of mine. He and his 
family farm the land his family homesteaded at the beginning of 
the century. Lyle wanted to pass the farm on to his children too, 
but the farm economy is so bad that Lyle’s kids don’t want to 
farm. So Lyle and Jean are looking to sell their farm. In fact, 
another farmer 60 miles down the road has made them a very 
fair offer, an offer that will give the Strakers a decent return. 
 
But Mr. Speaker, the NDP government says it’s illegal to make 
the sale because the buyer lives in Manitoba. Mr. Minister, this 
is ridiculous. Your NDP government policies are driving people 
off the land, and your laws are keeping them from selling their 
land at a fair price. 
 
Manitoba and Alberta have no restrictions on Canadians buying 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Now the hon. member’s been 
extremely lengthy in his preamble. And I’ll ask him to go 
directly to his question now. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, will 
you support the Saskatchewan Party legislation allowing 
farmers to sell their land to any Canadian citizen regardless of 
where they live? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we have set up an orderly 
process through an independent board to deal with these 
matters, and the farm ownership provisions under The 
Saskatchewan Farm Security Act allow Canadian non-residents 
to acquire up to half a section, 320 acres, without Farm Land 
Security Board approval. The board will also accommodate 
non-resident purchases above that limit if the result doesn’t 
negatively impact the farm community. 
 
It can’t depart from the intent of the Act for the benefit of a 
particular vendor. The forum for dealing with this matter is with 
that board. If there is further information that’s available then 
the matter should be brought back to the board. We’ve set up an 
orderly process to do that — that’s how we do it in 
Saskatchewan. And I think that’s the remedy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Grain Handlers’ Strike 
 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
next question is for the Minister of Agriculture or his designate. 
Mr. Minister, farmers are facing a full-blown crisis with grain 
prices approaching historical lows. Unfortunately it didn’t help 
that the NDP government refused to stand up for farmers while 
Ottawa was coming up with a totally inadequate package. 
 



44 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 1999 

And, Mr. Speaker, it only gets worse. Now farmers are facing 
yet another threat to their livelihoods. This week 70 striking 
Canadian Grain Commission workers in Vancouver have shut 
down the movement of grain across the prairies. Farmers are 
fighting to keep their farms afloat in the midst of a major crisis 
in agriculture, and now we have 70 strikers holding up the 
entire agriculture industry for ransom. The situation is 
absolutely ridiculous and has to stop. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, what is your government doing to bring an 
immediate end to the grain handlers’ strike on the west coast 
and to ensure farmers are not held responsible for additional 
expenses as a result of the strike? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: —Mr. Speaker, the minister in charge of 
Highways . . . I believe the minister in charge of Agriculture is 
not with us today. The government has communicated at 
various levels to federal authorities who are in charge of this 
particular matter that we want this strike to be completed and 
the blockage, the stoppage, ceased as quickly as possible. We 
cannot sustain the loss of markets and the loss of income for 
Saskatchewan farmers at a very critical time as it is now. We 
want this settled and settled quickly, and if not, legislation 
should be considered because the economy of Saskatchewan 
demands it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, I’m 
glad to hear you say that but I kind of wonder if you’ve called 
your friend, Mr. Chrétien, to put an end to this nonsense. 
 
Mr. Premier, the fact of the matter is that the NDP refuse to 
negotiate on a federal farm aid package until it was a done deal. 
Then you refused to help fund the aid program until the public 
pressure got too hot. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the grain handlers went on strike for the first 
time in January, the NDP did nothing. Now the province has put 
the road bans on; the farmers couldn’t get their grain to the 
elevator even if there wasn’t a strike. Mr. Speaker, following 
question period today, the Sask Party will be moving an 
emergency motion calling on the federal government to 
immediately legislate striking west coast grain workers back to 
work so the farmers can move their grain once again. 
 
Mr. Premier, will you and your government finally stand up for 
Saskatchewan farmers by supporting this motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I must answer the hon. 
member by speaking first to the preface of this question. I think 
Mr. Hermanson and the Saskatchewan Party — so-called the 
Tory Party — probably did the most damaging infliction of hurt 
on the farmers of Saskatchewan when Mr. Hermanson went to 
Ottawa at the time when the Minister of Agriculture and the 
time that I and others of the members of this cabinet were 
arguing with Ottawa, urging for a proper farm aid program. 
Your leader was in Ottawa saying don’t believe the 
Government of Saskatchewan. We’ve got the money. And in 

the consequence, we are stuck with a Bill which is unfair to all 
the taxpayers and most unfair to the people who are farmers 
themselves who have to pay the biggest chunk of their own 
relief. 
 
You say you’re acting in the best interests of the farmers; I’m 
telling you, you went out there and you damaged the farmers by 
that kind of cheap politics and we’re not going to play cheap 
politics like you are. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Funding for Regina Health District 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 
the Minister of Health. Can the minister tell us if she is going to 
provide the $40 million for the Regina Health District to cover 
their cost overruns on the Plains, and more importantly, how 
much more do they feel the Regina Health District needs to 
make the Pasqua and General hospitals first class tertiary 
centres would be? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the 
member very much for the question. As I indicated yesterday 
the cost overruns that these folks are associating with the Plains 
amount to about $12 million. Those costs are associated with 
some upgrading of building code and fire safety. In addition the 
Regina Health District has also over and above Project ’98, 
enhanced services to the people in Regina and southern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The member may not know this but the MRI (magnetic 
resonance imaging) has been installed and it’s becoming 
operational. That’s an added cost. 
 
The member may not know that we have a new cardiac cath lab 
which strictly helps those people with cardiac difficulties get 
access to service very, very quickly. 
 
We have a burn unit. We have a new mental health facility. We 
have a women’s health facility. We have new space for a spiral 
CAT (computerized axial tomography) scans. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, the people of southern Saskatchewan 
have access to much better technology and health services now 
in this city and I wonder why that member is opposed to it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — And, Madam Minister, you forgot to add that 
you have unprecedented waiting lists in this province. Add that 
to your long list of accomplishments. 
 
Madam Minister, the Regina Health District is far behind other 
districts in western Canada in hiring many new health care 
workers. It needs millions more in increased annual operating 
costs and needs to spend millions more for capital equipment 
and new bed construction. 
 
I ask the minister if she agrees with this statement: that the 
Regina Health District is several years behind other tertiary 



March 17, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 45 

centres in its ability to fund many such programs. Admit it. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well I think I know where that 
statement is coming for but I want to check the source. I think 
I’ve had the . . . I’m recalling that . . . but it may come from a 
report that actually, Mr. Speaker, I asked the Regina Health 
District to engage in and that was the task team on the 5-5-4. 
And for those people listening today, on December 2 the 
Associate Minister of Health and myself announced the task 
team to look at surgical waiting times in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
At 3:30 this afternoon the task team is going to be releasing the 
results and the recommendations. We realize that there are 
people that are waiting too long for some surgical procedures in 
the province of Saskatchewan and we’re going to do everything 
we can to implement those recommendations. And the budget is 
coming on March 26 and we’ll have money available to assist 
health districts with the task of reviewing . . . of reducing 
waiting lists and waiting times in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Madam 
Minister, that statement does come from the Barriers to Access 
report, a report from the Regina Health District that probably 
the minister should have read. Or did the minister not read the 
report, or is it laying beside the nursing shortage report that you 
didn’t read either, Madam Minister? 
 
In case the minister has not read it in detail, the report states 
that about 185 new full-time employees — that’s nurses, 
technicians, and support staff — are needed. That’s on top of 
the 120 virtual nurses. About 10 million is needed in increased 
annual operating costs, and about 14 million is needed for 
capital equipment and new bed construction — new bed 
construction. And as the report states, that is just to meet current 
standards. 
 
Madam Minister, have you read the report? And will she meet 
the health district’s bare minimum request? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, what that member 
may not know is that I met with a group of physicians in the 
city of Regina shortly before Christmas, and at that time I 
indicated to them that I would encourage the Regina Health 
District to undergo a task force review of the 5-5-4 in the city of 
Regina. I thought that this fit in very nicely to the December 2 
announcement on the task team on surgical waiting lists. 
 
The report has been provided by Dr. Bartlett, the CEO for the 
Regina Health District, to the task team on waiting lists. We 
will be releasing the recommendations from the task team this 
afternoon at 3:30, and I can assure the people of this province 
that when the budget is delivered on March 26th that we are 
going to do as much as we possibly can to provide funds to 
reduce waiting times in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Madam Minister, the question is: are you 
going to release this report, which isn’t very flattering for you? 
 

Mr. Speaker, does the minister realize that this report basically 
says that if the NDP hadn’t wasted $130 million in closing the 
Plains, that that money could have bought and paid for all the 
needed equipment; constructed, Mr. Speaker, 73 new beds; run 
the operations and eliminated waiting lists for the next 10 years; 
plus hire 185 new staff members. And this is just the bare 
minimum, Madam Minister — just the bare minimum. 
 
Madam Minister, was blowing $130 million on closing the 
Plains one of the mistakes your government admitted to in the 
Speech from the Throne yesterday? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well, I think the member is drawing an 
awfully long bow between the consolidation of services into the 
Regina General and the Pasqua. Mr. Speaker, as I indicated 
yesterday, we have a new space for the MRI and that’s going to 
mean right now 5,000 people of the province of Saskatchewan 
get our MRI. With two new MRIs in this province we’ll be able 
to provide more MRIs to the people of this province. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, we have an additional cardiac cath lab. 
That means that people that need angiograms are getting that 
service immediately. We don’t have the cardiac problems in 
southern Saskatchewan that other regions of this country have. 
And that’s because of the work that’s been done in this health 
district to support cardiac people in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said yesterday we’ve got a new CAT scan, a 
spiral CAT scan. Over 40 or 20 . . . I believe over 40,000 people 
get CAT scans each and every year in the province. That means 
more services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that Regina and the people in southern 
Saskatchewan have the state of the art technology in facilities 
and that means better health care to the people of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll ask the minister 
one more time if you’re planning on releasing this report today 
along with your waiting-list report? 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, even if the Premier in his address to this 
Chamber admitted his government’s failed in its attempts in 
health care reform. And I ask the Premier today, considering he 
doesn’t trust the minister to handle all the tough questions, if he 
would just take over the health care portfolio and straighten this 
whole mess out? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I think I’ve heard some 
rather humorous questions but this one really goes a long way 
in taking the prize award. 
 
I tell the hon. Liberal member, a member who’s party federally 
cut back $6 billion in health care since 1995 — $6 billion. And 
may I say when the premiers met in Saskatoon, I had the 
privilege and the honour of chairing that meeting, and the 
headlines came out, premiers make health care top issue, that’s 
what we said. 
 
You know what your leader said — your leader said you sold 



46 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 1999 

out. You know what the member from Kindersley said, he said, 
“Romanow traded off highways for health care to accommodate 
other premiers, namely Lucien Bouchard.” The member from 
Kindersley said, “we’ve said health care is a priority, we’ve 
never said it was a number one priority.” And that’s exactly 
what the Liberals have said too. It was not the number one 
priority when we got the money for health care, today it’s the 
number one priority. 
 
People in Saskatchewan will never trust any Liberal or any 
Conservative at any time with the care and control of the health 
care system in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Plains Health Centre Closure Costs 
 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question this 
afternoon is for the Premier. Mr. Premier, you heard the people 
of Saskatchewan. You promised to improve health care and 
then you follow up by closing hospitals. 
 
It hurts people when you promise no beds will be closed in 
Regina and then you follow up by closing 34 beds at the Pasqua 
Hospital and an additional 30 more beds at the Regina General. 
It hurts taxpayers and it hurts other health districts when you 
spend $40 million more than you budgeted to close the Plains 
hospital. Even though the Finance minister said it’s on time and 
on budget, on time and on budget — 50 times he said it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Premier, the Saskatchewan Party tried to call 
a meeting of the Public Accounts Committee to investigate the 
$40 million cost overrun but the NDP boycotted the meeting. 
 
Mr. Premier, what are you hiding? The people of Saskatchewan 
deserve the truth. Will you support a full investigation by the 
Provincial Auditor of the $40 million cost overrun at the Plains 
hospital for presentation to the legislature before the next 
provincial election? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well, you know, Mr. Speaker, here we 
go once again with good old Tory math. It’s not 64 hospital 
beds that have been closed — closed 34 at the Regina General. I 
think there’s 29. So they can’t even get those numbers right. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, these are the guys, there are the guys that 
say that they are going to increase the health spending by 
inflation. Well, Mr. Speaker, let’s look at the facts. In 1996-97, 
we increased health spending by 4.1 per cent. That’s twice the 
rate of inflation. The next year, 4.3 per cent, three times the rate 
of inflation. This year, 6.7 points again, three times the rate of 
inflation. 
 
We’ve been investing, we’ve been investing, Mr. Speaker, in 
health care in this province. We haven’t been freezing it. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as a result of that we have over 800,000 days 
of in-patient care in our hospital beds. We have over 650,000 
emergency room visits and over 4.6 million visits to doctors and 
we’ve got over 925,000 visits to specialists. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
I think that’s an awfully good record. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I’d 
like to rise to move a motion of urgent and pressing necessity 
under rule 46. 
 
The Speaker: — The hon. member for Saltcoats wishes to 
introduce a motion under rule 46 of urgent and pressing 
necessity. I’ll ask the hon. member, very briefly state the reason 
why he wishes to bring this matter to the attention of the House 
to set aside normal course of business, and to very briefly 
advise the House of the nature of the motion he wishes to 
introduce. 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 46 
 

West Coast Grain Handlers Dispute 
 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
emergency debate would be on the situation at the west coast 
with the grain handlers’ labour dispute involving Public Service 
Alliance of Canada which has shut down grain shipments on the 
west coast for the fifth or sixth time in the last number of 
weeks. Various other unions now are starting to honour the 
picket line and it’s shutting the total grain movement down on 
the west coast. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s of urgent need that we discuss this 
now and urge the federal government. The motion reads, Mr. 
Speaker, seconded by the member for Moosomin: 
 

That this Assembly urge the federal government to 
immediately legislate an end to the labour dispute affecting 
grain shipments at the west coast ports and to ensure that 
farmers do not incur demurrage charges for any late 
shipments caused by this dispute. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Leave not granted. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Jess, seconded by Ms. Murrell, 
and the proposed amendment thereto moved by Mr. Krawetz. 
 
Mr. Renaud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I had a short 
opportunity yesterday . . . my speech in regards to support of 
this government’s road map for this session, the fourth sitting of 
the twenty-third legislature, and it’s my privilege to continue 
today. 
 
I want to again thank the mover of the speech, the member from 
Redberry and the seconder, the member from Battleford-Cut 
Knife. 
 



March 17, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 47 

I want to say again too that I sought the nomination in Carrot 
River Valley for a third term, Mr. Speaker, under the banner of 
the New Democratic Party for several reasons. On Friday, 
March 12, there was a large crowd at the hall in Crooked River, 
the Princess Hall — in Hudson Bay, pardon me — and it was 
an honour for me to accept their wishes and their vote of 
confidence at that nominating meeting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some of the reasons that I sought the nomination were as 
follows — there were many but, you know, you kind of sit and 
contemplate after seven years in politics whether you should in 
fact seek that nomination again. And so you weigh the pros and 
the cons. And some of the reasons that I thought maybe I should 
do that was because I wanted to continue to work for and with 
great constituents in my constituency. 
 
The second reason for wanting to seek the nomination under the 
New Democratic banner, Mr. Speaker, was a concern within 
myself that the Tories were trying to trick the electorate by 
hiding behind the Saskatchewan name. Could they succeed? A 
grave concern that I had. 
 
And the third reason was because of the priorities and the 
direction and the leadership that this government has provided 
to the citizens of this province, and resulting in Saskatchewan 
being selected, Mr. Speaker, as the best province in the best 
country in the world to live and raise a family. 
 
And I know I mentioned this yesterday but it was something I 
learned from you, Mr. Speaker, or got the information from one 
of your presentations at a school in my constituency. I believe it 
was at the White Fox School. Just everyone should sit back and 
consider for a moment that there are about 6 billion people in 
the world. And there are several countries and there are several 
provinces and there are several states and there are several 
continents and you know how big the world is. And 
Saskatchewan — 1 million people — selected for that honour, 
Mr. Speaker. That is quite an achievement and one that we 
should be very proud of. 
 
(1430) 
 
The first reason, as I mentioned earlier, to seek the nomination 
was because of the great constituency that I represent and the 
people in that constituency. People from White Fox and 
Nipawin and Codette and Carrot River. Two First Nations in the 
constituency of Carrot River, Mr. Speaker — Red Earth and 
Shoal Lake. Communities of Arborfield and Crooked River and 
Peesane and Prairie River and Hudson Bay and Chelan and 
Bjorndale and Greenwater provincial park. Beautiful park. 
 
And I know I’ve missed some, Mr. Speaker, and I also know 
that many of you have visited there. Many of you would 
probably like to live there. And you know, I think everyone 
knows what I speak about — the beauty of that constituency 
and the great hospitality and the great people in that area. That’s 
why I want to represent that constituency, Mr. Speaker. That’s 
number one reason. 
 
And my job is to try and help those constituents, my friends and 
neighbours, their ideas and concerns. I have help. I have an 
office in Hudson Bay and Cathy Ryan represents me in that 
office, and many people visit her and ask me to help them with 

their ideas or concerns. 
 
And an office in Nipawin, Mr. Speaker, and Connie Black is the 
secretary there — or the minister’s person. Very good public 
servants and very responsible to the great people of Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Now I want to deal . . . I am going to skip the second reason, 
you know, the second reason why I wanted to seek the 
nomination was, of course, my concern about the Tories sort of 
trying to trick the electorate. So I’m going to move to the third 
reason first, and I’ll deal with that later. 
 
The third reason, of course, is the direction and leadership and 
priorities that this government has provided to our citizens. 
 
First I want to acknowledge that it is our citizens that are 
responsible for our successes, Mr. Speaker; there’s no question 
about that. Government can only provide leadership. For jobs 
and working men and women, Mr. Speaker, a promise of 
30,000 more jobs today than in 1991 when first elected — a 
goal that has been achieved. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Now, all hon. members 
recognize this is Throne Speech debate, and I’m sure that in 
making remarks we’ll want to put them on the record. And I 
assure all hon. members there is much time available to put the 
remarks in the record and I encourage you to do it that way. 
 
Mr. Renaud: — I want to say again for jobs and working men 
and women, 30,000 more jobs today than in 1991 when we 
were first elected. And that goal was accomplished, Mr. 
Speaker, and we must do more. 
 
I don’t know if the members opposite who are chirping over 
there have ever opened up the Leader-Post, or the Star-Phoenix. 
They should. And they should look at the ads . . . the ads to hire 
people, you know — I don’t know, what do they call them — 
want ads? Employment opportunities . . . employment 
opportunities. 
 
If they would have looked at that newspaper in 1991, Mr. 
Speaker, when they were in power, they would have seen 
maybe a half a page of ads seeking employees. Today if they 
looked in that same newspaper, Mr. Speaker, there are page 
after page after page of ads seeking employees in the province 
of Saskatchewan — 478,000 people working in Saskatchewan 
today, more than ever before in the history of our province. 
Minimum wage improved; better labour laws. And of local 
interest to my constituents, Mr. Speaker, in the forest industry 
there are 9,000 direct and indirect jobs and $600 million of 
economic activity in that one industry alone in this province. 
And by improving the way we utilize forests in a sustainable 
way with all stakeholders, this industry will provide many more 
jobs and economic activity. 
 
In regards to social safety nets, Mr. Speaker, this government 
will continue with programs like the Child Benefit, employment 
supplement, and the family health benefit which helped reduce 
our social services caseloads in 1998 by 1,500, Mr. Speaker. 
Tremendous. Tremendous. 
 
Changing unemployment insurance by the Liberals — of course 



48 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 1999 

less to the working people, the people that need, and more to 
the surplus pot. And the downloading of the responsibility of 
the off-reserve Indian people in need to the province increased 
dramatically the number of people needing assistance. 
 
Through forward thinking and cutting-edge programs, we are 
taking charge of this problem — not by giving one-way bus 
tickets to other provinces, Mr. Speaker, but in real programs, 
ending for some the need for dependency.  
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Renaud: — This government, with the support and advice 
of our citizens, is working at making our communities safer, 
realizing that 99.9 per cent of our youth are good kids that work 
at the corner store, go to school, play on the football team or 
figure skate. We have to crack down on serious, habitual 
offenders. And in this session, Mr. Speaker, we will crack down 
on johns and help children get out of the sex trade. We will 
continue to support and improve early intervention for kids at 
risk and programs through health wellness that work with and 
support families. 
 
We will, with other stakeholders continue to, slowly as we can 
afford it, rationalize and improve our transportation system. Mr. 
Speaker, 2.5 billion over 10 years — that’s our commitment to 
roads in this province. My constituency has benefited through 
the winter tendering schedule. Highway No. 38, Highway No. 
3, will receive more improvements. Still more needs to be done 
— I acknowledge that. And on this side of the House I’ll 
acknowledge that. No. 55, Shoal Lake and Red Earth, the 
highway east of Carrot River certainly will need work as we can 
afford it. Highways 123 and 23 in the Bjorkdale area will also 
need work as we can afford it. 
 
We’ll also continue to twin, Mr. Speaker, Highways No. 1 and 
16 — by ourselves if we have to. If the federal government will 
not, will not come with a national highways program, we will 
have to do it ourselves. You know we have a large land base 
and not many people — great place to live though. And we 
can’t afford maybe things that other provinces have or we have 
to be a little slower in accomplishing some of those goals 
because of that. But we will get it done. 
 
We will continue to stand up for changes to the Canadian 
transportation Act — that Act that I call the railway friendly 
Act — because our good friends in Ottawa . . . we will work to 
keep the rate cap so that our producers will pay a reasonable 
rate to ship their products to market. And we will change the 
railway’s view — I hope someday — of the real meaning of 
competition. 
 
We will continue to support the port of Churchill. And we will 
support short line alternatives. And we will continue to work for 
a strong and involved Canadian Wheat Board. 
 
The importance of price pooling, quality and quantity 
assurances for our export customers are very, very important to 
the producers of this province. We will continue to try to 
convince the federal government that subsidies by the U.S. and 
Europe are driving the prices for our commodities down. And 
they have a responsibility. 
 

It’s not the Saskatchewan treasury that can compete with 
Washington or the European union — it’s Ottawa that will have 
to take that cause. And we must continue to convince the 
federal Liberals that input costs are a concern — a real concern 
to our farming, our farmers. 
 
The last word we got I believe from Ottawa was that well just 
let the farmers shop around — it will be okay. That’s their 
concern about input costs. Well that’s not enough, Mr. Speaker, 
and this government will continue to try to convince the federal 
Liberals that input costs are a concern and have to be dealt with. 
 
The loss of the Crow benefit, Mr. Speaker, has cost farmers in 
this province $320 million each and every year — twenty-five 
per cent of the input costs that farmers have. 
 
Transportation, Mr. Speaker, transportation. Now the . . . the 
member opposite chirps up, well that’s all you can talk about is 
loss of the Crow. I wish he would stay in touch with farmers, 
Mr. Speaker. If he talked to farmers they would tell him that, 
you know, only if we could have that benefit back we would 
have a chance to compete with the Americans and Europeans. 
But we don’t have that any more and they have the support of 
the Tories in this House. I can’t understand that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And you know, when you pull $320 million out of a farmer’s 
pocket, you pull it out of Saskatchewan businesses and you pull 
it out of the Saskatchewan economy. And the Tories support 
that. I still don’t understand that. 
 
And we must continue, Mr. Speaker, as much as we can 
provincially, to support agriculture through our safety net 
programs like crop insurance and NISA (Net Income 
Stabilization Account). We were able to enhance NISA just a 
few, a few . . . or a week or so ago, by announcing with the 
federal government $85 million to top up the NISA accounts. 
And that’s important. It’s not much, but it’ll help a little. 
 
And I want to speak just a minute about the AIDA (Agriculture 
Insurance Disaster Assistance program) program. That’s the 
new federal program that is supposed to be the end-all program 
for disaster relief, but of course it’s not going to help many 
people. 
 
And the opposition say, well why did you join it? Well it’s 
pretty interesting when you have an opportunity to lose $85 
million to support farmers. It’s kind of like the Premier said one 
day — you have to know when to hold them and you have to 
know when to fold them. And in this case we had to fold, and 
hopefully that program will help as many farmers as it can. It’s 
not sufficient; we understand that. And we will have to watch 
the federal government and continue to push the federal 
government for a proper disaster relief program, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Our Ag minister a few days ago also announced lower 
premiums and more products covered under crop insurance. 
Now that’s something that the province can do. You know, we 
can help to a certain extent the agricultural sector and we will 
continue to do that. We must continue to promote value-added 
enterprises. The development of processing plants. 
 
You know, it’s better that we have fresh pack cuts rather than 
live hogs or a side of pork to ship to another country. Pasta 



March 17, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 49 

instead of durum, cosmetics and cereal in place of bulk oats. 
And you know as our farmers continue to diversify into 
potatoes and cabbage and carrots, coriander, beans, you name it, 
they’re trying it, along with wheat and barley. We need that so 
that we will have a healthy rural community with schools and 
health care facilities and stores and recreation facilities. That’s 
what we need to do. 
 
New legislation, Mr. Speaker, announced in this Throne Speech 
to help the formation of new generation co-ops will help 
facilitate that very goal: healthy rural and urban communities in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
(1445) 
 
The Throne Speech talked about education as being one of our 
people’s top priorities. And I want to say that we will continue 
to strengthen our partnership with teachers, school boards, 
parents, students, and all stakeholders in our education system. 
It is a tremendous system, right from pre-kindergarten to 
post-secondary and skills training. Graduates from universities 
and colleges, whether it be engineering, education, medicine, 
commerce, social work, to mention a few, are looked upon as 
some of the best educated when being considered for 
employment. 
 
They are ready for the twenty-first century. A stronger 
emphasis to apprenticeship mentioned in our Throne Speech 
will continue to better prepare our youth and unemployed for 
the workplace. It will give them a step up on their competitors. 
 
I had the privilege to meet with teachers’ associations and 
school division boards in Hudson Bay and Nipawin recently, 
and they have stated very clearly that we must continue to 
recognize the changing classroom — a classroom that now 
takes a role in feeding our kids. Social and justice and special 
needs are all part of this new classroom. 
 
The province has responded by announcing on Monday, March 
15 in the Throne Speech, a Role of Schools Task Force to 
dialogue with teachers, parents, and all stakeholders and define 
new goals and roles for our schools and classrooms. Early 
intervention for at-risk kids was also flagged, Mr. Speaker, and 
a stronger pre-kindergarten program will help address that need. 
 
It is very important that with the support and understanding of 
our constituents we continue to allow medicare to adjust to 
meet the needs of future generations. And today’s users, in 
particular our seniors, with exploding changes and technology, 
drugs and drug costs, alternative medicines and the 
demographics of our province, we must be continuously 
changing how we deliver the services needed by our citizens. 
Some of the facilities we see today may change in appearance, 
but health care will always be the very best to meet our people’s 
needs. 
 
The opposition used scare tactics, Mr. Speaker, and we all heard 
them. Hudson Bay — a good example. You know, they’re 
going to close that facility, they tell the people. Yes, this 
government’s going to close that facility. Well, I want to read 
you, Mr. Speaker, the press release that was issued the day I 
was there to open the new facility. They did the very same to 
me in Hudson Bay as they did to the member from Redberry at 

Hafford. The press release reads like this: 
 

Associate Health Minister Judy Junor today announced the 
establishment of a primary health services site in Hudson 
Bay in the Pasquia Health District. The most significant 
difference Hudson Bay and area residents will notice will 
be the addition of a primary care nurse who will 
complement the team-based approach to health service 
delivery. The health team will focus on early intervention, 
prevention, and the health promotion . . . 
 

I’m going to stop there just for a minute and make sure I have 
the attention of the members opposite, so that they will learn 
from this. 
 

. . . The health team will focus on early intervention, 
prevention, and health promotion, as well as treatment and 
ongoing follow-up with patients. 
 
This primary health service site is an excellent example of 
how, through co-operation and a community approach to 
health care, we can make our province’s health system 
better serve our residents, Junor said. 
 
The primary care nurse with advanced clinical training 
will, under the medical supervision of the local physicians, 
be able to treat minor illnesses and stable chronic 
conditions. This will mean that the residents may see the 
nurse instead of, or in addition to, the physicians. 
 
In addition to primary care nurse, the health team includes 
. . . 

 
Now listen to this: 
 

. . . the health team includes physicians, public health, 
mental health, the Hudson Bay and District Assessment 
and Resource centre, home care, visiting health 
professionals, and workers from other community services. 
 

And this is what the doctor says, and I quote: 
 

“We look forward to the addition of an advanced clinical 
nurse to our existing team,” Hudson Bay physician Dr. 
Don Gelhorn said. 
 
Junor congratulated the Pasquia Health District, staff and 
the Hudson Bay physicians for their pioneering work in 
providing Hudson Bay and area residents with this 
team-based approach to health services. 

 
“We believe that these changes will enhance our ability to 
offer a broader range of health services which will benefit 
our patients,” Hudson Bay physician, Dr. Larry 
Sandomirsky added. “We hope that these new 
arrangements will enhance our ability to recruit and retain 
physicians in Hudson Bay and area.” 
 
The Hudson Bay site is part of a provincial primary health 
services initiative introduced in 1997. Other primary sites 
have been established in Beechy, Kyle, and Hafford, and 
Saskatchewan Health is working with other health 
districts, physicians, and communities to establish 



50 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 1999 

additional primary health services sites. 
 

“We are pleased to support the addition of the primary 
services site to the range of services to be provided at the 
new Hudson Bay Health Care Facility,” said Pasquia 
District Health Board Chairperson Carol Hayward. “We 
are putting the health needs of our residents front and 
centre by embarking on a community-based, teamwork 
approach to health service delivery.” 

 
Now I don’t know if the people over there understand that. 
They continue to use scare tactics. They say we are closing 
facilities, you know. This is about more services. Primary 
health care service may include a dental service perhaps that 
will move . . . that will come to the site of the building or a 
chiropractic service coming to a community that does not have 
such a service today — that’s what it’s about. It’s about 
enhancing services, not taking them away. 
 
I want to talk a minute about the importance our citizens put on 
the ability of this government to, however difficult, keep the 
books balanced. This year will be the fifth consecutive year that 
the NDP have been able to accomplish this — not by ourselves. 
We may have played that leadership role as I explained earlier, 
but it was the Saskatchewan people themselves who said we 
need to do it, it is our people who tightened their belts, it is our 
people who made the sacrifices. 
 
And in five short years, Mr. Speaker, we have paid over $3 
billion on a $15 billion debt by using some of those surpluses 
and the good management of Crowns and CIC (Crown 
Investments Corporation) holdings. And at the same time we 
have been able to cut taxes as well — two points off the sales 
tax, two points off the income tax, and a portion of the debt 
reduction surtax — and at the same time enhance services. 
 
We have to remember that the NDP had to backfill 100 per cent 
of the Liberal cuts to health care and 93 per cent of the Liberal 
cuts to education plus enhance our own spending in priority 
areas like health, education, and highways. 
 
And as long as we have an NDP government, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, there will be a surplus because we have a balanced 
budget law in Saskatchewan. And the surpluses will be used in 
a balanced approach: one-third to continue to pay down the 
debt, one-third to continue to reduce taxes, and one-third to 
continue to enhance services in priority areas. 
 
Have we accomplished Utopia? Absolutely not. Is there more to 
do? For sure. Have we made mistakes? You bet. 
 
But let’s look at the alternative. When I was preparing for today 
I was thinking, you know, if we went back to 1991 and thought 
for a minute what it would be like if we would have left the 
other administration, the people across, in power, what would 
we be like in Saskatchewan today? It’s a scary thought. 
 
And you know, I heard Mr. Hermanson on television last night 
stating that the record of this government is deplorable. And if 
we step back to 1991 and look from whence we began, from 
where we came from to today — $3 billion paid on our debt, 
lower taxes, service enhancements — I can’t understand where 
he gets his point of view. And as I mentioned earlier, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, it would be a sad day if we would have not 
changed the government in 1991. 
 
Finally, friends, the second reason why I sought the support of 
my party at our recent nominating meeting was that we must 
tell the people about the Tories and their stories, their scare 
tactics, their propaganda, and their misplaced priorities. I want 
to be here, Mr. Speaker, to warn our people about the dangers 
of placing a growing but fragile economy in the hands of the 
same old it-could-be-better, Tories. 
 
You know if you open the Regina phone book you will find the 
Tories listed under the Progressive Conservative Party and you 
will find the Saskatchewan Party listed under the Saskatchewan 
Party. The strange thing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that they have 
the same address. They have the very same address. 
 
And you know, someone once told me, and I think our Minister 
of Health said it today in question period, if it still quacks like a 
duck and if it looks like a duck and if it waddles like a duck, it’s 
likely still a duck. And if it has the same address, for sure it’s 
the same duck. 
 
I know that most of you in this House will not recognize this 
name — I don’t think you will — Grant Schmidt. I don’t think 
anyone will maybe recognize that name. But I do know that he 
advertises in the Melville newspaper as president of the 
Saskatchewan Party Association for candidates; that he’s 
looking for honest, hardworking candidates in the name of the 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . They are the same old Tories. 
They are. 
 
And I want to tell people again about Tommy Douglas’s story. 
You know he had the story about the white cats and the black 
cats and they each took their turn at governing. And then finally 
the people got smart and elected the mice. 
 
But I wonder if Tommy was here today what he would say with 
these . . . Like, the white cats are still here but the black cats 
have sort of . . . And I think what you would see is a little black 
and a little white with lots of kitty litter. 
 
You know the Tories conducted a poll to prove to the people 
that they are very popular in rural Saskatchewan. And their poll 
included 67 per cent males, 33 per cent females; about 45 per 
cent was conducted in the southeast of our province and about 
45 per cent in the southwest, about 4 per cent in the northeast, 
where I’m from, and about 6 per cent in the northwest. 
 
This is what the Tories believe, Mr. Speaker, is that a male in 
the South represents the views of everyone in rural 
Saskatchewan. Maybe yes, but I don’t think so, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And what about our highways and the recent worst highway 
contest, Mr. Speaker. I will join people like Dwain Drew of 
Carrot River and remind the people who really created the 
pothole in the first place — the members opposite. 
 
And of course I want to be there, Mr. Speaker, I want to be here 
warning our citizens of the intended sell-off of our Crown 
corporations. If the Tories are elected, this is what they say — 
now listen very carefully — the privatization of Crown 
corporations where it is in the public interest to do so. Well, you 



March 17, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 51 

know for a Tory, Mr. Speaker, it is always in the public interest 
to sell off a Crown corporation. 
 
And health care, Mr. Speaker. The promise of Texas-style 
audits and for-profit health care like the U.S. (United States) 
where over 40 million people have no health care insurance at 
all — is this what we want? 
 
You know, the Tories criticize the NDP in regards to health 
care but they have no plan, absolutely no plan of their own, 
except to scare people and to freeze for five years the funding 
for health care. Well that’s interesting. Inflation alone will mean 
drastic cuts under a Tory government. 
 
And their platform, “The Way Up” — I had a copy of it but I 
didn’t bring it — “The Way Up” it’s called. It’s a very good 
selection of a name. At least they realize they once took us to 
the bottom, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In closing, friends, together we have come a long way. We still 
have plenty to do and that is why I will be supporting our 
Throne Speech, our direction for this session, Mr. Speaker, our 
road map for the fourth session of the twenty-third legislature. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, it’s indeed a great pleasure to be back for the 
fourth session of this Assembly. It’s great to be back to 
welcome you and your colleagues to this Assembly. And it’s 
also great to have the opportunity to reply to this Speech from 
the Throne. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for the first time in my constituency two 
communities have been added to the legislative channel 
broadcasts, and at this time I would like to welcome them and 
trust that a number of people are indeed finding the debates 
very useful and interesting — the communities are Tisdale and 
Kinistino. I think that it’ll be a welcome addition to the services 
provided by Mr. Ward and his colleagues and I know that it is 
always very interesting. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the Throne reminded 
me of a story I heard recently and I would like to pass it on 
because I think there are some parallels that are worth 
mentioning. The story is about an ocean voyage from across the 
Atlantic, and as a matter of course, the captain — and the first 
officer, the first mate, from time to time — always had to do a 
daily log of things such as the ship’s position, what time of the 
day it was, how fast they were going, relevant items of interest 
and importance to the ship. 
 
In one particular occasion, the first mate, who was known not 
ever to indulge in having more than a very, very, very tiny bit of 
rum on occasion accidentally had too much rum. And at the end 
of the day, the captain made the note in the log about the time 
and the place and the distance and the position, and he also 
made a note that said the first mate was drunk today. 
 

The first mate when he saw the note in the log protested and 
pleaded with the captain to have him remove that entry into the 
log. He said, I’ve never done this before and it is only on one 
occasion; I don’t know what happened. And this is going to 
potentially have an impact on how people and potential 
employers think of me. Would you please remove it from the 
log? And the captain was very, very staunch and he said no, it’s 
a fact and into the log it will stay. 
 
Well some days later it was the first mate’s time to be the 
person in charge of the bridge and he completed all his duties 
faithfully. And at the end of the day he made his notations in 
the log and he noted the time and the date and the location and 
the speed and all the relevant information. And he added this 
further thing. It said: the captain was sober today. 
 
The captain protested viciously. He said, what are you doing? 
I’ve never ever, ever, ever been drunk on the job and this 
implies that this was the first day that I was sober. And the first 
mate said it’s a fact and into the log it will stay. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, when I heard the Speech from the 
Throne I thought isn’t that just about the way things are because 
the speech is more hyperbole and more misrepresentation of 
supposed facts than reality. And I think when it stands the test 
of scrutiny it is not going to stand very well at all. And so the 
Speech from the Throne does indeed deserve some careful 
scrutiny and I will return to that general theme a bit later. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to talk about some issues and, first of 
all, issues that are important to people in my constituency. The 
Melfort-Tisdale constituency over the years has been very 
blessed by mother nature and by the industry and dedication 
and work of the people that live there. Over the years, we’ve 
built a very diverse and strong economy largely based on 
agriculture, but beginning to see value added and further 
diversification of our economy and very much of a move into 
areas such as tourism, ecotourism, game farming, and things of 
that nature. 
 
But the bottom line is for our constituency the most important 
commodity, the most important human endeavour is still based 
around agriculture. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 1998 in our constituency, by and 
large, we had a very bountiful harvest. We had good crops. We 
had new and diverse crops, and by and large they turned out 
very, very well for the farmers in our constituency. 
 
The harvest was very favourable. I’ve had farm friends tell me 
that in their whole memory of farming this was the most 
favourable harvest season that they’ve ever had. The weather 
was such that the actual harvesting process went very easy. 
There were people that said they didn’t even burn one single 
belt in the whole process and that was a welcome relief from a 
lot of years where that wasn’t necessarily the case. So the 
harvest was very good. 
 
And really, you know, Mr. Speaker, a member opposite said 
this was his worst harvest. Well of course he doesn’t live in 
Melfort-Tisdale constituency, the centre of God’s blessing to 
the universe in terms of the harvest this year. And hopefully, 
you will see your way clear to visit our constituency and 



52 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 1999 

perhaps even look at moving your farm after the election. 
You’ll have a lot of freedom on your hands. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the area is very, very bountiful in that respect. 
And last fall the farmers in my area were feeling very grateful. 
They saw with concern some of the other areas of the province 
where drought had really done a very devastating impact on the 
crop on the west side particularly. 
 
There were areas in the southeast that had a great deal of 
difficulty in terms of the challenges of harvest. And when I 
went around last fall talking to farmers in my constituency, by 
and large, they were very, very grateful and relieved that that 
was spared them in this harvest season. 
 
And so there was not a great deal of concern expressed after the 
harvest last year, it was mostly gratitude. And I think that that 
was an appropriate sentiment in our area. 
 
But you know over the winter things have been changing. And I 
noticed when I talked to the business community already last 
fall in Melfort they were sensing that the farm community was 
starting to be much more cautious with their spending, and in 
our communities that that is the cornerstone of what moves the 
economy. 
 
And so while there was not a great deal of concern expressed, 
the business community could almost immediately sense a 
tightening up of the spending habits or traditions of their rural 
customers. It started to impact pretty noticeably early in the fall 
last year and extended into the winter season. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as the spring has now advanced and people 
have started to take stock and complete their year-end financial 
statements and start looking at what their input costs were going 
to be into the 1999 crop year, concern has accelerated. 
 
And as well, Mr. Speaker, of course, there are a number of hog 
operations in our constituency as well and they went through a 
very devastating cost-price squeeze which they’re only 
beginning to see their way out of. So for some segments, it has 
been very difficult. 
 
But I notice a very dramatic change in what’s happening to 
people right now. Sure there are those farm organizations and 
farm entities, families that are pretty well established and are 
not into immediate concern, in terms of cash flow and cash 
crisis. But there are a great many people as well that are looking 
forward to the 1999 crop year and are realizing that the margins 
are going to be extremely small, that the margins are going to 
be extremely tight, and that they have to be very careful about 
their cropping decisions this spring. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think that that is appropriate in a general 
sense as well. But really what changed people’s attitude, I think, 
in my area is the way this whole negotiation about a long-term 
aid package and a response to the subsidy war that was 
occurring off our shores was being conducted. 
 
They were absolutely horrified when they realized that our 
government was going to stand back instead of going to the 
table and negotiating and participating right upfront with the 
whole process. They realized that we were going to stand back 

and throw stones. And as a result what happened? What we 
ended up was a program that is totally unacceptable to people 
right across this province. 
 
And, you know, the irony of it all is, is because of the fact that 
in our area we had some pretty good crops over the last three 
years and some pretty good prices, it is at least theoretically 
possible that the 70 per cent rule that’ll apply in this aid 
package will at least be based on a three-year average that 
amounts to something. And potentially farmers in my area that 
need it are potentially at least going to have some benefit out of 
the program. 
 
But in my area they sit and they look at the guys on the other 
side of the province and they say, 70 per cent of nothing is still 
nothing. How in the world can the people who’ve had difficult 
harvests from drought or other issues, of frost, etc., how are 
they going to benefit out of this issue? 
 
And what the Saskatchewan opposition has been talking about 
— the Saskatchewan Party opposition — where we should’ve 
had a per acre based aid program was the only thing that made 
sense because it was fair to everybody. It would’ve put cash in 
everybody’s hand in time for the spring seeding. And what we 
have now is a bureaucratic mess that’s going to result in a 
whole bunch of forms, a whole bunch of complicated 
calculations being made and very little is going to be going into 
the hands of those that need it most. So they were really, really 
concerned about what happened in that area. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the member opposite, my colleague from 
Carrot River Valley was talking about how wonderful their 
government has been over this whole process of commitment to 
the farmers. Well people in my area and people right across this 
province still remember that this NDP government were the 
ones who unilaterally not only changed the rules of this House, 
but retroactively took the GRIP (gross revenue insurance 
program) program away from farmers that was designed to 
protect them in exactly this emergency that’s coming forward. 
And it resulted in $200 million going back into the provincial 
government and almost 300 million being returned to the feds. 
 
So when we talk about who has taken away a support program 
from the farmers of this province, this government has to bear 
their responsibility because the farmers of this province know 
indeed who took it from them and will remember it when the 
election comes forward, I am quite confident. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other area that I want to talk about — one of 
two more areas in my constituency — is the whole area of 
health care. And while, Mr. Speaker, we have had very dramatic 
impacts by this health program of the NDP government, by and 
large, our people have bit the results and are now faced with the 
downsized services that have resulted out of this government’s 
handling of the health care issue. 
 
I have to, however, give one area of credit that I think credit is 
due and that is the fact that in the whole northeast, three health 
districts, Mr. Speaker, three health districts worked together on 
a joint project to supply renal dialysis in Tisdale which was 
central to the three districts. And I said last year, and I’ll say 
again this year, that I think that that has been a positive program 
and the government should be recognized and congratulated for 



March 17, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 53 

that initiative. 
 
The reality is, is that the capacity of this unit has been 
established and it has been initially established at a 50 per cent 
capacity. And the discussions that went on with the department 
were such that when need could be demonstrated to have a need 
beyond that 50 per cent capacity that it would be increased. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I say on the public record now is that that 
need has been increased, and the need has been demonstrated, 
and there is application to have the capacity of the unit 
increased as well to 100 per cent of capacity to supply the 
ever-increasing identified people who would benefit from this 
service in the northeast. And I look forward to the government 
looking positively on that proposal for increased access to the 
facility in Tisdale. 
 
The other area that is of a concern in health care is when you 
sit down and you have a visit and a cup of coffee with the 
front-line workers. And it doesn’t matter really if it’s people 
with CUPE (Canadian Union of Public Employees) or SGEU 
(Saskatchewan Government Employees' Union) or SUN 
(Saskatchewan Union of Nurses), the nurses; it doesn’t matter 
what their jobs are in the health district, if they work with 
clients in senior citizens’ homes or if they provide . . . of the 
support staff that provides meals and cleaning services. It 
doesn’t matter if your front-line nurse is working in the public 
health department or if you’re working in acute care. It really 
doesn’t matter who you talk to, what their political background 
may be — because it really doesn’t matter — every single 
person is concerned about what’s going on in health care. 
 
Every single one of them have a story about how the system is 
falling apart, how morale is diminishing to a point where they 
don’t want to come to work in the morning. How they’re 
worried about how that low morale and concern is being passed 
on to the clients, and how they are feeling increasingly 
burnt-out and frustrated about their ability to provide the 
services that they know that their clients deserve. 
 
And Mr. Speaker, I think that in the last negotiations where the 
union leadership were recommending the acceptance of the 
CUPE contract and it was rejected by a 56 per cent vote by the 
membership, indicates that level of frustration and concern and 
how high it is because the people were expressing not only 
initially their willingness to go out on strike with great concern 
about the impact it would have on their clients who’ve become 
their friends, but a recognition of the fact that these people 
have their backs to the wall. The frustration has built to the 
stage where burnout is happening, and they know we can’t go 
on like this. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, before this government breaks an arm 
patting itself on the back, it better make sure it deals with the 
front-line workers who have to care to that broken arm and deal 
with the realities. And unfortunately this government keeps its 
head in the sand and isn’t willing to look at if indeed the money 
we’re spending — it’s going to be probably over $1.8 billion 
this year after this budget — if that money is being well spent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if you look at the health care component of the 
provincial budget, it’s going to probably be very close to 40 per 
cent of the total expenditure. I think it was 38 per cent in the 
last fiscal year. That’s a huge commitment by the people of this 

province to health care. It’s a huge commitment. 
 
And I think the time has come, in fact I know the time has 
come, the health workers that I’ve been visiting with in my 
constituency know the time has come, where we have to look at 
how we’re spending that money to make sure it’s going where 
it’s really needed most. That’s critical. I think any family, any 
household, any business, that has a single expenditure that 
amounts to 40 per cent of your income has to look at that on an 
ongoing basis with a very clear look to making sure that the 
money is being well spent. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I know the health care workers in my 
constituency want to know that that is happening. They want to 
know that we have the administration level we need and not 
way more than we need. They want to know that the way we’re 
organizing home care and long-term care and acute care is 
meeting the needs in an efficient way. 
 
You know, there’s so many stories that are told anecdotally 
about wastes that happen in the system. Everywhere you go, 
you hear these stories. Well if you add them all up they’re 
probably going to add to a lot of money that’s being wasted in 
the system and we simply have to look at it and say, are we 
getting the best value we can for the dollars we’re spending. 
 
Because this province’s ability to infinitely increase the health 
care budget as a percentage of the total will diminish. One day 
we’re going to have to do accounting of the stewardship of the 
40 per cent of the budget that we’re spending on health care and 
this government has been remiss in not doing it long before 
now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other area that people are concerned about — 
and I have people that call me on a regular basis — is the great 
concern they have for having to leave our community that has 
some health care, acute care facilities and have to go to Prince 
Albert or Saskatoon primarily for acute care and what they feel 
like when they get there. 
 
You know, every day you hear stories of people who feel that 
they’re getting the minimum of service and then get the bum’s 
rush to get out of the place so that they can have someone else 
moving into the facility. They tell stories of how cold and 
impersonal the care is in many of these institutions, not because 
people don’t care but because they’re simply overworked and 
understaffed and the front line workers don’t have the resources 
that they need in order to do the job properly. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, we simply have to look at how the money 
is being spent. Is it meeting the needs of Saskatchewan people 
and providing the best health system that we can have for our 
people? Are there areas of improvement where we can be more 
effective and more precise in the way we’re spending our 
resources so that the issues that are facing the front line people 
who provide an incredible service with increased compassion 
and dedication every day are going to have the resources that 
they need to meet the needs of health care people? 
 
Mr. Speaker, another area of concern, and also an area where I 
have to give some accolades to one of the Crowns, is in the area 
of telephones. Mr. Speaker, as you’re aware, when I first came 
into the House, one of the issues that I raised in the House were 



54 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 1999 

the issue of regional telephones. And I presented a private 
members’ Bill the very first time, my first private members’ 
Bill will go on record as being in regard to the issue of regional 
telephones. 
 
And I have had ample opportunities to talk to the managers and 
the people at SaskTel about this issue, and I was pleased to see 
a year ago where SaskTel started taking steps to providing for 
regional telephone exchanges in this province. And I 
congratulate them for that and I thank them for listening to the 
concerns that were being expressed in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And in my constituency there has been progress made in terms 
of the issues that were raised, and we’ve had some 
regionalization of the exchanges to make them better for 
Saskatchewan people. And when SaskTel came around through 
the province, particularly in my neck of the woods, we sat down 
with them as well and said this is a good first step but there’s 
more that needs to be done. We need to address the issue of 
how people can call people in the neighbouring exchange or 
from rural Saskatchewan to urban Saskatchewan, and indeed 
maybe look at the issue even beyond those borders. 
 
And again I have to say that I thank them for listening to us 
because I think the bundling program that they’ve come up with 
in terms of putting together services in a pretty cost-effective 
way have been again a good first step in terms of dealing with 
the issue of people communicating with each other. 
 
And you know the good positive benefit out of this, I’m led to 
believe, is SaskTel is not losing revenue through this process. 
Indeed the utilization of long distance calls are going up so that 
. . . I know my granddaughter in Calgary phones me much more 
often and gets on the phone and says Papa, I miss you. And 
that’s hard for me to hear, but I’m glad at least these bundling 
and these long-distance plans make it affordable for our 
children and grandchildren to call us and for we to call them 
much more. 
 
And so I think, Mr. Speaker, this program and this idea that I 
first proposed three years ago has resulted in much better 
service and much more community happening within families 
and within communities than what we ever realized when we 
first looked at it strictly as a cost issue. And so I certainly give 
SaskTel credit for the initiatives they’ve taken, and I encourage 
them to look beyond that to do a cost analysis as well as to how 
it would work if we increase some of these services better. 
 
An area where there is some concern is the area of cellular 
service, and perhaps cellular is an area where regionalization of 
services has to be looked at as well. I’ve had a number of 
concerns expressed to me by the town of Tisdale and the 
Tisdale Chamber of Commerce that indicate that while there is 
cellular service in Tisdale, because the Tisdale cellular tower is 
so much lower and of a weaker energy output apparently than 
Nipawin or Melfort, the service in terms of the long distance 
from Tisdale is very, very small. The footprint is very small. 
 
And so for people that are not very far out of Tisdale if they 
want to phone into their community with their cellular phone, 
they’re immediately on long-distance coverage and the whole 
issue of the regionalization that has occurred on the land lines 
with SaskTel in terms of the neighbouring exchanges, I think 

has to be looked at in cellular service as well. And perhaps the 
regional concept could be applied to cellular service as well to 
address those kinds of issues because I don’t think it’s viable to 
build a tower in Melfort or in Tisdale another hundred feet taller 
so it all works out the same. That seems to be very wasteful. 
But I do think the issue of providing reasonable local service 
even on a cellular network is something that SaskTel has to 
look at, and I encourage them to do that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many other issues that face not only my 
constituency but the province as well. People in our area are not 
immune even though the agricultural industry has been 
relatively successful to the pain that is in people’s minds about 
social services and welfare and the inability to find work. 
There’s pain in our communities about recognizing that so 
many of our young people are leaving our neighbourhoods 
because there isn’t the opportunities that they need for 
meaningful employment. 
 
There’s concern by some of our local employers who see that 
jobs and employees are being lured away from rural 
Saskatchewan into urban Saskatchewan and then into 
neighbouring provinces for a whole lot of issues. And I think, 
Mr. Speaker, it’s long past due when this province has to 
seriously look at the depopulation of rural Saskatchewan and 
what the impact it’s going to have on our delivery of services 
and the impact on families and jobs into the future. 
 
And I haven’t seen this happening except in a haphazard 
knee-jerk way that seems to imply that the government doesn’t 
have a plan. And after eight years in charge of the affairs of this 
province, it’s time that they did indeed make a plan. But I fear 
it’s much too late for that. And instead of them making a plan, 
the people are going to ask someone else to do it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was interesting to hear the Speech from the 
Throne talk about jobs. And it was also interesting to hear the 
member from Carrot River Valley quote some statistics, 
because I would like to follow that up. 
 
In the Speech from the Throne when they talk about jobs and 
growth, the quote was, and I will quote from the Speech from 
the Throne. It says, “Together we have created 30,000 jobs. We 
will do more.” 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I think that that is a number that has to be 
challenged. Because Statistics Canada also quoted, and the 
member opposite from Carrot River Valley quoted again this 
afternoon, that in 1998 there were 478,600 jobs, working people 
in this province. And I think that that is fine. And the same 
Statistics Canada also said that in 1991 when this government 
took office, there were 458,000 jobs. 
 
Well my math says if you subtract one from the other it’s 
20,600 jobs that were created, not 30,000. And again we see an 
example of where this government is putting into the log, if you 
like, information that is factually incorrect. 
 
And I would like very much to make sure it’s on the record that 
the number as agreed to from StatsCanada is 20,600 jobs — 
10,000 or 9,400 jobs less than you said in the Speech from the 
Throne you created; 9,400 jobs less than you promised to 
create. About two-thirds of the promise delivered. And so again 



March 17, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 55 

you fall short and the people of this province deserve to know 
it. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Even the Lieutenant Governor couldn’t 
say it. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, my colleague says it’s even 
true, even the Lieutenant Governor was unable to say the 
numbers when he was reading the speech. And so, Mr. Speaker, 
we have to look at that. 
 
The second issue that I think I want to talk about on a provincial 
basis is the whole issue of taxes. There’s a reason why we’re 
falling behind in our job creation. There’s a very simple reason 
why that’s happening. The reason is, is that the taxes are too 
high in this province. You know we’ve said for some time that 
it is unacceptable that Saskatchewan should have the second 
highest taxes in Canada. And it is unacceptable. 
 
But you know what makes it worse, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 
when you look on the bigger scale, and of the G7 countries 
Canada has the highest level of taxes of the G7. And so here we 
are in good old Saskatchewan in the country with the highest 
taxes among the Group of Seven nations of the world, with the 
highest taxes, here we are in good old Saskatchewan with the 
second highest taxes in Canada. 
 
And what makes it even worse than that is we’re next to the 
province that has the lowest. And so the comparison is very 
immediate and very stark when we look at the differences 
between our two provinces. 
 
And one of the things that were ignored in this Speech from the 
Throne was the whole issue of taxes. You know, Mr. Lloyd 
Boutilier, president of the Saskatchewan Chamber of 
Commerce made comment on Tuesday, March 16, Saskatoon 
Star-Phoenix. And he said, “We didn’t hear anything on taxes 
today. We need further tax cuts in this province to retain our 
young people who are graduating in the province and those 
people who are retiring. We’re seeing more and more people 
leaving Saskatchewan.” 
 
And that’s a tragedy, Mr. Speaker, because they are given no 
options, there’s no opportunity for them. And this Speech from 
the Throne was absolutely mute on the point of tax relief. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as well, Mr. Richard Truscott, the provincial 
director of the Canadian Taxpayers Federation said that there 
were few hints if we could expect tax relief in the budget 
coming on March 26. “Tax relief and tax reform must be the top 
two priorities of this government in the upcoming budget.” 
 
And so all of a sudden you see two prominent individuals 
representing two major organizations in this province who are 
saying they are very, very concerned about what’s going on. 
 
(1530) 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, it would be bad enough if 
everything was left alone. It would be bad enough with the fact 
that in Saskatchewan our people are paying . . . an average 
Alberta family, for example, right now will pocket about $9,000 
more each year in take-home pay than the average 

Saskatchewan family. That’s bad enough, Mr. Speaker. 
 
A Manitoba family will pocket about $4,400 more than the 
average Saskatchewan family in taxes. That’s bad enough. 
 
But you know what’s even going to be worse is when you get to 
the next few years and Stockwell Day, the Finance minister for 
the province of Alberta, really sort of put a shot across the bow 
probably of all Canadian governments and said he is going to 
fundamentally change the way taxes are collected in Alberta in 
the Year 2002. 
 
And he said, you know, what we really are in a situation, we’re 
going to decouple the provincial income tax as a percentage of 
federal to what they’re going to do is have 11 per cent flat tax. 
And what they’re going to do in order to take care of other 
issues is deal with the low-income people by removing some 
70,000 taxpayers from the Alberta tax roll altogether while 
they’re doing this. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, if we think we’ve got a competitive 
disadvantage right now, if nothing is done it’s going to get 
tremendously worse in three short years. You know, I quote 
from Mr. Bruce Johnstone in the Saturday Leader-Post, March 
13. And he says, and I quote: 
 

The Alberta Advantage just got a whole lot bigger. 
 
Alberta Treasurer Stockwell Day’s trail-blazing budget 
puts our western neighbour several more light-years ahead 
of us in terms of taxes, debt load and fiscal flexibility. 
 
Even without any major tax cuts this year, Alberta 
taxpayers will pay hundreds and, in some cases, thousands 
of dollars less in taxes than Saskatchewan residents earning 
the same income. 
 

And he goes on to list the whole example of different tax 
brackets and income brackets of how major this impact is going 
to be. And he sums up by saying this, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 
 

In next week’s budget, Cline will undoubtedly have a few 
modest goodies for taxpayers. But, if you’re looking for 
real tax relief, you’re going to (have to) go west to find it. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, that troubles me a great deal because if we 
can’t retain our young people, if we can’t retain them and show 
them that it is in their advantage to build their careers in this 
province and to raise their families in this province, who’s 
going to be left? 
 
Is the tax burden going to be increasingly imposed on fewer and 
fewer taxpayers? How in the world can we carry that burden 
and still have balanced budgets and provide the services that 
our people need? How are we going to do that? Every 
government, including Alberta, in the ’80s ran deficits; every 
single government in this province, in this country. And quite 
simply to say that this province is the only one with debt is 
irresponsible. They all had debt. But what they did is take a 
different approach as to how they would solve it. They said they 
were going to build the economy. They were going to grow the 
economy. They were going to encourage people to invest in 
their economy and to move it forward — that’s what they did. 



56 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 1999 

And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is a huge issue that this 
province has to deal with, and in this Speech from the Throne 
this government has completely ignored it. And we do it at our 
peril. The member from Carrot River Valley said we reduced 
sales tax by 2 per cent — and he’s right — but they’re also the 
guys that increased it 2 per cent. And so you know what 
happens in Saskatchewan, only if we end up right where we 
started from, we consider that progress. That’s just nonsense. 
 
And the people of this province know it. Business leaders know 
it. Taxpayers’ federation know it. The seniors who are leaving 
this province to live elsewhere know it. Our young people who 
are graduating from university and going elsewhere for jobs 
know it. People are fed up, Mr. Speaker, and they’re looking to 
this government for some direction. And they’re getting nothing 
but complaints. 
 
They’re getting nothing but trying to fight an election that was 
eight years ago. Mr. Speaker, I want to fight the 1999 election. I 
want to go to the polls right now, but I doubt if this government 
has the courage to do it. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I hope . . . I very much support the 
amendment by my colleague from Canora-Pelly that says let’s 
go to the polls right now, let’s go to the people of 
Saskatchewan, let’s do that now. I’ll be voting for that 
amendment, Mr. Speaker, and I’ll be voting against acceptance 
of the Speech from the Throne. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Murray: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
It’s always a real pleasure to be involved in the Throne Speech 
debate. And I must say that my heart always beats a little faster 
but I’m very happy to be here, and I’m very happy to have an 
opportunity to say a few words. 
 
I want to thank you for your diligence to your duties as Deputy 
Speaker. And I’d also like to say a few words to Mr. Speaker, 
and commend him on his continuing wise counsel, his patience, 
and his wisdom in dealing with this House. I’d also like to 
thank him for the work that he does in his outreach programs. 
 
I know that many of us have been involved in them. He’s come 
to our schools, and he’s had the schools here in the Chamber. 
And the presentation he does is just excellent and it’s something 
I wish that everyone could see because it gives you a new 
respect for the whole parliamentary system. And, Mr. Speaker, 
more than anyone, has a tremendous respect for the 
parliamentary system. 
 
I want to welcome back all my colleagues on both sides of the 
House. It’s good to see you and it’s nice to be here. I want to 
make a special mention of welcome to the member from 
Saskatoon Eastview who is here in her first session, and has 
already made a valuable contribution to the work of this 
government. 
 
I also want to say a special welcome to the member from 
Athabasca, who showed all of us how to do the honourable 
thing. 
 
I’d like to welcome the new pages as well. We hope that you 

will enjoy your time here in the session. And it goes without 
saying that the work you do is invaluable to us and we really 
appreciate your energy and your commitment to this House. 
 
I also want to say good luck and best wishes to two former 
colleagues and friends, Robert Mitchell and Ed Tchorzewski. It 
seems strange to be able to actually say their names in the 
legislature. Both of them have moved on to other challenges. 
They continue to be valued friends. And in their time with this 
government, they’ve made huge contributions and were 
certainly part of many of the defining moments of this 
government. And all of us miss them and I know we all wish 
them well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Murray: — And of course, Mr. Speaker, I couldn’t be 
involved in this debate without making special congratulatory 
remarks to the colleague who moved the Speech from the 
Throne, the member from Redberry Lake; and to the member 
from Battleford-Cut Knife who was the seconder. 
 
The speeches were very eloquent, and they were passionate, and 
they were full of wisdom, and a real inspiration. And I certainly 
enjoyed and appreciated their comments very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Murray: — It’s a tremendous honour to be asked to be the 
first to speak and they both did an exemplary job and we’re 
very proud of them. Thank you. 
 
Of course, Mr. Speaker, I also want to pay my respects to the 
people in the Regina Qu’Appelle Valley constituency, which is 
my constituency. I want to thank them for the trust that they 
have placed in me and tell them how honoured I always feel to 
represent them. 
 
I’ve talked about the constituency many times in past debates, 
and I just want to say again that physically it’s a very beautiful 
constituency, having the Qu’Appelle Valley right in the middle 
of it as it has, and also glorious wheat fields and fine 
communities like northwest Regina and Lumsden and Grand 
Coulee. 
 
As well, there’s such an intense variety of people in that 
constituency doing so many interesting and wonderful things. I 
mean, we have artists and musicians; we have teachers and 
other professional people; doctors, lawyers, radio personalities, 
television personalities. It’s really a very diverse constituency, 
and it’s always very pleasant for me to spend time there. 
 
So I thank them for keeping in touch with me and for 
welcoming me into their homes and their businesses and their 
schools. And I just want them to know that I never tire of being 
their MLA, and I continue to thank them for their support. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Murray: — Well, Mr. Speaker, in this debate on the 
Throne Speech — and a fine speech it was, I might say — I 
could talk about many things. 
 



March 17, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 57 

I could talk about keeping the promise to create meaningful 
jobs for today and tomorrow. Saskatchewan has made 
tremendous economic strides in recent years. In fact, our 
province has led the country in terms of economic growth over 
the past five years, posting either the best or second-best growth 
in those years. The result of our improved economic condition 
has been more jobs for Saskatchewan people. 
 
There are plenty of new projects coming up in the province, Mr. 
Speaker, that will stimulate our economy even further and 
create more jobs. For example, the Research and Development 
Park in Regina will create 165 construction jobs, and tenants of 
the park expect to employ 300 people. Good news for 
Saskatchewan. 
 
One other project I’ll mention, the $1.1 billion Pan Canadian 
CO2 project in Weyburn will create 30,000 person-years of 
employment in the area. 
 
Or, Mr. Speaker, I could talk about keeping the promise to 
provide quality education and training. A growing economy 
requires skilled, knowledgeable workers. We all know that by 
investing in our young people we will build the skills and 
academic excellence they need to fulfill their potential for 
satisfying and prosperous lives here in Saskatchewan. 
 
I could mention and let you know something about the training 
and skills development. For instance, we are providing $136 
million for skills training and employment programs. We are 
delivering more training to more people for more jobs than ever 
before in our history. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Murray: — This year nearly 23,000 people will have the 
opportunity to participate in training, education, and skills 
development programs through the Saskatchewan Training 
Strategy. 
 
I could tell you about universities and that we’re providing over 
$200 million for our two Saskatchewan universities. 
 
I could tell you about student aid, and say that we are increasing 
student aid for 2,200 students with children by raising the 
assistance limits to reflect today’s costs. In fact, Saskatchewan 
Student Assistance Program is one of the best in Canada, and 
this past year we made it even better. More students are getting 
more financial assistance with considerably less debt as well as 
tax help when they go to repay their debt. 
 
I’m always pleased, Mr. Speaker, to mention our investment in 
infrastructure and transportation. Our goal is to ensure that 
Saskatchewan families can count on a sustainable highway 
network with improved levels of service on high priority 
highways. 
 
(1545) 
 
A further priority will be to address the road infrastructure in 
the province and we are committed to a 10-year, $2.5 billion 
highway program. 
 
I could also share some Saskatchewan road facts with you. We 

have 26,100 kilometres of provincial roads and highways to 
maintain and upgrade. We also have 158,900 kilometres of 
municipal roads. Our road system has 800 bridges and 12 major 
river crossings served by ferry operations. 
 
Six per cent of our total road network carries 70 per cent of the 
total traffic. Saskatchewan has more kilometres of twinned 
highways per capita than any other province in Canada. But 
alas, Mr. Speaker, I also must mention this: that Canada is the 
only industrialized country that does not have a funded national 
highway program. 
 
Something important to all of us, Mr. Speaker, is keeping the 
promise to reduce taxes for families and businesses. On the road 
to turning the province’s finances around, we promised to 
reduce taxes on an affordable, sustainable basis and that’s what 
we’ve been doing. Since we balanced the budget in ’94-95, 
we’ve reduced taxes for families in every budget since. In 1997 
we lowered the education and health tax from 9 per cent to 7 
per cent leaving an additional $180 million in taxpayers’ 
pockets every year. 
 
On July 1 of last year, the 2 per cent reduction in the provincial 
income tax rate which we announced in the 1998-99 budget 
came into effect. A $55 million per year income tax reduction 
was introduced in 1995 and fully implemented in 1996. 
 
Besides providing tax relief to families, we’ve also introduced a 
number of tax incentives to encourage jobs and economic 
growth. Targeted tax incentives introduced since 1992 included: 
20 per cent cut in the income tax rate for small business; 
elimination of the sales tax on 1 800 and 1 888 telephone 
numbers; and a 7 per cent tax credit on new and taxable used 
equipment. Mr. Speaker, when we balanced the budget in 1994 
we began a series of gradual tax cuts which are affordable, 
sustainable, and reasonable — and that’s what we will continue 
to do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I could also talk at great lengths about our promise 
to preserve medicare. Our commitment, Mr. Speaker, to health 
is stronger today than ever. And that commitment includes 
increased funding to health districts to maintain and improve 
hospital and home care services. That commitment includes 
operating funding for diagnostic tools such as the new MRI in 
Regina and the CT (computerized tomography) scanner in 
Prince Albert. It also includes 25 new family physicians 
recruited to rural Saskatchewan in 1997 through a joint 
provincial Saskatchewan Medical Association rural practice 
establishment grant program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today we provide a wider range of health services 
than ever before including province-wide screening for breast 
cancer, treatment for people with eating disorders, new health 
and safety programs for farm families, in-home and renal 
dialysis for Saskatchewan residents, and specialized pediatric 
teams to transport children anywhere in Saskatchewan for 
specialty services. 
 
Well I could talk about these issues, Mr. Speaker, for a long, 
long time because they’re certainly very important and they’re 
certainly worth discussing, but I know that many of my 
colleagues on this side of the House will again talk about the 
positive initiative that this government has outlined in the 



58 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 1999 

Throne Speech. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, just for today I want to speak just for a few 
moments about something that’s very dear to my heart and that 
is children and families. And I want to do that in the context of 
this government’s commitment, first to children through the 
child action plan. Now on this side of the House we have 
spoken many times of the action plan for children and of how it 
is a partnership of numerous departments and secretariats. And 
the reason for that is that it is not one department or one 
secretariat that has responsibility for children, but many 
throughout the government departments. 
 
We’ve talked about how the action plan’s priorities include 
reducing child and family poverty, strengthening early 
childhood development, supporting at-risk children, youth, and 
families, and also how the action plan plays a huge role in 
investing in communities. 
 
The action plan, Mr. Speaker, is also helping shape the national 
children’s agenda. We remember how proud we were when our 
Premier received a Champions for Children Award for the 
development and the implementation of the action plan. Well 
you might ask, Mr. Speaker, what has the action plan 
accomplished? Well since it’s inception, Saskatchewan’s action 
plan for children has resulted in some significant achievements 
and I’d just like to list a few of them. 
 
We have an office of the Children’s Advocate; we have a 
Saskatchewan Council on Children; we have integrated school 
link services; we have early intervention pre-kindergarten 
programs; we have a family law division of the Court of 
Queen’s Bench and related services; we have numerous Indian 
child and family service agencies providing child welfare 
service on reserves; we have a new northern community schools 
program; a prevention and support grants program; and the 
establishment of associated entities fund. 
 
And as I said earlier, Mr. Speaker, because of this plan 
Saskatchewan has been recognized nationally and 
internationally, but we did more for children and families. Last 
year we launched the Building Independence: Investing in 
Families strategy, and, Mr. Speaker, the Building 
Independence: Investing in Families strategy is the most 
significant social program in 30 years. Under this strategy, three 
new programs were introduced which are providing health to 
tens of thousands of Saskatchewan families. 
 
The Saskatchewan Child Benefit and Saskatchewan 
employment supplement came into effect last July. These 
programs are assisting parents in making the step from 
dependence on social assistance to the work force and are 
helping low-income families with the child-related costs of 
going to work. The family health benefits program came into 
effect in August, and this program is providing supplementary 
health coverage to lower-income families with children. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this program is working. Social assistance 
caseloads showed a major decline last year. Province-wide, the 
social assistance caseload dropped from 35,631 at the end of 
December in ’97, to 34,003 at the end of December of last year. 
This is consistent with an overall trend of declining caseloads 
which began in 1994. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I’d just like to quote the Minister of Social 
Services when he says the new building independence program, 
the Saskatchewan employment supplement, the Saskatchewan 
Child Benefit and family health benefits, combined with 
existing government programs such as the provincial training 
allowance and other elements of the provincial training strategy, 
represent a fundamental change in the province’s approach to 
welfare. We want to help families get off social assistance and 
stay off. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I look forward to having other opportunities 
during this session to speak more on these positive initiatives of 
the government that I’ve just mentioned in my remarks. And 
when I think about these things, Mr. Speaker, I can’t help but 
think that the future of this province is very bright and very full 
of promise. 
 
Now I’m aware that if there is an election this spring or this fall, 
that this may be my last opportunity to take part in the Throne 
Speech debate. Now I am so proud to be a part of this 
government, Mr. Speaker, part of this government when it had 
to make the tough decisions that we had to make, but also part 
of this government when we had the many triumphs that we 
had. 
 
Now the friends I’ve made on both sides of the House are for 
life. I’ve learned much from my colleagues and from my 
constituents. I will never regret one second of my life as an 
MLA. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, my thanks to you and all my colleagues, 
and all my constituents for this wonderful experience. And I 
also want to say a special thanks to my constituency assistant, 
Donna From, who really is an amazing woman. I’ll miss all of 
you more than you’ll ever know. 
 
I can’t think of a better way to close my remarks, Mr. Speaker, 
than with the quote that was read at the end of the Throne 
Speech, a speech which I totally support. And it is the quote 
from the poet, Vesta Althea Pickel, in her poem, “Spring in 
Saskatchewan”: 
 

Reach out and feel the air and smell the earth, 
For springtime here is life, new hope, rebirth. 
 

Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to enter into this debate today although I have to say I 
wish I had the eloquence of my friend from Regina northwest in 
her comments in the House today. 
 
In the few years that I’ve had the pleasure of serving in this 
House, I have to say I’ve heard some wonderful speeches. And 
I know that whatever happens after this next election that the 
people of Saskatchewan have to work very hard to find 
representatives as good as the member for northwest and as 
well as our colleagues Ed Tchorzewski, who I have always 
considered to be personally a mentor of mine, as well as Bob 
Mitchell. 
 



March 17, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 59 

It is an interesting time that this legislature comes to meet. We 
are on the eve of a new millennium, the eve of a new century, 
the eve of a new session and sitting and legislature itself as we 
get ready for potentially an election this spring. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to tell you that listening to the 
Speech from the Throne, I was very pleased with many of the 
initiatives that the Lieutenant Governor read, with many of the 
initiatives that this government intends to introduce. 
 
I had the pleasure in 1995, the first opportunity to speak in this 
House, was to second the motion accepting the Throne Speech, 
and I think back to what we were discussing in that time and the 
progress we’ve made over those four years, and it really has 
been quite remarkable. 
 
We have seen a period of tremendous growth for our province. 
We have seen unemployment come down to record lows. We 
have seen our GDP (gross domestic product) grow. We have 
seen our taxes come down. We have seen the increases in health 
care. We’ve seen a modernization of our health system. We’ve 
seen much better services. These are all things that I think as 
Saskatchewan people we should take great pride in, particularly 
considering what we came into. 
 
I know on this side of the House, having worked with the 
government during that 1991 to 1995 period, that the decisions 
these people grappled with on this side were extremely difficult. 
And I think now this many years into it we’re finally starting to 
see that those decisions have borne fruit. And I think that that’s 
very positive. 
 
Let me say also, that as I think back on the other Throne 
Speeches which we’ve listened to over the years in this House, 
the one which is perhaps stuck in my mind most was the one in 
that Christmas session of 1991, with the new government 
having taken office only a month before and bringing forward 
its agenda on what was unfortunately a rather gloomy horizon. 
 
We knew that there were unprecedented deficits. We were just 
starting to grapple with the size of the debt, and we were trying 
to figure out where to go. And yet that Throne Speech which I 
think was titled “A New Beginning,” offered hope and offered 
direction for that time period. I remember in particular a line in 
the Throne Speech which said that this government would once 
again restore honesty, integrity, and accountability to the 
government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, some eight years in, I 
think that the men and women on this side of the House have 
done just that. And it’s one of the things that I think is 
particularly important as we look at this Throne Speech to 
compare and contrast how far we have come. 
 
Let me talk for a minute about some of those initiatives. Let me 
talk about the question of hope and the people’s agenda. 
Because I think often people get caught up . . . and I listen to 
the opposition members opposite talk about what their party’s 
platform is and what they think should happen. 
 
I’ll tell you what the people have told us over the past few years 

and it has been very much one of the successes of this 
government. Our priorities have remained relatively unchanged 
since 1991. Those priorities were jobs, better health care, and 
restored financial freedom to this province. 
 
In 1994 we were able to come forward and say that the budget 
was balanced. Every single year since then we have reduced 
taxes in this province — every single year since that budget was 
balanced. Today this platform, this Throne Speech, continues 
that and offers hope again of more jobs, better health care, 
lower taxes for Saskatchewan people under this government. 
 
(1600) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are certainly 
challenges. As we’ve watched the last year, the last 18 months, 
and many of the challenges that we have, particularly in our 
economy, I have to say personally I’m amazed that we’ve 
weathered it as well as we have. The conditions of drought that 
we’ve heard expressed from the northwest part of the province, 
the problems we have with commodity prices on virtually every 
one of our commodities, from uranium to oil to wheat, have all 
posed major challenges for us. And yet through all of that 
because of good planning, because of a resiliency of the 
Saskatchewan people, and because of a strongly diversified 
economy, we’ve weathered that. And I think that that’s 
something Saskatchewan people, as they look back over the 
years, should take some pride in. Because it is those changes — 
and I know they’ve been difficult — but those changes that we 
have made to our economy and to our social system have 
allowed us to weather that and to be able to continue on with a 
very clearly identifiable Saskatchewan solution to the particular 
problems. 
 
I think it’s interesting as we look across the country, and we’ve 
seen the approach taken by other governments, be it in Ontario 
where they have slashed and hacked at the health care system, 
Alberta and the difficulties we have there with a single-minded 
approach to government which simply believes that government 
should remove itself from the economy, remove itself, distance 
itself from the people, and the difficulties we’ve seen in terms 
of what that has brought home to them in terms of their health 
care system is interesting. 
 
Let me speak for a minute about the health care situation. Over 
the last two days we’ve listened to the opposition hammer away 
on health care. I have to tell you that it has . . . Although I think 
it’s an instructive set of questions that they’re asking because it 
shows where they’re coming from, it hasn’t exactly been too 
biting. 
 
I think that is interesting because as was identified today what 
they can clearly pick out are the problems — what they cannot 
identify are the solutions. And they have turned their backs on 
looking for the solutions. We’ve listened time and again to what 
their leader and the Saskatchewan Party leadership says. There 
is nothing new in that. It is a return to value-added audits of 
health care workers. It is a return to the Texas-style audits that 
were proposed by the Liberals under the member for Greystone 
at one point. This is the approach that they’re putting forward. 
 



60 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 1999 

I think we need to take a look at what was being suggested in 
Alberta right now. This is a party opposite that likes to 
constantly say look west friends. On Monday in the Calgary 
Herald there is a paper, a report from the doctors that says a 
quarter of a million Albertans will now be without health care 
coverage — one quarter of a million. One quarter of a million 
Albertans are without, potentially are without medicare 
coverage. Why? Why? Because they didn’t pay their premiums. 
It’s amazing. The doctors on Monday were grappling with how 
to create a system where they could get paid. 
 
One doctor says . . . and I should dig out the article just so I get 
it absolutely right. The article says, AMA (Alberta Medical 
Association) President Dr. Rowland Nichol disagreed. He was 
disagreeing that people are at a risk. He says that’s not true. He 
had several patients at his Calgary practice whose medical 
needs were not urgent and who were told they would have to 
pay to get treated. What’s of course all the more disturbing is 
that the doctor then goes on to say, that’s an ethical stance the 
doctors can take. 
 
Well how does it become ethical that you’re going to start 
refusing service, medical service in Canada, unless you pay, I 
don’t know. That, though friends, is the cost of an Alberta style 
system which you bring forward time and again to this House. 
That is the cost of going and slashing into health care, freezing 
health care, even minimalizing the increases in health care. It 
will lead to a system where in Alberta a quarter of a million 
Albertans are without medicare coverage. 
 
That’s not what we believe in. And that is one of the reasons, 
my friend from North Battleford, why this Throne Speech is an 
important cornerstone of what Saskatchewan people believe in. 
 
The introduction of a Saskatchewan medicare Act, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, will show that we support the Canada Health Act. It 
will say and will ensure that no Saskatchewan people will ever 
be faced with having to pay to get medical service. 
 
I wish we could say that this were the case everywhere in 
Canada. Unfortunately, next door in Alberta, that’s not the case. 
And I wish that the Saskatchewan Party would look at that. I 
wish that when they came forward with their plan of health care 
and reform, whatever that mean be . . . value for money audits 
is the last I heard. Minimal increases in spending. I hope that 
they understand the consequences of that are not a solution 
which Saskatchewan people want. 
 
When I listen to the reporting of what the opposition had to say 
about this Throne Speech and saying it did not reflect the 
priorities of Saskatchewan people, I have to say that they’re 
wrong. The fundamental inclusion of The Saskatchewan 
medicare Act will be one of those pieces of legislation which 
Saskatchewan people will stand and salute because it says 
exactly . . . it identifies clearly the difference between the path 
that we have taken in this province and the path that they have 
taken elsewhere. 
 
I’ve listened for some time to the opposition over the last few 
months attack the health care workers and attack the health care 
system, and I find it disturbing. There is no quick and easy 
solution. There is no quick and easy solution to the problems 
we face today. 

I wish that we were able to quickly arrive at settlements with 
our health care employees. I remain confident that we will. But 
I think that fanning the flames of those potential work 
problems, distorting them as the opposition has a tendency to 
do, and not identifying any clear alternative, I think is really 
disturbing. 
 
The member for North Battleford says that it’s not the Liberal 
Party distorting it. Well they don't need to distort it because 
they caused it. If we had back that $4 billion that they had 
yanked out, my guess is that we wouldn’t be in quite the same 
dire straits that we were. As I watch and see Elwin Hermanson 
sit in the gallery every day and say nothing as he watches over 
his flock of black sheep over there, and he sits and he’s got no 
solutions. I don’t see Dr. Melenchuk. I assume it’s because he’s 
chained to the doors of the Plains hospital still with no 
solutions. None. What are the big solutions? 
 
Well on our side we believe the solutions are continuing with 
initiatives, new initiatives, like primary health services. We 
believe in community services. We believe that we should 
continue to put money into mental health services, into 
women’s health services, into prevention, into home care. These 
are the things we believe in. These are the alternatives. 
 
The opposition remains focused on an illness-based system — 
more acute care beds, more acute care beds. Today, as they 
stand up and say, well, there’s 64 fewer beds than we said there 
were going to be. Well it’s not true. That’s simply not true. 
 
In Regina we are making progress in getting those beds open 
again. But at what . . . what was their alternative? Keep the beds 
open at a risk of patient safety? Is that what the alternative was? 
 
Well we don’t know. Because they never identified an 
alternative. They never identify a solution. All they do is stand 
and complain and never offer anything new. I would be 
interested to know if we were to apply their platform to the 
current problems where we would be at. How would those 
members sit opposite on a bargaining table with CUPE and say 
to you, sorry friends, nothing new for your salary. Nothing new 
to hire new workers. How do you sit across from the union of 
nurses and say to them, sorry friends, we know that you work 
hard because listen to all the complaints that we identify on 
your behalf and our solution is nothing for you. 
 
How do they explain this, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Can they claim 
to have a credible alternative to what we’re offering to say 
they’ll settle the labour strikes, they’ll fix the health care 
system, they’ll make sure services are protected. On what? On 
this year’s budget alone? Four years from now as we enter into 
that millennium, we’re still going to be looking at paying 
people in 1999 dollars? How does that work? Well I know that 
they’re sensitive on the financial management side. We know 
that. Why wouldn’t you be? If you were a Tory, you’d have to 
be. 
 
I found it interesting reading the Alberta budget this week to 
note that Alberta is carrying the same size of debt as 
Saskatchewan. They should take pride in that because they 
created the debt and so now we’re equal to Alberta at least in 
that regard. It’s one place where we’re absolutely equal. It’s too 
bad that they’re carrying that debt with how much of the 



March 17, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 61 

world’s oil reserves. It’s too bad that they have two and a half, 
almost three times the population that we do. But thanks to the 
Tory members opposite, we now have the same size of debt as 
Alberta. Isn’t that a good fortune? 
 
Well I can understand why they’re sensitive and why they say, 
no we’re fiscally responsible and our answer to fiscal 
responsibility is to freeze the budgets of health care, freeze the 
budgets in education. I can only image what they have planned 
for some of the other social sectors. I doubt that they would be 
as fortunate as to see freezes. And instead what they would do, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, is they would slash taxes. 
 
Now that in itself isn’t bad. Reduction of taxes has been a major 
platform of ours. We’ll have to see what the budget on the 26th 
says. But even so, I understand that we’ll be passing along the 
reduction in income tax that the feds announced. 
 
The question, though, is how do we strike a balance? I was 
reading a recent report from the centre on public policy 
alternatives which was taking a look at Alberta and the situation 
there. And what that report said is that as they reduce taxes in 
Alberta for middle income families, all that resulted in was 
increased charges that they had to pay. 
 
Alberta is one of the highest, most expensive places to live in 
terms of the amount of money that private individuals have to 
pay for health care. It’s something that the opposition always 
forgets to identify. They seem to forget to mention that. And 
I’m not just talking about the health care premium, I’m talking 
about the number of services that are not covered. 
 
Let’s remember that when Elwin Hermanson campaigned for 
the leadership of the Saskatchewan Party, he campaigned on a 
platform of de-insurance saying that there may very well be 
some things in medicare that are no longer covered. Well that 
would explain to me how they plan on giving the nurses an 
increase, how they plan on giving CUPE an increase, and yet at 
the same time, not increase the health care budget. 
 
And I suspect that what we will see is that as you walk into the 
doctor and need to get your elbow fixed, or need to get a cast 
put on, or granny needs some work done on her eyes, my guess 
is that we are going to start to see service charges. Or we will 
see a complete de-insurance and simply move it over to the 
private sector. 
 
I would be interested to know in Alberta, how many publicly 
funded cataract surgeries there are. I’d be interested to know 
what is happening there considering that that’s the home of 
Gimbel Eye Clinic. I’d be interested to know what commitment 
they have to those kind of publicly funded services. 
 
I don’t want to be particularly negative in my comments, but I 
do think that we need to pose the tough questions to the 
members opposite to ask them what their plan is. I would talk 
more about the Liberals, but frankly I feel so sorry for them. I 
just figure we should leave them alone for a little bit. 
 
(1615) 
 
As I watched the member for North Battleford — and I happen 
to say I listened to his comments yesterday. I actually 

appreciated many of his comments in terms of the perspective 
that he brought as a new member to the House, a relatively new 
member, and reminding us all that we are here, I think he said, 
temporarily. I know the Premier who has been here temporarily 
now for 30 years is . . . certainly I’m sure would share that 
view. As for the members opposite, well, I think that some of 
their view of temporary may be considerably shorter. 
 
It brings me to another issue that I want to talk about and that 
was the uproar we heard on Monday from the members 
opposite as we announced that we would introduce the respect 
for constituents Act. 
 
When we came to office in 1991 one of the things we promised 
was accountability — honesty, integrity, and accountability. 
This is an important piece of that democratic reform. Many 
things have changed since 1991 in terms of the democracy and 
the way that this House operates. I’m pleased to report that 
despite what the members opposite would argue, the Public 
Accounts Committee has met regularly. It’s completely caught 
up in its review. Not like the three-year backlog that we saw 
when we came in in 1991, when the Tories wouldn’t allow the 
committee to meet. We’re caught up on that. 
 
There have been other significant changes. The fact that we will 
be seeing by-elections in June is a significant change — and a 
very positive one — introduced by this government. 
 
There’s a long list of those democratic reforms. This respect for 
constituents Act I wish we never had to introduce. I wish that 
we had never seen happen in this House a circumstance as did. 
The fact that a democratically elected opposition would be . . . 
first of all, would deep-six its leader, who had carried it to a 
record number of seats for some 20-some years, would in the 
dead of the night go and stab her in the back is . . . Fine — that 
may be the way that party operates. But then, having done that, 
to all of a sudden realize, oh no, that that didn’t save them and 
that they all had to jump off the ship and swim to whatever 
poorly tied-together raft was floating by, I think is really 
unfortunate. 
 
I was disappointed, I have to say, when the member for 
Humboldt moved over to join the Saskatchewan Party not 
because her views don’t fit in there — I think they certainly do. 
I think she’s part and parcel of that. But I found that 
disappointing because I think it was really for political 
opportunism. 
 
As we know, there’s been no independent member re-elected to 
this House since 1924. And clearly, as the member was looking 
for where her next paycheque was going to come, decided that 
there was more hope in joining this Saskatchewan Party than 
attempting to stand by her principles and either coming back to 
the party that had initially elected her or running again as an 
independent. 
 
And perhaps all of this would’ve had much less impact if it had 
not been for the actions of the member from Athabasca, who I 
want to welcome to our caucus and to our side of the House. If 
there had not been such a contrast between these two operations 
. . . I think a lot of us understood when the member for 
Greystone decided to sit as an independent, when the member 
for Humboldt decided to sit as an independent, that those were 



62 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 1999 

principled stands. 
 
But I could not understand how you could simply say, run, on 
the one hand, as a Liberal, and all of a sudden, months later, 
decide you’re going to become a Conservative. How does that 
work? How does that work? I don’t understand that. 
 
The member opposite says maybe we should phone Glen Clark. 
Well if so, it would probably be a long conversation because 
we’d probably offer him some other advice beyond just that. 
 
But just remember — I say to the Leader of the Opposition that 
the last time you held that seat it was as a Liberal and how you 
can walk in every day down that aisle and take that seat now as 
a Conservative, I don’t understand. How you could part and 
parcel sign your name to a party to replace the Tories, claiming 
it’s some blended operation, knowing that in the process you 
have diverted $350,000 from the democratically elected 
opposition to Saskatchewan Party caucus coffers, how can you 
do that? How can there be that kind of thinking that this is 
somehow acceptable? 
 
So now we’ve got the Tories back in opposition. Drummed out 
of office in 1991, drummed out of the opposition in 1995, and 
they’re back again. 
 
Well I’ll tell you, the members opposite look at us and say how 
can we be so partisan as to bring in a respect for constituents 
Act. Well, friends opposite, I have to tell you I think we are the 
only party that believes in respect for our constituents, because 
if you did, you would have gone to a by-election. You claim 
instead that you are going to introduce recall legislation, and yet 
when people drop by your office, member from Melfort, and 
ask for a recall petition, what did you tell them? You said you’ll 
have to wait until the next election; you have to wait until the 
next election. 
 
Well isn’t that a commitment even to your own great enshrined 
platform. Unbelievable. Absolutely unbelievable. As we watch 
this group of Tories opposite try to justify how they could turn 
their backs on their constituents, I just don’t understand. And 
they argue then, the only argument that I’ve seen mounted, is 
that, my goodness, it may not be constitutional. It may violate 
our individual rights. 
 
Well the piece that we need to remember is that we are not here 
representing individual views; we are here representing the 
views of our constituents. And perhaps we should understand 
that and remember that as we sit here. I don’t expect that you’ll 
vote for the respect for constituents Act. I’m not sure whether it 
will be retroactive or not; it’s probably not a bad idea. We’ve 
got a few by-elections scheduled for June anyway. It might be a 
good initiative to decide to put a few more up. 
 
But regardless, I think what we should remember is that there 
will be an election in June, or October, or June of next year. But 
there will be an election coming. And at some point you will 
have to go and face your constituents on the doorsteps and 
explain how it is that you turned your back on them a year and a 
half ago. It will be interesting to hear that. It will be interesting 
to hear that defence. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to talk for a minute about 

education. In 1995 when I had the opportunity, the honour of 
seconding the response to the Throne Speech, education was a 
key component of the initiatives that we identified at that time 
as we moved forward to 1999 that we would want to work on. 
 
Today I think we’ve seen great success, particularly in our 
post-secondary sector, in terms of how we’ve seen the growth. I 
look at the University of Regina which borders my riding, and 
we see the growth of the research park over there, we see the 
new high technology coming in, we see the new construction 
over at the SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science 
and Technology) facilities that’ll consolidate and greatly 
expand and enhance those facilities. And I feel proud about 
that. 
 
I’m also proud to read that today more than 90 per cent of our 
schools have an Internet connection. This is an important 
component as we get ready for the 21st century and the 
information-based economy. 
 
I’m proud of our record in our inner city communities, on our 
community schools initiative. Although my riding does not 
have any community schools, I have to tell you that it is 
important to us on this side of the House that we have that same 
quality of education throughout the province that we enjoy in 
areas like the south end of Regina. 
 
The front page of the Leader-Post today in fact there was a 
speaker from . . . one of the Roughriders was speaking I 
believe, a Mr. Grier. And he was talking about his experiences 
— talking about his experiences going to school down in the 
southern U.S. and talking about the problems that they have 
down there versus the problems we have here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Several members from this Assembly had an opportunity as part 
of a CPA (Commonwealth Parliamentary Association) tour, and 
in fact a member from Melfort I believe was down at the same 
time I was to a conference in Washington where we were taking 
a look at what was happening with American school reforms. 
 
I have to tell you that in terms of our education system, we are 
very, very fortunate that here in Canada and here in 
Saskatchewan we do have as well a funded, publicly funded 
education system as we do. 
 
The problems that they have in terms of curriculum, the 
problems that they have in terms of violence in their schools, 
are all very unusual I think for us to hear, because we simply 
take for granted that that’s not the case. We take for granted that 
we have a relevant curriculum. We take for granted that we 
have safe schools. 
 
And I think that the work that’s been done over the past few 
years, particularly I want to say with the community schools 
project, has helped to ensure that that will be the case as we 
move on. 
 
These projects — and I forget the number of them now; I think 
there’s some 23 of them — are really very important to ensure 
that we look at students in a holistic way, as a whole being, and 
try and meet their needs not simply feeding them textbook 
information. And this is a real success I think, of this 
government. It’s something I’m very proud that our government 



March 17, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 63 

has introduced. 
 
I’m also very pleased that we have put as much commitment 
into capital as we have, not simply in terms of the construction 
of new schools, but in terms of the type of educational 
equipment we’re offering. 
 
A couple of weeks ago the Minister of Education and I had a 
chance to tour Campbell Collegiate which is in the heart of my 
riding. And I was amazed at how the schools have changed 
even in the 15-some years since I was at one. 
 
The fact that at one point we walked into a classroom and there 
is the TV camera on and they’re broadcasting out a calculus 
class to Yorkton and a few other small communities, I think is 
really quite impressive. It’s a quality of education that a lot of 
people didn’t have, didn’t have that kind of access to. 
 
It also I think helps to break down that sense that somehow our 
urban schools were going to be better than our rural schools. 
And it allows us I think to deal with a lot of the challenges 
particularly in rural Saskatchewan that we’ve seen in the past. 
 
Technology, if it’s properly dealt with, can be a huge benefit to 
Saskatchewan students. Through things like SCN 
(Saskatchewan Communications Network) we are able to see 
distance education offered, through the work being done in our 
high schools, through the improved Internet access. These are 
all real improvements. 
 
I think it’s also very important that we understand as we look at 
our universities, both in Saskatoon and in Regina, that we 
understand that these are truly first rate institutions in this 
country. 
 
We’ve heard a lot in the last year about crumbling buildings at 
the U of S (University of Saskatchewan) and certainly this is a 
difficulty. I know that when I was president of the Students 
Union back in, I guess it was ’90-91, Convocation Hall at that 
point was condemned. I’m not surprised. I think it was probably 
condemned when my mother was there some few years before 
that. This is an ongoing set of problems in terms of how we deal 
with that. And yet we have worked co-operatively with the 
universities to attempt to find solutions to that. 
 
Here in Regina we’ve worked co-operatively with the U of R 
(University of Regina) to try and find solutions to the capital 
problems that they face. The new Student Centre and Fine Arts 
facilities have been a great enhancement. The addition of ISM 
(Information Systems Management Corporation) and the info 
research park will certainly help out our engineering program 
here. 
 
And we’re starting to see our universities mature. And I think 
this is a very, very positive thing for Saskatchewan as we get 
ready to enter into that 21st century. 
 
There are those, I believe, in this House who think that we 
cannot compete as we head forward into the 21st century or 
believe that we can only compete if we slash the taxes in this 
province. And I want to tell you I disagree with that. Because as 
I’ve said earlier, by slashing the taxes we have to understand 
that there’s a cost and that usually comes in a slashing of the 

publicly funded education system. 
 
When I was the Student Union president and Grant Devine’s 
government was on this side of the benches, I will tell you that 
we went through, at the U of S, unprecedented increases in 
tuition because of the problems in funding and their lack of 
funding of those universities. Unprecedented increases. 
 
Now last year at the U of R there was a 2 per cent increase in 
tuition. It’s unfortunate there was any increase. I had wished 
that the universities had taken advantage of the fact that we had 
provided them with enough money not to have to increase 
tuition, but they did not avail themselves of that. Nevertheless it 
was not like the record increases that we were seeing when the 
Tories were in office. 
 
(1630) 
 
Now the Tories will say, oh, but it’s not true, we increased 
funding to the education and we increased funding to health 
care at that point. 
 
Well perhaps so, except today what we know is that the Tories, 
in order to deal with their problem of lack of credibility on 
finances, are now saying zero increases or minimal increases. 
Well what is the alternative? How do you deal with that? How 
do you pay faculty salaries? How do you pay teacher salaries? 
How do you pay for the increases in the cost of living? How do 
you deal with the new technologies? 
 
And it is the same in education as it is in health care. The 
opposition does not have a credible plan. Its plan doesn’t work 
financially. Its plan for health care doesn’t work in terms of 
needing the needs. Its plan for education doesn’t work in terms 
of meeting the needs of the students and the economy. And yet 
they still seem to feel that that is the direction we should be 
following. 
 
I’m surprised that the first question period in this House that the 
opposition would stand up and essentially say, Mr. Premier, 
why is it you don’t like our platform. Well isn’t that self 
evident? Isn’t obvious? Of course it is. We don’t like that 
platform because it’s a platform that doesn’t solve anything. It 
doesn’t add up. 
 
I think as the Finance minister once said, it was just plain 
goofy. And it is as we listen to it. And we watch and maybe, 
maybe what’ll happen, maybe what will happen is that they will 
go back and sit down and rework the plan. Or maybe they will 
be able to finally come forward and explain to SUN. And I’m 
interested in hearing what the members opposite are going to 
tell SUN that they’re going to do on their salary increases. How 
would they settle the current dispute with the nurses? 
 
I’m listening and I don’t hear any answer. What is your solution 
to the nursing problem? How do you settle that contract? How 
do you settle that contract with CUPE. Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. Now the hon. 
member is a veteran member of the House and he’ll recognize 
of course that the appropriate place to direct debate in the 
House is through the Chair, and I’m sure that he’ll want to 
conduct his debate in the proper manner and continue with his 



64 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 1999 

typical enthusiasm. 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My apologies — 
that is true. 
 
But I think it is incumbent upon the members opposite to come 
forward, particularly in this session, with a credible alternative 
to what we are presenting today and what we will present on 
March 26 with the budget, and tell us what that solution is; 
because unfortunately as much as every member in this House 
would simply like to wish it away, we have got to somehow 
find a contract with the nurses. And we have got to settle a 
contract with CUPE . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well the 
Tories across say if we had not made such a mess of health 
care. 
 
Oh, boy. Let me tell you. It was the Tories that made a mess of 
health care. It was the Liberals who slashed the budgets for 
health care funding. That’s the mess. Building hospitals that 
don’t need to be there for any purpose except getting their 
members re-elected, and that didn’t even work. 
 
Ask yourself what was the point of that, Mr. Speaker? Fifty-two 
facilities. Fifty-two facilities. For what? For what? And by 
going with a high cost, overcapitalized system, they were 
running a billion point two in deficits. Unsustainable. 
 
So we come in and we say how do we fix this? We convert the 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Now we’ve got two 
simultaneous debates going on here. Order, order. Now one is 
on the record and the hon. member for Regina South has the 
floor, and I’d ask all other hon. members who want to enter into 
debate to wait their turn and put their remarks on the record. 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. But going back to 
this question of where we ran into the difficulties, let’s 
remember that we had an overcapitalized health care system. 
What we have done is by converting these facilities, we have 
made more efficient use of funding. 
 
Nobody’s lying in the streets waiting for health care. Nobody 
has died as a result of the changes. No. You see, this is the 
problem. The members opposite are attempting to paint a 
picture of crisis. There is not a crisis in Saskatchewan health 
care today. There are problems in health care; there are 
problems in education. But there are not problems . . . there is 
not a crisis in health care as they say opposite. 
 
The member for Cannington unfortunately had missed my 
earlier comments about the situation in Alberta so perhaps I’ll 
restate them again. If we had gone with the so-called 
Saskatchewan Party’s platform, if we had implemented the 
Tory type changes, if they had been here, perhaps we would 
have a system like Alberta where today a quarter of a million 
Albertans risk losing medicare. A quarter of a million . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, the member opposite is now . . . 
I don’t know where he’s living to say that Alberta doesn’t have 
a waiting list. 
 
Oh, this is getting more and more surreal. I’m waiting for Grant 
Devine to reappear in here and say he passed the budget that 

year. This is just not a case. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the fact is that we have made tough decisions from 
1995, in 1996, in 1991, and we’ll make tough decisions this 
year, and those decisions have been to the benefit of 
Saskatchewan people. Saskatchewan people have benefited first 
and foremost by sound financial management which has 
restored this province to a stable, affordable level of 
government. 
 
Now the member opposite . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Although the member opposite I know 
doesn’t believe my figures, let me read to him one of his, some 
figures from one of his favourite groups, the good, old Fraser 
Institute. Saskatchewan — they are showing here public sector 
spending as a percentage of GDP — 1981 when the Blakeney 
government left office it was at 38.8 per cent. By 1992 when we 
took office again it had risen to 63.4 per cent — 63.4 per cent. 
Today we have gotten it back to a sustainable level of 46 per 
cent. 
 
Now this party opposite has difficulties, Mr. Speaker. Between 
1982 and 1992, late ’91, they had rapidly run up the bills and 
the credit cards of this province — rapidly running them up. 
You wanted a new hospital; you got a new hospital. A new 
nursing home; you got a new nursing home. A particular 
member is in trouble? Build them whatever they need. That was 
the solution that they offered. The reduction in taxes? Never 
happened. The reduction in taxes never happened. 
 
I listened earlier as the member from Melfort said . . . was pooh, 
poohing the fact that we had reduced the sales tax by 2 per cent. 
I would remind the member from Melfort that when we took 
office in 1991 there was a harmonized 7 per cent sales tax. We 
will remind them that there was a harmonized 7 per cent sales 
tax in this province. Remember that was the tax that was also 
applied to services as well as goods. Remember that was as you 
were tagging, as the members opposite were tagging along with 
good old Brian Mulroney and his good financial plans. That 
was their solution. Harmonize GST. 
 
Today the sales tax in Saskatchewan is lower than it was when 
we took office in 1991 because we removed from that tax base 
so many goods. Because we refused to put in the Tory tax on 
services. Imagine paying 7 per cent on every single service. 
That was the Tory plan . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . It was. 
 
I appreciate the member for Cannington being in here today 
because at least he has the courage to defend the Tory record 
that he so dearly supports. Unlike the member for Canora or 
Melfort who pretend that they’re not actually part of that 
agenda. It’s good to see that kind of defence from the real 
Conservative members. 
 
But it is, it is just unbelievable to hear the sense of denial that 
these members have about what they had really done to the 
province and where we were headed. And to somehow pretend 
that their fiscal plans now, that after all their years in the 
wilderness, that somehow they should be welcomed back onto 
the treasury benches. 



March 17, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 65 

Well I am just not certain that the people of Saskatchewan are 
going to see it that way. We saw them ring up spending up to 
1992. Now they’re saying, no, we’re not going to spend; we’re 
going to cut taxes, not realizing . . . Or maybe they do realize. 
Maybe I don’t give them enough credit. Maybe they understand 
exactly what that’s going to do. That is going to off-load the 
costs of those services directly onto individuals through service 
charges, through user fees. 
 
Let’s be honest about it. Let’s be honest about it, because, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s exactly where we’re at. That is the . . . that is the 
cost. The member opposite is talking about the municipalities, 
saying we unloaded to the municipalities. 
 
When we came to office in 1991 and when I was elected in 
1995, people said time and again what they wanted was a 
platform that said protect medicare, create jobs, reduce taxes. 
That, Mr. Speaker, is exactly what happened. That is what we 
have done. 
 
It has been a repriorization of government. And I think it draws 
back directly to what this speech this week has identified. Those 
priorities of ours have remained constant. We will protect 
medicare by introducing a new Saskatchewan medicare Act, 
and I wait to see how the members opposite, on a standing vote, 
vote on the Saskatchewan medicare Act. Are you in favour of 
medicare will be the question that they are posed, Mr. Speaker, 
or are they opposed to medicare? 
 
We understand with the Liberals — they’re probably in favour 
of medicare but just don’t want to pay for it. We’ve seen that. 
We understand where they’re coming from. 
 
But where is that party going to stand? Are they going to stand 
and vote in favour of the Saskatchewan medicare Act or will 
they oppose it? That’s the question, that’s the question is where 
are they going to be? Yes there’s been a reconfiguration in the 
system. 
 
Yes there have been changes in terms of the hospitals. The 
major hospital in my . . . adjacent to my riding has been closed. 
 
But do you know what? The people in my riding receive better 
service today than they did in 1995. They didn’t have access to 
a MRI. They did not have access to the spiral CT scanners. 
They did not have access to the new cardio lab. They did not 
have access to the same level of mental health services that they 
do. They did not have access to the same level of home care 
services. 
 
Today people are better off in the south end of Regina as they 
are in Southey, as they are in just about every other part of this 
province. And I think we need to remember that. I look forward 
to campaigning in this next election. I look forward to 
campaigning on it. I look forward to going out and explaining 
to people what we have done with health care. And I will tell 
you that people will agree that we have better health care today 
than we did. 
 
But what is the opposition going to campaign on? They are 
going to campaign on freezing the health care budget. They are 
going to campaign on freezing nurses’ wages. They are going to 
campaign on freezing the wages of the home care workers. 

That’s what the result of their policy is, Mr. Speaker. And it is 
. . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Shameful. 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Shameful is the best word in terms of the 
approach that is being brought forward. Duplicitous is another 
excellent word for what it is. Because as much as we would all 
like to hold the line, or whatever nice euphemism they have, the 
fact is it’s not going to work. 
 
And in the coming weeks as we have to grapple with the 
situation potentially with the nurses, I will be interested to see 
how the members opposite come forward with a solution on 
that. This is why I’m interested in seeing, Mr. Speaker. Because 
there is no way for us to go back to the style of spending that 
they had, to go back to the style of raising taxes that they had, 
to go back to the style of running this government that they had. 
The people of Saskatchewan aren’t going to put up with it. 
 
The interim member for North Battleford I hear talking from his 
seat and saying that the Liberals have an even better plan. Well, 
I’m not sure that in this election that there’s going to be enough 
whiteout in this province to fix the Liberal’s plan. I can only 
imagine what they’ll have to cook up this time. 
 
At least you’ve got to say about the Tory members opposite, 
somehow or another they have cobbled together a plan. It’s not 
a good one, it’s not a sustainable one, but at least they have it. 
The poor Liberals — I’m sure that the five of them there will 
run on five separate plans. I am absolutely certain of it. Maybe 
six. Of course, by then there may only be two of them. I’m not 
sure who else is going to move across the floor. It’s a sad, it is a 
sad state of affairs, Mr. Speaker, on that side of the House. 
 
(1645) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the agenda laid out in the Throne Speech is a good 
one. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — It is an approach that we hold dear. It is an 
approach that we feel strongly about, and it is an approach 
which is supported by the people of Saskatchewan. And if there 
is any doubt about it, the members opposite will know very 
soon that we’ll have the opportunity either to campaign in their 
by-elections or to campaign in a general election. One way or 
the other we will have an opportunity to face this issue. 
 
And I suspect that those by-elections or that general election 
will see a return of the members on this side of the House, will 
see new members come in where we’ve had retirements, and 
we’ll see just a few seats on that side come sit over here without 
their incumbents. I am quite certain of that — that the seats may 
very well move over here, but the incumbents are going to have 
to find something else to do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I want to tell you that this is a good 
Throne Speech. It offers hope at a time when Saskatchewan 
people are asking for it. It is offering solutions to the problems 
that we’re seeing today and it offers something that this party 
— this is probably the only party that could offer it — and 



66 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 1999 

that’s credibility. It is credibility. You know that when we 
identify a plan that it will work. It will work. Health care is 
going to work. We can see the progress in education and on the 
26th we will see a financial plan come down which the people 
of Saskatchewan I know will endorse. 
 
That’s a strong foundation. It’s something we have to be proud 
of on this side, and it is something which I hope all members 
will look at more seriously. 
 
I was concerned, I want to say, Mr. Speaker, I was concerned as 
I was listening to some of these speeches from the opposition 
members in the Saskatchewan Party over the last couple of 
days, and their concern about how somehow or another there’s 
this belief that the respect for constituents Act somehow is 
picking on them. And they talk about how they need to . . . how 
this is so terrible to them and it’s such a political Act. 
 
This Throne Speech is not about them. It has nothing to do with 
the opposition. This is a Throne Speech of the people’s 
priorities. Go and ask the people the question you haven’t asked 
them since you created your dark-of-the-night party. Do they or 
do they not support you? And the only way any one of us, the 
only way any one of us can know that is to go and stand for 
re-election. 
 
And I look forward to it. I look forward to being nominated in a 
few weeks. I look forward to being nominated in a few weeks 
and taking on the Liberals, hopefully taking on a Tory or a 
Saskatchewan Party. I understand there may actually be other 
candidates running. I suspect there may be a Green Party 
candidate. I look forward to it. The campaign will be excellent. 
And then at the end of it we will see who the people of 
Saskatchewan support. 
 
But this question of the respect for constituents Act is an Act 
that they’re asking for. And I suggest that you read your local 
weekly papers when they come out next week and see what the 
people in your communities are saying. Because they would 
support this. This is a popular measure. This is a people’s 
agenda. This is not about the members opposite — it isn’t. And 
we have done our best to try and focus it on that. 
 
Rather than talk about the fact that $350,000 was diverted from 
the Liberal opposition into the Saskatchewan Party caucus 
coffers, as happened when you guys created your party — 
Leader of the Opposition and his extra pay, the extra money for 
the Tory support staff . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, I’m 
not saying that. 
 
The member opposite asks if I’m saying if it was illegal. It’s not 
for me to advise the Tories on illegalities. Far be it for me to say 
anything on that. What I am saying is it diverted funds from a 
democratically elected party over to these folks, and I think it’s 
unfortunate. 
 
But at the end of the day, at the end of the day, Mr. Speaker . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . I will tell you, Mr. Speaker, it is a 
pleasure to have as many Tories in the House today to argue 
with directly or indirectly through you. But it is interesting to 
hear their perspectives because I’ll tell you as we go through the 
next several weeks of this session there are going to be a lot of 
questions which are going to get asked. Questions that they’ll 

certainly pose during question period. Questions that we’ll be 
posing during our speeches to them. 
 
And it is a good prelude to the debate that we’re all going to 
have in a few months as we head off to the polls. For my part I 
feel good about going into the election, be it tomorrow, be it 
two months from now, be it 18 months from now. With the 
record of this government, with the approach that we will be 
taking in this session, and with the overall consistent approach 
that we have taken since 1991 to restore honesty, integrity, and 
competence to government. That is something Saskatchewan 
people will endorse loud and clear. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I am tempted to save some of 
my speech for later on, but I want to talk for a minute about 
some of the other things which are important to my 
constituency specifically. And let me tell you, the members 
here, some of the benefits that we’ve seen, particularly on the 
job side. 
 
It is interesting to note, it is interesting to note that from 1992 to 
1997 Saskatchewan led the nation in economic growth — led 
the nation. It’s something we never hear from the members 
opposite. They don’t celebrate the accomplishments of 
Saskatchewan people. They simply refuse to accept that. 1992 
to 1997 — Saskatchewan leads the nation in economic growth 
and yet we hear nothing about it. 
 
Are there difficulties today? Sure. I wish oil was at a higher 
price. I wish wheat was at a higher price. I wish uranium was at 
a higher price. There are many things I wish, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There are many things I wish, Mr. Speaker, but I can tell you 
that we have a lot to celebrate. We don’t hear them talk about 
the fact that during that time period retail sales in this province 
grew 45 per cent. We forget that. Members opposite don’t 
mention that. They certainly don’t mention the fact that it 
outpaced Alberta during that time period. 
 
Now, I would be remiss if I didn’t mention the fact that one of 
the reasons retail sales grew was because we got rid of that 
harmonized sales tax that those guys put on. I’d be remiss not to 
mention that. You’ll remember the impact that that had on the 
restaurant sector in 1991. And we saw that increase almost 
immediately upon taking office on that first day of November 
when we said that was it, the harmonized tax was gone. Retail 
sales have grown steadily. Even when we had to go through the 
period with the increased sales tax up to 9 per cent, retail sales 
continued to grow. 
 
But we don’t hear anything about that. We don’t hear them talk 
about the fact that capital investments were up 63 per cent 
during that time period, or that the value of farm assets had 
increased 31 per cent. We hear nothing about that. Because that 
doesn’t fit their narrow agenda. 
 
We don’t hear of the fact that the value of manufacturing 
shipments was up 76 per cent since we took office — 76 per 
cent. That’s a phenomenal increase and speaks, I think, to the 
diversification and the vision of the business leaders and the 
co-operative sector and the work that this government has done 



March 17, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 67 

in terms of setting a foundation for that kind of growth. Today 
Saskatchewan’s economy is more diversified than it ever has 
been in our history. Grant Devine talked all the time about 
diversification, but never did it. But never did it. The 
diversification that has happened has happened since 1992. 
That’s a fact. But it’s a fact we don’t hear from the members 
opposite. 
 
I wish that we would hear this, but we don’t. We listen to the 
gloom and doom on the jobs front from the members opposite. 
Yet I want to tell you, Regina, which suffered under the initial 
set of cuts we had to do in 1992 and 1993 to get those balanced 
budgets, is back. Its economy changed. It grew. 
 
And last year — well, listen to this, Mr. Speaker, and I know 
the members opposite will want to hear it as well — Regina led 
the west in job growth. We did. It’s amazing. We still do — 
7,000 new jobs created in Regina last year. There were 4,000 
more people working in Regina in January than there were a 
year before. I understand those stats hold up in February. 
 
The members opposite say, what about the rest of 
Saskatchewan. Well we have been fortunate here in Regina to 
be on the front edge of job growth. And I know, and the 
members opposite know, and it is folly on their part not to 
admit that they know. 
 
A big part of the problem with job creation in the rural area 
right now has to do with the fact that oil has barely cracked $13 
a barrel. This is what they don’t understand. This is what the 
members opposite don’t understand. There’s a member talking 
away about the others but he again neglects the fact that 
Saskatchewan led the nation. Forgets to mention that a record 
number of people were working in this province last year, a 
record number — 478,000 — on virtually the same population. 
And yet the members opposite forget that; the members 
opposite forget that. 
 
And here, oh well they’re complaining the population’s not 
growing. And then the population grows and they complain the 
jobs aren’t growing. The fact is the population is growing, the 
number of jobs are growing, the economy is growing. We’ve 
seen diversification. This is a positive foundation for 
Saskatchewan to enter the 21st century on. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, we are nearing 5 o’clock and I 
hate to prolong the events of the House today. I wanted to make 
just a couple of other very quick comments. And there are a 
couple of things I’m very proud of here in Regina. 
 
First of all, it’s the fact that I look to the Crown corporations. 
And I know the members opposite would like to sell them all 
off, but we really have seen some real successes. And SaskTel 
is a real leader in terms of turning the economy around. I think 
that the testament to that is the fact Netscape Communications 
out of California came to Saskatchewan and signed a 
partnership agreement with SaskTel which is particularly aimed 
at providing Internet services to small and medium sized 
businesses. 
 
There’s a real opportunity here for us to capitalize on that. 

There’s a real opportunity for us, particularly in the health 
sector service, to grow. And we’ve seen this interest out of the 
U.S. even in terms of making use of Netscape and SaskTel’s 
services. These are real positives and they’re real changes. 
 
The fact that we’ve got a new $11 million petroleum research 
centre being built over on the U of R campus I think is another 
positive. There have been changes. There have been a lot of . . . 
We’ve had to think about the city’s economy differently, but 
we’re seeing that that growth has paid off. I know that when the 
commodity prices turn around, that growth we will see in rural 
Saskatchewan again as well. 
 
The member opposite asks, do I know when the commodity 
prices are going to turn around and when that’s going to 
happen. I will tell you that I am absolutely certain that the 
potential . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well the member, the 
member opposite says that I don’t have a clue on when it’s 
going to turn. Who does? Who does? 
 
The member opposite I’m sure has an opinion on it, and I’m 
sure he’ll provide a platform piece on it and a plan to get there. 
And it will be just as valuable as every other plan that they’ve 
presented and just as accurate. I am absolutely convinced of 
that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the next few weeks I know that this government 
will be bringing forward other announcements on job creation, 
particularly aimed at the rural sector. And I suspect the 
members opposite, listening to their clamourings on the other 
side, will take a very keen interest and will rise to support it, as 
we will on this side. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think with that I will end my comments and 
simply say that I will vote against the amendment proposed by 
the members opposite and will support the sound, solid plan 
laid out in the Throne Speech on Monday. Thank You. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, it will be my pleasure to speak 
to this motion, but it being very close to 5 o’clock, I would 
suggest that what we should be doing is calling the clock, and I 
would just move adjournment of debate at this time. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:01 p.m. 
 



 

 


