





























































Hansard: April 07, 1999


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 423 
 April 7, 1999 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers. 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I have a petition to present from people concerned 
about the Crown Construction Tendering Agreement. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to end 
its unfair tendering policies and immediately cancel the 
Crown Construction Tendering Agreement. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition come from within 
the city of Regina. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present today on behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan on behalf of Saskatchewan’s disenfranchised 
widows. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to have the Workers’ 
Compensation Board Act amended whereby benefits and 
pensions are reinstated to disenfranchised widows and 
whereby all revoked pensions are reimbursed to them 
retroactive with interest to April 17, 1985. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from the Saskatoon area. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, as well to present 
petitions, reading the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide a review process with respect to family 
intervention to ensure the rights of responsible families are 
not being violated. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petitions I have in my hand are signed by 
individuals from the Melfort, P.A. (Prince Albert), Choiceland, 
Kinistino, St. Brieux areas of the province. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
citizens asking that there be a review of parental rights. The 
prayer reads as follows: 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide a review process with respect to family 
intervention to ensure the rights of responsible families are 
not being violated. 

 
Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are all from the 
community of Melfort. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
and present petitions on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan who 
are embarrassed about the horrendous state of our highways in 
this province. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call on federal and provincial 
governments to dedicate a greater portion of fuel tax 
revenues toward road maintenance and construction so that 
Saskatchewan residents may have a safe, reliable and 
effective highway system. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on these petitions are from Neudorf, 
Lemberg, Melville, Duff, Goodeve, and Yorkton. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I rise with petitions from citizens 
concerned about the contested and unsafe entrance to the city of 
North Battleford and requesting the relocation of the junction of 
Highway 40 and Highway 16. Your petitioners come from 
North Battleford, Battleford, and Denholm. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 
petitions today. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call upon the provincial 
government and SaskTel being wholly accountable to the 
people of Saskatchewan to immediately take steps to 
provide cellular coverage to this area so that residents can 
travel in winter with some assurance of safety. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed these petitions are 
from the Kincaid, Rockglen, Willow Bunch, St. Victor, 
Assiniboia, Coronach areas of the province. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 
petitions on behalf of people who are concerned about the 
severe financial crisis facing our farmers in the province. The 
prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call upon provincial and 
federal governments to immediately take steps to end 
unfair world subsidies and provide farmers with prompt 
relief from declining incomes and act as watchdogs against 



424 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 1999 

rising input costs which are harming the rural economy. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Those who’ve signed these petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from 
all over the province. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud today to 
rise again in this House to present petitions on behalf of the 
people of this province. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call upon provincial and 
federal governments to immediately take steps to end 
unfair world subsidies and provide farmers with prompt 
relief from declining incomes and act as watchdogs against 
rising input costs which are harming the rural economy. 

 
And causing many farmers to go down the tubes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This petition is signed by people from the communities of 
Lemberg, Grayson, Neudorf, Stockholm, Fenwood, and 
Melville, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I so present. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
an honour once again to rise on behalf of citizens in 
Saskatchewan who are concerned about quality education for 
exceptional children. And I’ll read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide essential funding and ensure the delivery of 
scientifically proven diagnostic assessment and 
programming for children with learning disabilities in 
order that they have access to an education that meets their 
needs and allows them to reach their full potential. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
All the people who have signed this petition today, Mr. 
Speaker, are from Leoville, Saskatchewan and Prince Albert. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the petitions presented at the last 
sitting have been reviewed and found to be in order. Pursuant 
to rule 12(7) these petitions are hereby received. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 20 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: how many district health boards 
have completed and submitted their three-year strategic 
plan to the provincial government; what are the necessary 
elements set out by the provincial government that are to 
be included in these three-year strategic plans; and when 
were the districts to have their three-year strategic plans 
completed and submitted to the provincial government. 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
want to introduce to you and members of the Assembly today, a 
family that’s from my constituency that are here visiting the 
legislature today, Robert and Lydia Sliva, along with their four 
children, Jason and Eric and Timothy and Stephanie. 
 
They’re here, Mr. Speaker, not only to observe the work of the 
Legislative Assembly but as well they’re home-schooling in 
this province. And part of their educational experience is to 
bring their children to the Legislative Assembly to see the work 
of the members who are here. 
 
So I want to welcome them to the Assembly today. I’m meeting 
with them shortly in my office and would ask all the members 
of the Assembly to join me in welcoming the Slivas to the 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to introduce to you and to all members of the House a 
gentleman seated in your gallery, Mr. Lyle Stewart. Lyle 
Stewart was the successful candidate in the constituency of 
Thunder Creek last week in a very large attended meeting, and I 
wish him well in the future endeavours. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet I’d also like to join with the 
Minister of Education in recognizing Rob and Lydia Sliva. Rob 
and Lydia originally attended Invermay School. And this dates 
me, Mr. Speaker, because I think they happen to be former 
students of some of my classes. And I want to congratulate 
them and I wish them well in their endeavours of meeting with 
the minister. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you 
and through you to all members of the legislature, a man who is 
sitting in your gallery, Dr. Ed Udd — I’d ask Ed to stand — is a 
professor at Washington State University in Pullman, 
Washington. And he’s here in Regina interviewing students 
who will go down to Washington State University on an 
exchange program from University of Regina and the 
Saskatchewan Indian Federated College. 
 
This is part of the North American mobility in higher education 
project which is funded by Human Resources Development 
Canada, and it includes Washington State University, 
University of Regina, Saskatchewan Indian Federated College, 
University of Manitoba, Campeche Autonomous University, 
and Quintana Roo University, both in Mexico. Let’s give him a 
warm welcome. 
 
He’s accompanied by my brother, Dr. Ralph Nilson, who is the 
Chair of this committee. He’s also the consul of Norway. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 



April 7, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 425 

introduce to you and the members of the legislature, two young 
hockey players sitting up in the east gallery. The one is my 
youngest son, Carson, and a friend of his, Kyle Haubrich from 
Hodgeville. They’re here this week to enjoy the proceedings of 
the House, keep the government in line. And I welcome them 
here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to the Assembly, I would like to introduce some 
constituents: Mrs. Shelby Goud seated in the west gallery along 
with her children, Eric, Andrea, and Heather. 
 
Shelby and her husband, Garnet, operate the Carlyle Motor 
Products down in the town of Carlyle. And Shelby is also in the 
process of gaining her Canadian citizenship. So I hope she 
enjoys the proceedings here today. And I’d ask everyone to 
welcome them here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 
for me to introduce someone to you and through you to all 
members of the Assembly, someone who is most deserving to 
sit behind the bar — I notice that he’s, of course, in the west 
gallery — that’s Ian MacDougall who was a member of the 
Legislative Assembly for the Liberal Party representing the 
constituency of Estevan for some time. 
 
Many of you may have remembered from years past his 
handsome knees when he wore his kilt. But the infamous Ian 
MacDougall is in the House today and I ask everyone to give 
him a warm welcome please. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 
my colleague from Wood River in welcoming his son Carson 
here this afternoon, as well as Kyle Haubrich, son of Barry and 
Val Haubrich from my riding, and I always enjoy seeing some 
young people in the House and I hope you have a lot of fun here 
this afternoon. 
 
I’d also, while I’m on my feet, take the opportunity to welcome 
Lyle Stewart here this afternoon and wish him well in his 
endeavours, and I’d encourage him to take in as many days of 
proceedings as he possibly can on his road towards trying to 
overthrow me in Thunder Creek. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 
gives me great pleasure today to introduce to you and through 
you to the members of the Assembly — due to the Easter break 
— someone special to me in the west gallery, my son Jordan 
who is down to observe the activities today. I wish everyone to 
give him a warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Melville People and Events 
 

Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is an 
honour and a privilege to rise today and tell you about some of 
the terrific events that have taken place in my constituency 
recently. 
 
The annual spring Melville and District Trade and Craft Fair 
took place March 26 to 28; about 80 booths featuring dozens of 
different products, along with a first-ever craft section, made 
the show among the best ever and the attendance was great all 
weekend. I’d like to commend all the hard work done by the 
Chamber members — with whom I had the pleasure of working 
in the past — and the displayers, as well as the many people 
that stopped by my booth to say hello, wish me well, and tell 
me how they feel that this government is deserting them by 
choosing the wrong priorities. 
 
And like the member from Regina Sherwood, I too would like 
to publicly welcome Dr. Abdalla Kenshil to the Melville area. 
Dr. Kenshil will be the chief surgeon at St. Peter’s Hospital 
performing general surgery. But mostly I would like to 
commend Dr. Kenshil’s courage for agreeing to come to a 
province with such a disastrous health care record. Obviously 
he was unaware of how health care workers are treated in this 
province. 
 
Nevertheless, Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to welcome the new 
secretary-treasurer from Melville’s combined school divisions. 
Mr. Calvin Martin began his job March 1, moving from 
Saskatoon. I look forward to meeting him and his family in the 
near future, and I’m sure he will enjoy living in Melville. 
 
I’d like to congratulate the Melville midget hockey team. For 
the first time in 20 years, they are proud owners of a provincial 
midget hockey championship. On March 23, before a great 
hometown crowd, they defeated Tisdale for the championship. I 
congratulate the Junior A Millionaires. 
 
And I’d also like to welcome this afternoon to the community 
— I understand the Deputy Premier will be . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The hon. member’s time has expired. 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. I just wanted to 
respond very quickly. The member for Melville of course forgot 
one more event that . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. The hon. member will 
recognize of course that it is beyond the rules of statements by 
members to engage in debate other members. Continuing 
statements by members. 
 

Medical Research Funding 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
think members will recall over the last couple of years my 
requests and many questions to the ministers of Health 
regarding medical research funding in Saskatchewan. Too few 
opportunities are given in the House to be able to commend the 
government on its performance. And of course the reasons why 
I for so many times raised the issue of medical research funding 
or the lack of it in the province is because there was a void to be 



426 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 1999 

filled. 
 
Well this past week the Minister of Health indeed did raise I 
think the whole profile of medical research funding in 
Saskatchewan by providing to them matching funds for many, 
many of the resources that were going to be available to 
researchers in Saskatchewan, but would be lost if the province 
did not put in their share. 
 
This was done. It’s to the credit of the government to recognize 
this, and in particular to credit to the Minister of Health for 
doing so. I know that people in Saskatoon are very, very 
pleased about this and as a citizen of Saskatoon and a citizen of 
Saskatchewan I simply wish to say, thank you. 
 

Medical Research Projects 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 
speak to the research funding and call attention to it as a further 
indication of this government’s commitment to quality health 
care here in Saskatchewan. A commitment of $200,000 from 
the province for very significant research projects conducted at 
the University of Saskatchewan in Saskatoon. 
 
This funding will be matched by the Medical Research Council 
of Canada and will be augmented also by the College of 
Medicine which means that the seven projects will share more 
than $400,000. Projects covering a range of different health 
issues from cancer research, nerve cell injury, women’s health, 
and circulatory disorders. 
 
They address the real concerns of Saskatchewan people and 
they’re part of an ongoing provincial commitment to health 
research. It isn’t what it could be or maybe even should be, but 
it’s a step in the right direction. An increase of more than 50 per 
cent since 1992. And I’m happy to see this additional money in 
place as is all members from Saskatoon especially. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

1999 Saskatchewan Indian Winter Games 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I’m 
pleased to rise to mention the 1999 Saskatchewan Indian Winter 
Games is being held here in the city. I watched the hockey 
game this morning between the Yorkton Tribal Council and the 
Meadow Lake Tribal Council novice games. And, Mr. Speaker, 
all of these young children are having a lot of fun. 
 
The game was very, very close when I left — two-two — so as 
I wouldn’t cheer for the wrong team even though my heart was 
with the MLTC novice team. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I was very happy to see people out there that 
are very important to all athletes in the province. Reggie Leach, 
who played with the Philadelphia Flyers, dropped the puck at 
the start of this game. We also bumped into Sandra Schmirler 
who is a gold medallist in the Olympic Games. And we also 
bumped into an MBC (Missinipe Broadcasting Corporation) 
broadcaster, the only guy in Saskatchewan that can do 
play-by-play in Cree — the famous Tsi-boy Iron. 
 

All of these people are taking part in the Indian Games. And 
certainly it hits the mark when you hear the comments by 
Saskatchewan’s Minister of Intergovernmental and Aboriginal 
Affairs when he opened the games. He had this to say: 
 

As the new generation you have helped build and shape the 
future of our province. You will become the leaders and 
role models of tomorrow. The dedication and hard work it 
has taken to get here will serve you well as you pursue 
your education and careers. These games are an 
opportunity for you as young athletes to expand your 
horizons, test your abilities, make new friends, and renew 
friendships from past years. 

 
I ask all members to once again show our appreciation to the 
participants, the volunteers, parents, and organizers of . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The hon. member’s time has expired. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 
National Aboriginal Curling Championships 

 
Mr. Whitmore: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Over the Easter 
weekend Saskatoon and the Granite Curling Club hosted the 
National Aboriginal Curling Championships, concluding with a 
nail-biting, come-from-behind win on the Monday night game. 
 
Eighty rinks from across Canada participated as they of course 
attracted a great number of spectators to this annual event which 
pits the best Metis and First Nation curlers against each other in 
friendly competition. 
 
I particularly want to congratulate Mr. Martin Aubichon, the 
1999 chairman, and his fine staff of volunteers which planned 
the event. And I know he’d want me to mention the sponsorship 
of SaskPower. 
 
To our newest member of the caucus, the member from 
Athabasca, I can report his teams did very well. The men’s 
team, skipped by Lawrence Corrigal, a good sport from 
Ile-a-la-Crosse, lost by a whisker to a team skipped by Len 
Aubichon from the Red Pheasant Reserve. But at least the 
championship stayed in-province. 
 
The junior men’s title went to Jason Gardiner, also of 
Ile-a-la-Crosse. The junior women’s title was won by Tracy 
Deschambeault from Cumberland House. 
 
My congratulations to all. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Prince Albert Community Workshop 35th Anniversary 
 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. Tonight the people of Prince Albert are celebrating the 
35th anniversary of a very special community organization. 
 
The Prince Albert Community Workshop is celebrating 35 
years of advocacy for the disabled; 35 years of providing 
meaningful employment, economic freedom, dignity, and 
personal independence; 35 years of working to remove barriers 



April 7, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 427 

facing people with disabilities. 
 
I would ask all members to join with me in commending the 
staff and volunteers of the community workshop for 35 years of 
excellence. 
 
I would also like to congratulate the general manager, Dennis 
Bleir, who will be retiring after 35 years of service. 
 
Mr. Speaker, through their efforts the staff and volunteers 
demonstrate the values of Saskatchewan — compassion, caring, 
and concern for their community. Mr. Speaker, this is what 
makes Saskatchewan a wonderful place to live. 
 
And I want to once again congratulate the P.A. Community 
Workshop on 35 years of the best work that our community and 
our province has seen. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Students to Toronto for National Competition 
 

Mr. Ward: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud to inform 
the House today of two high school students from Estevan who 
will be representing Saskatchewan in a national auto skills 
competition. Murray Conrad and Jared Story, grade 12 students 
at the Estevan Comprehensive School, earned this right by 
placing second in the 8th annual provincial Canadian 
Automobile Club and Ford Student Auto Skills Contest that was 
held last month in Regina. 
 
This contest challenged the mechanical knowledge of eleven 
teams representing seven high schools from across the province. 
During the competition each team had to diagnose and repair a 
malfunctioning car. This was followed by a comprehensive 
written exam. The Estevan team received high marks and 
placed second to a very strong Nipawin team. 
 
This gives both teams the right to go to Toronto for the national 
competition. In addition, the Ford Motor Company of Canada 
will pay the expenses of both teams. The winners of this 
competition will go on to the North American final held in 
Washington later this year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, please join me in congratulating Murray Conrad 
and Jared Story, along with their auto technology teacher John 
Dyck, in their success. We wish them the best of luck in the 
national competitions and know they will be superb 
representatives of Saskatchewan. 

 
ORAL QUESTIONS 

 
Negotiations with Nurses 

 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
for the Premier. Mr. Premier, over the past eight years you have 
given this province one health care crisis after another, and it’s 
always someone else’s fault. You blame the former 
government, you blame the federal government, you blamed the 
health districts, and today you’re blaming the nurses. 
 
Mr. Premier, it isn’t the nurses’ fault; you created the mess. 
You created the nursing shortage; you created the wage 

disparity. Why don’t you take responsibility? 
 
Mr. Premier, instead of blaming the nurses, why don’t you take 
responsibility for the chaos you have created in Saskatchewan’s 
health care system? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, I have an editorial from The Press Review which 
is the Eston newspaper, dated Tuesday, March 30, 1999 and in 
that editorial Verna Thompson indicates: 
 

In the past few days I’ve been at two Saskatchewan Party 
meetings and one NDP meeting. I’ve come away from both 
Saskatchewan Party meetings depressed and ready to slit 
my wrists with my fingernails. I came away from the NDP 
meeting on a three-day high. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the point of the editorial is that all that this 
opposition seems to be able to do, Mr. Speaker, is spread doom 
and gloom, Mr. Speaker. And that’s not what this government’s 
all about. We’re quite optimistic about the future and quite 
hopeful about the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I gather the 
writer can’t stand the truth because the Premier did create this 
mess, Madam Minister. The nurses didn’t create the massive 
wage disparity between provinces; you did. The nurses didn’t 
create the Dorsey report and the massive pay inequity between 
Saskatchewan nurses; you did. The nurses didn’t create the 
nursing shortage; you did. 
 
And what is the result? Overworked nurses, bed closures, and 
chaos in the health care system. And now the potential for a 
nurses’ strike. It’s not the nurses’ fault, Madam Minister; it’s 
your fault. Yet all you do is blame the nurses. 
 
Madam Minister, when are you going to take responsibility for 
the nursing shortage and the total chaos that you have caused in 
our health care system? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, you know, the 
Saskatchewan Party or the Tory Party continue to spread doom 
and gloom. You know, if you left it up to them I think we’d all 
be in a major state of depression. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you will know, the Premier yesterday called on 
both the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses and the Saskatchewan 
Association of Health Organizations to meet with him this 
morning. Those meetings are continuing and we’re quite 
hopeful about the outcome of those meetings. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
after eight years of NDP (New Democratic Party) government 
most people in Saskatchewan are depressed. Madam Minister, 
there is nothing more than sandbox negotiation tactics from the 



428 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 1999 

playground bullies known as the NDP. First the Health minister 
threatens to take away all the toys by bringing back . . . by 
putting in back-to-work legislation and threatening with 
thousand dollar fines. And now we get the Premier picking up 
sand and throwing it in the nurses’ faces. 
 
Madam Minister, you have been acting like playground bullies 
for the last eight years, always blaming someone else and 
throwing sand in their faces. Madam Minister, you know what 
always happens to playground bullies. Eventually someone 
decides they’ve had enough and hangs a licking on them. 
Madam Minister, when are your bully tactics going to end? 
When are you going to quit throwing sand and take 
responsibility for the chaos that you have created? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, as I indicated in the 
previous answer to the previous question, the Premier of the 
province of Saskatchewan along with the Saskatchewan 
Association of Health Organizations and the Saskatchewan 
Union of Nurses are meeting. There are many issues that 
obviously need to be addressed if we are to put hope back into 
the workplace for nurses. And what I can tell the member is that 
those discussions are continuing and we’re quite hopeful that 
through these series of discussions that the issues that we’re all 
faced with can be resolved. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again, to the 
Minister. The headline on the front page of today’s Leader-Post 
says, “Patient safety a concern.” Of course, that’s a story about 
the possible nurses’ strike. The problem is patient safety has 
been a concern with nurses for a long time now and it will 
continue to be a concern even if you legislate the nurses back to 
work. Health care in this problem . . . in this province is 
bleeding to death and you’re offering a band-aid. The problems 
are going to continue; patient safety is going to continue to be a 
concern because we don’t have enough nurses. 
 
Madam Minister, I know . . . I know you plan to legislate the 
nurses back to work to fix your short-term problems but how 
are you going to deal with the long-term problems — nurses 
that are overworked and stressed out because of the nursing 
shortage created by your NDP government. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As the 
member will know that on March 26, 1999, the Minister of 
Finance rose in his . . . from his chair in the legislature and 
announced a $195 million increase to the provincial Health 
budget. The provincial health spending in this province, Mr. 
Speaker, is now at $1.9 billion. That’s 1,900 millions, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s a significant increase in funding and we believe 
that this increase in health funding will go some distance to 
addressing many of the issues that we are presently confronted 
with. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just want to go back to this editorial. What’s so 
interesting about the Saskatchewan Party is that they are 
running around the province — which they are prone to do — 
they are running around the province spreading doom and 
gloom and fear. 

Mr. Speaker, as this woman, Miss Thompson indicated, it’s 
time for the Saskatchewan Party to start spreading some hope, 
Mr. Speaker, and we think that’s what will happen with the 
discussions that are occurring as we speak. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There is a 
good reason for fear and concern around this province when 
this government is dealing with health care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve been in the Plains hospital and the Wascana 
Rehab a lot over the last year and I’ve seen what’s happening 
first-hand when it comes to working conditions of nurses. And 
their concerns are very real. They’re working too many hours, 
they’re working double shifts. The strain on the system is real, 
Mr. Speaker, and patient care is suffering. It’s not because 
nurses aren’t working hard enough; it’s because they’re 
working too hard due to the nursing shortage caused by the 
NDP government. 
 
Madam Minister, it’s a problem you and your government 
created and you’re not going to solve it simply by ordering the 
nurses back to work. In fact, the situation is probably going to 
get worse. The Premier hired the past president of SUN 
(Saskatchewan Union of Nurses) and is now the Associate 
Minister of Health and the problem has got even worse since 
then — some friend. 
 
What are you doing to address the tremendous nursing shortage 
in this province, Madam Minister, that’s causing the problems? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
if the member, the Health critic for the Saskatchewan Party, had 
had an opportunity to read any newspaper in this country, and 
in fact, if they had gone onto the Internet, they would discover 
that nursing shortages are not something that are peculiar to the 
province of Saskatchewan. In fact, Mr. Speaker, there are 
nursing shortages all across the globe, and I’m thinking in 
particular Great Britain is one example, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I indicated to the member — and I know that he 
is extremely interested in escalating this situation because that’s 
what the Saskatchewan Party or Tory Party is prone to do — 
the Premier of the province of Saskatchewan and the employer 
and SUN are having a discussion as we speak. And we are 
hopeful, Mr. Speaker — we are not in a doom and gloom mood 
— we are hopeful that we can begin to address the many issues 
that nurses and other health care workers in this province 
presently face. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the Premier said, 
nurses are asking for wage increases that would be unfair to 
other health care workers, to other public sector workers, and to 
taxpayers. Once again, we see the NDP government’s double 
standards. 
 
In 1996 the CEO (chief executive officer) of the Saskatoon 
Health District was making somewheres between 105 and 



April 7, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 429 

$140,000 a year. Today he’s making $185,000 a year, and that’s 
an increase of somewheres between 33 and 77 per cent in just 
three years — 33 to 77 per cent. 
 
That’s a wee bit more than 2 per cent your guideline has. But of 
course the NDP always have more money for administration but 
never enough money for the front line workers like nurses. 
 
Madam Minister, why the double standard? You compare the 
CEO salary to London or to Halifax, but how about comparing 
some nurses’ salaries? Why is there more money for 
administration and not for the front line workers, for the nurses? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, this member of the 
legislature was elected in 1991 I believe. He replaced Mr. 
Berntson, representing the constituency of Cannington. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this member came to this legislature as a 
Conservative and he was re-elected to this legislature as a 
Conservative in 1995. 
 
My point is, Mr. Speaker, that this member comes from a 
history of a government that racked up $15 billion in debt. That 
presently, Mr. Speaker, amounts to about $2 million a day in 
interest. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I could tell this member that we could hire a 
tremendous number of health care providers in this province if 
we had that $700 million-plus that is now leaving this province 
in the form of interest on the public debt racked up by that 
member’s party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Phoenix Advertising 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question 
today is to the minister responsible for SOCO, Saskatchewan 
Opportunities Corporation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. Order. The Chair 
is having some difficulty being able . . . Order . . . The Chair is 
having some difficulty being able to hear the question being put 
by the hon. member for Wood River. I’ll ask for the 
co-operation of the House on both sides. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
minister has surrounded herself with political hacks that are 
either incompetent or have chosen to deliberately mislead 
elected members of the Crown Corporations Committee. 
 
Liberals have received through an FOI (freedom of information) 
from SOCO a listing of the advertising agencies contracted by 
SOCO and the amount they are paid. Well for two years 
Phoenix Advertising with Reg Gross, who we all know too well 
as the NDP bagman, has coincidently been the NDP agency of 
record. In 1997 they were awarded $153,000. That’s nice to 
have old friends like the NDP writing your cheques. 
 

What’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, is that in a report given to the 
Crown Corp. Committee SOCO stated that only 82,000 was 
paid to Phoenix Advertising in 1997. The amount given to 
MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) is $70,000 less 
than what was forced out of SOCO through an FOI. 
 
My question is to the minister responsible for Saskatchewan 
Opportunities Corporation. Why did her staff hide the $70,000 
difference in expenses from committee members? Why is her 
staff deliberately misleading elected members of this House? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — I can assure the member and I can 
assure the legislature that nobody’s staff is misleading anybody 
or hiding anything. These are wild allegations. And what I will 
say is that one of the things that we are proud of on this side of 
the House is what we’ve done to clean up the tendering of 
advertising. 
 
Before we became government this sort of thing probably did 
occur in this government because there weren’t strict rules and 
there weren’t guidelines. We’ve gone to an open tendering 
process in which everything is transparent and accountable and 
that would be true of SOCO as it would for any other agency in 
this government. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m surprised to 
learn that the minister is proud of their record in advertising. 
Again to the same minister. In the FOI received by the Liberals, 
Phoenix received 105,000 in 1996 and 152,000 the following 
year. That’s a 50 per cent increase in funding for NDP 
advertising. While the Premier demands workers accept a 2 per 
cent increase in wage demands, he gladly signs cheques for 50 
per cent increase in advertising expenses for NDP hack firms. 
 
My question to the minister. How does she justify a 50 per cent 
increase in advertising expenses paid to that NDP hack firm 
when her NDP government forces others — like nurses and 
others working in this province — to stick to a 2 per cent 
increase? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — First of all, when it comes to the 
Liberals, like the Tories, I would never take their numbers at 
face value. You look at some of the comments about their 
platform and I think we can learn from that. You never take 
their numbers at face value. 
 
The second point I would make is, look at what this member is 
doing to respected firms in this province, calling them NDP 
hack firms. As I say, we have a process that we put in place as a 
government whereby advertising is tendered. 
 
And the final point I want to make, the final point I want to 
make to this legislature, is the government has to do some 
advertising. If we have programs available, if we have agencies 
like SOCO, which invest or lend money to businesses, we have 
to be sure that the businesses know what the services are that 
are available to the people. 
 
So again on this side of the House, we have nothing to 
apologize for in terms of advertising. We’ve cleaned it up. And 
as far as them, I’ll look at their numbers very carefully before I 



430 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 1999 

believe them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You bet you’ll 
look at these numbers. You’ve got a lot of explaining to do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this case of incompetence or deliberate misleading 
of MLAs is not isolated to the Saskatchewan Opportunities 
Corporation. It appears that SaskEnergy is guilty of the same 
thing. Again coincidentally the agency of record for 
SaskEnergy is Phoenix Advertising — the lucky group. In 
another FOI obtained by the Liberals, Phoenix was paid 
750,000 bucks by SaskEnergy for the services in 1997. 
 
However once again a completely different number was 
reported to the Crown Corporations Committee. Rather than a 
$70,000 sleight of hand, this time the difference is almost 
120,000 bucks. Mr. Speaker, I think a pattern seems to be 
emerging here: let’s only tell one part of the story and hope 
nobody asks any questions. 
 
My question to the Deputy Premier: why did he and his staff 
hide the $120,000 difference from elected members? Why is his 
staff deliberately misleading elected members of the Assembly? 
What’s he hiding? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
member from Wood River that clearly this would be the 
Phoenix that that member would have used when he was a 
member of this side of the House — just so people understand 
who he’s talking about. 
 
I would also say that in terms of the numbers, likely the 
differential is different year-ends or some very explainable 
method of accounting for the advertising. What’s important 
here is that the tendering that takes place, the tendering that 
takes place, is open to scrutiny at any time. 
 
Probably what has happened here is your new staff, Mr. 
Urbanoski, has done the numbers and due to lack of experience 
simply hasn’t got the dates, that the numbers tie to, correct. But 
to you, sir, I would say, as the House Leader has said, we’ll be 
checking these numbers pretty carefully because your numbers 
in the past haven’t been quite accurate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m surprised that this 
government is still saying, we’re going to check your numbers. 
They have been caught so many times, they should just sit back, 
listen and accept the blame that’s coming their way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question again goes to the Deputy Premier. In 
the FOI from SaskEnergy, the 1996 total paid to Phoenix 
Advertising was 572,000. The following year the bill paid by 
taxpayers rose to almost 750,000 — that’s a 30 per cent 
increase in one year. 
 
Ironically it seems the closer we get to the election, the more 
money is spent on NDP propaganda. The 50 per cent increase in 
fees paid by SOCO to Phoenix, the 30 per cent increase paid by 
SaskEnergy — that’s the waste that we’ve been talking about 

and that’s what’s going to be cut under our government. 
 
It’s obvious to everyone that the NDP is really just using tax 
dollars to pad their election IOU accounts with these hack 
firms. How does the Premier, and how does the Deputy 
Premier, justify 50 per cent and 30 per cent increases to their 
NDP hack firms while everyone else in this province is being 
told to shut up and take what you get from this government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
members opposite and to the Assembly, obviously this member 
is a little confused about advertising and competition because as 
we know, all of our Crowns are moving towards competition. If 
you follow the track of SaskTel as it went to full competition, 
the advertising went up by many, many percentage points. 
SaskEnergy is now moving down the track, as urged by the 
members opposite, to full competition. What would they have 
us do? Not advertise, lose the business to the private sector 
friends of the Liberals and Tories? 
 
But one thing I do want to say to the member opposite. Just 
remember, this is the individual who ran under the leadership of 
another individual as a Liberal, formed the official opposition, 
then went through the process of kicking out that leader, and 
now sits with a rump of a party pretending to be a Liberal. I say 
to you, sir, you have very little credibility and it’s gone down 
another 10 notches today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Funding for Education 
 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, my questions this afternoon are for the Minister of 
Education. 
 
The health system is not the only government service that is 
falling apart thanks to the NDP. Saskatchewan teachers are 
saying the NDP is well on its way to destroying the education 
system as well. Mr. Speaker, STF (Saskatchewan Teachers’ 
Federation) president, Doug Willard, is saying inadequate 
education funding from the NDP government is driving more 
costs onto the property tax base. Mr. Minister, Saskatchewan 
already has the second highest tax in Canada. Now your NDP 
government is forcing education boards to increase property 
taxes to pay for K to 12 education. 
 
Mr. Minister, is that your advice to school divisions? If the 
NDP’s funding isn’t going to pay the education bill, then have 
the school boards just jack up the taxes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the member 
opposite that in this province, we’ve had that two sources of 
revenue for the funding of Education, from the treasury and 
from the local tax base, of which school trustees in this 
province support as the minister . . . as the member opposite 
supported when he was the president of SSTA (Saskatchewan 
School Trustees Association). So the process is the kind of 
process that school divisions across the province want. 



April 7, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 431 

Remember, Mr. Speaker, that in this province today we spend 
more money on education — the most amount of money in 
education — than we’ve ever spent in the history of this 
province. Similar to health. The largest amount of money that 
we’ve spent in this province — $400.9 billion to K-12 
education. 
 
The member opposite talks about what we spend. What will he 
spend? What will he spend, Mr. Speaker, because this member 
here talks about freezing education in this province. One point 
five spending in education is what the Saskatchewan Party 
would spend — $1.5 million. 
 
Not us. Ten and a half, ten and a half per cent increase to 
education over the last two years with a commitment, Mr. 
Speaker, to spend more. Not like the Saskatchewan Party to 
freeze it and leave it at 1.5 per cent below the cost of living in 
this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I think I under . . . I’m starting 
to understand the NDP strategy. Cut education funding to the 
bone, and then blame school boards for the tax increase. 
Mismanage the health system for seven years and then blame 
the nurses for the deteriorating health services. Is that the 
NDP’s strategy, Mr. Minister? Find some innocent bystander 
and blame him for the government’s . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, schools divisions are saying 
property taxes will have to increase if education grants are not 
brought into line with rising costs. Teachers are saying the NDP 
is forcing school boards to increase taxes in order to keep 
schools open. Saskatchewan families need more from their 
provincial government than an endless supply of excuses and a 
growing mountain of new taxes. 
 
Mr. Minister, what is the NDP government’s plan for dealing 
with the serious funding shortage many school boards will face 
this year? Is your plan to close more schools and chase more 
teachers out of the province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I want to say first of all to the member 
opposite that in this province today, as I said earlier, we’re 
spending $400 million in education. And I want to . . . to the K 
to 12. 
 
But I want to say to the member opposite, there are two 
strategies that I’ve already announced that we’re going to work 
on. One is the role of the school — to add additional resources 
to the system over the next couple of years. And the dialogue 
with SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) 
and SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) 
and the SSTA to look at how we’re going to fund education in 
the future. 
 
But to the member opposite when he talks about closing schools 
in this province, this member sat as a member of the school 
division in his constituency. He closed schools in his 

constituency at a rate that’s comparable to any other part of the 
province. He was part of that school closure. 
 
He said . . . In his Canora career in 1996 he said that it’s 
important that we look at a meaningful, a meaningful strategy in 
closing schools in this province. He says a meaningful . . . 
closing schools in this province. 
 
And I want to say to the member opposite that if we had the 
$750 million today that the Tory, that the Tory administration, 
of which he’s a part of today, ran up as debt in this province — 
750 million — we could take the 60/40 and we could take the 
60 per cent off completely and fund education in this province. 
Seven hundred and fifty million dollars in taxes is your 
expenditure — yours. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, from a government that’s 
open, accountable, and responsible, I submit the answer to the 
question 35. 
 
The Speaker: — The answer to item 1, question 35 is provided. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — The answer to question 36, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The answer to item no. 2, question 36 is 
provided. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — I have here the answer to question no. 37, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The answer to item no. 3, question 37 is 
provided. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion moved by Hon. Mr. Cline that the Assembly resolve 
itself into the Committee of Finance, and the proposed 
amendment thereto moved by Mr. Gantefoer. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This government was 
first elected in 1991. It came to power . . . it came to power in 
the midst of a serious fiscal and moral crisis which will go 
down in Saskatchewan history as the Devine comedy. I give 
this government full marks for, like Ottawa, bringing back 
fiscal integrity. 
 
That said, after eight years in office, we have to ask what next? 
Where is the plan for the economic renewal of Saskatchewan? 
Where is the plan to reverse the flow of our young people out of 
the province as economic refugees? 
 



432 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 1999 

What is the plan to deal with the changing environment of 
Crown corporations, the rapid amalgamation of telephone and 
communication services across the continent? 
 
Where is the commitment to bring our rapidly expanding 
Aboriginal population within the economic mainstream? 
 
What is the approach to deal with the fact that we live next door 
to the lowest taxed jurisdiction in the country while we remain 
among the highest? 
 
What is the plan to deal with our crumbling infrastructure, 
especially in highways and education? 
 
Where is the commitment to bringing MRIs (magnetic 
resonance imaging) and CAT (computerized axial tomography) 
scans and renal dialysis to our regional hospitals so that all 
residents of the province may have health care close to their 
homes? Where is the commitment that there won’t be a wave of 
rural hospital closures as soon as the election is over. 
 
Where is the commitment to ensure that in health care and in 
other fields we do not simply become a province of two cities? 
Where is the plan to bring our highways back to standard? 
 
And, if I may digress for a moment here, three years ago this 
government promised to spend $250 million a year for 10 years 
on highway redevelopment. They haven’t hit that target once 
and they do not hit it again this year in this year’s budget. 
 
The one good thing in the budget, we had hoped, is that we do 
see significant new funding in health from the federal 
government and now from the province. So we had thought we 
could look forward to some improvements in health care. 
 
And I was very bitterly disappointed then that following on this 
budget our own health district in the Battlefords was forced to 
have an horrendous increase in the cost of ambulance service in 
the Battlefords. The basic cost of a hospital trip has gone now 
from $145 to $225. The mileage cost for out-of-district trips 
over and above this basic 225 will go from $1.45 per kilometre 
to 2.25 per kilometre. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we know that the ambulance provides a 
good service. We know they have to upgrade their vehicles. 
However two things disturb me greatly: first, for our seniors 
especially, we have this huge increase from $145 to $225; and 
the other thing that came to my attention is that ambulance 
service around the province varies widely from health district to 
health district. 
 
Now I know this government is committed to equal access to 
health care. The fact that ambulance rates vary so greatly is 
two-tier medicine. It is two-tier health. And I have to ask the 
minister and the associate minister, why the enormous 
differences in ambulance rates from health district to health 
district? 
 
If we believe in universal and equal access to health care surely 
something should be done from the provincial level to provide 
ambulance service at reasonable cost and also to make sure that 
the burden of ambulance costs falls more or less equally across 
the province instead of especially in some communities over 

others. We know that most of our ambulance users are our 
senior citizens on fixed incomes so this is a serious issue for 
them. 
 
If I also may digress for a personal note for a minute. I have 
always been one, Mr. Speaker, who objects greatly to those 
people who insist on telling us . . . I’ve always been one of 
those who does not like those who tell us the details of their 
operations. Well if I may break my own rule for a minute, I do 
have to say that I had surgery last week in the Battlefords Union 
Hospital, and I must put it on record that I am more than 
satisfied with the level of care and treatment I received. 
 
I especially want to express my gratitude in view of my prior 
fears that the NDP might send down word that I was not to be 
given anaesthetic. But I have to report, Mr. Speaker, that 
everything went well and like many other patients I have 
spoken to, I was impressed with the dedication and the caring of 
our nurses. And we know that in spite of the tremendous 
pressures they have been under, that they continue to do a 
dedicated job for the people of Saskatchewan and that I want to 
put forward my own personal thanks for a job well done. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wish to speak about our Crown corporations for 
a moment. Again this year the provincial budget includes only 
the activities of the General Revenue Fund. That 40 per cent of 
government activities . . . (inaudible) . . . occurring within the 
Crown corporations is not covered by the provincial budget. 
This omission is even more serious today as our Crowns are 
faced with new and fundamental challenges. 
 
(1430) 
 
Take the example of SaskTel. Today it is the only, solely, 
provincially-owned telephone company. It is also the only 
telephone company on the continent not regulated. And finally, 
it is the only telephone utility which has yet to form a link with 
any other telephone company. 
 
Well we know that every other telephone company in the 
country has now formed a link with one or more other 
telephone companies. What is the plan to save 
telecommunication service in this province as we move into 
CRTC (Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications 
Commission) regulation? We know that there will be new and 
increasing pressures put on our Crown corporations which now 
look very small and vulnerable in the face of this new 
environment. 
 
We are all thankful, Mr. Speaker, that we have gotten through 
another winter with no serious interruption in power service. 
However this . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Why is the hon. member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And thank you to the 
member from the Battlefords. 



April 7, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 433 

I just noticed in your gallery, the Speaker’s gallery, a young 
lady and her two daughters from our area. Her husband happens 
to be the dentist in our community. I’ve had to deal with him a 
few times but . . . Mrs. Sylvia Ku and her daughters, Stephanie 
and Natasha. We’d like to welcome you this afternoon and trust 
you’ll find the proceedings very interesting and informative. 
Join me in welcoming our guests today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

(continued) 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I was saying, we 
are thankful that we have gotten through another winter with no 
serious power interruptions. However, this does not diminish 
the reports that our power has not been well managed and that 
SaskPower has a grid which is aging, not being properly 
maintained, and being increasingly stretched to the limit to meet 
the needs of this province. SaskPower, which was so full of 
ideas for investing and building around the world, has lost sight 
of its real mandate to provide power to this province. 
 
On taxation, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan starts taxing 
low-income earners at one of the lowest levels in Canada, far 
lower than either Manitoba or Alberta. Alberta residents will 
soon enjoy a basic exemption of $11,600, which is over 23,000 
for a couple. Manitoba offers a basic exemption of nearly 
$1,500 more than the exemption in Saskatchewan. 
 
In Saskatchewan we start taxing low-income residents at only 
$7,402 income. If the government truly wanted to put more 
money into the pockets of low-income earners, it would raise 
basic exemptions. This would be by far the most efficient 
method of giving low-income families additional funds. 
 
I do want to congratulate the Minister of Finance on the 
reduction of the sales tax. This is especially welcome to 
residents and businesses in the western part of our province. I 
note that the minister projects this will cost the province 100 
million in lost revenue. The last time there was a reduction in 
the sales tax, it ended up costing the treasury only one-half of 
what it was forecast. 
 
I firmly believe that this was because fewer of our residents 
drove to Medicine Hat or Lloydminster to do their shopping. 
 
I call upon the provincial government to do a study as to the 
cost of cross-border shopping, especially in the western part of 
the province. The government should know how much revenue 
the government is losing and how much revenue businesses are 
losing because of cross-border shopping. I am convinced that 
reductions in the sales tax will ultimately save rather than cost 
money to our province. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, the biggest single area in which 
Saskatchewan residents are overtaxed is property tax. We pay 
by far the highest property taxes in the whole of Canada. This 

of course is the direct result of underfunding by the province in 
the areas of education and municipalities. 
 
This situation has not been addressed in the current budget. And 
of course since the budget was announced we have heard more 
reports from both municipal governments and school boards 
that increases in property tax are inevitable as a result of this 
budget. 
 
Our high level of property tax is not only sapping the strength 
out of struggling farms, it is acting as a disincentive for retiring 
residents to remain in Saskatchewan. In that regard I have to 
say that since the Alberta budget came down in February I have 
been truly frightened by the number of residents who have 
approached me saying that they are now considering moving to 
Alberta. 
 
I have to also say that most serious of all, the high burden of 
education tax is leading to a backlash against education by 
property owners. And I don’t want to see that. If we want our 
education system to remain a high provincial priority, then the 
province has to reassume its responsibility for funding. It has to 
cease pushing the burden of school financing on farm and home 
owners. 
 
We do see some increase in training, post-secondary training, 
but that represents transfer of responsibility from the federal to 
the provincial government rather than an increase in 
programming. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve spoken of the tax revolution which appears to 
be sweeping this country. Alberta of course is now committed 
to a flat tax, no longer linked to the federal income tax Act. The 
provincial Minister of Finance has shown some interest in that 
and said that Saskatchewan is also looking at an independent 
income tax system, no longer linked to the federal income tax. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say that there is nothing necessarily 
wrong with that. However, when the Minister of Finance talked 
about our own income tax Act, I couldn’t help but worry that 
his real concern is that Ottawa is now committed to reductions 
in the federal income tax. And of course the way the present 
system is set up, every time the federal government reduces 
income tax, the marginal rate of Saskatchewan is also 
automatically reduced. 
 
Is this what the Minister of Finance is really worried about? Is 
this what the government is determined to stop so that unlike 
what happened this year with the federal budget — the federal 
government reduced income tax, consequently the provincial 
income tax also came down — is the government committed to 
putting a stop to that so that future decreases in the federal 
income tax rate will not result in benefits to Saskatchewan 
taxpayers? 
 
We live next door to the lowest tax jurisdiction in Canada. This 
is a problem for us if we are to maintain our infrastructure, 
maintain our tax base, and to have incentives for growth. We 
cannot afford to have the second last tax freedom day in the 
country without suffering an exodus of investors, entrepreneurs, 
and other people who are looking for a lower tax level. 
 
I am distressed as I look down the revenue side of this year’s 



434 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 1999 

budget. I note that if we look at provincial revenues, we find 
that they are static or declining in nearly all areas except for 
two, Mr. Speaker. And the two which are increasing are these 
— federal transfers, and liquor and gaming. Again this year, the 
only true bright spots in our provincial revenues will be 
transfers from Ottawa, and gambling. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a province increasingly dependent on federal 
transfers and gambling revenue is not something to take pride 
in. This is something we should all consider to be extremely 
serious and something we should all be committed to reversing 
if we truly want a strong and vibrant future for Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I heard one of the ministers say earlier that 
all we hear from the opposition is gloom and doom. And I don’t 
want to do that, but I do have to say that many of the statistics 
being generated by this province do indeed give us cause for 
pause. And the most serious of all the statistics which have been 
generated by this province in the last year which concerns me is 
that we had the lowest level of job creation in the entire of 
Canada and the only province with a net job loss. 
 
A couple of years ago I recall that in an area of Regina the bus 
benches, while people were waiting for the bus, were decorated 
with signs announcing how many jobs had been created in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Well we should all, regardless of party, look for job creation. 
We want our young people staying and living and working and 
having families and building futures and building homes and 
yes, paying their taxes here. And it should be a matter of great 
sadness to all of us when we see our province not fulfilling that 
promise and when we see our young people pursuing their 
futures elsewhere. 
 
I have to ask, will we see in Regina this year bus benches with 
signs on them saying Saskatchewan, lowest job creation in 
Canada? Will we see signs saying Saskatchewan, only province 
to have a net loss in jobs? 
 
You know, some of the rhetoric we heard around the budget, if 
one let it go very quickly and didn’t analyze it too carefully, 
would leave one with the understanding that this province was 
booming. You would think we were the envy of Alberta instead 
of struggling to keep up with Newfoundland. Well last year 
unfortunately we did not keep up with Newfoundland. 
Newfoundland considerably outstripped this province in job 
creation. 
 
If I can digress for a moment. When I was convalescing last 
week I considered myself privileged to be able to watch the 
television coverage of the 50th anniversary of the entry of 
Newfoundland into Confederation and of course the 
inauguration of the new territory of Nunavut. 
 
These are great developments and we in this Chamber, being 
Canadians, I’m sure welcome heartily both the new territory 
and also the anniversary of Newfoundland. I certainly wish 
them no ill and I am glad, as I’m sure other members are, that 
Newfoundland appears to be headed to a new prosperity after 
many years as our poorest province. 
 
However, that said, I hope this doesn’t mean that we will 

supplant Newfoundland as the province with the lowest 
economic growth and the bleakest time for our young people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many of the things I have said have been perhaps 
critical of the government. But I have to for one moment put the 
Liberal Party on record as soundly rejecting the solution offered 
by the Saskatchewan Party. Their proposal to abolish the 
Canada Health Act and thus end national standards is an 
Alberta-driven agenda. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I understand when Reform, as an Alberta-based 
party, is opposed to national standards and is opposed to the 
Canada Health Act. I also understand that the end of national 
standards would in fact benefit provinces like Alberta. So I 
understand where they’re coming from and I understand why 
they endorse it. 
 
But I want to say emphatically that national standards are 
Saskatchewan’s best, perhaps our only guarantee that the level 
of services we have in education and health and transportation 
will be commensurate with those enjoyed by Canadians in other 
provinces. 
 
We cannot afford to sacrifice the principle of national standards. 
And I think that has been a struggle for the Premier too over the 
constitution talks. We all know that there are great moves for 
decentralization in this country, mostly coming from the 
province of Quebec but also coming from the province of 
Alberta. 
 
(1445) 
 
I think all members of this House applaud and support the 
Premier for his work on behalf of national unity. But I again 
want to say we cannot sacrifice national standards for national 
unity. National standards are key to the success of this province 
and to the maintenance of a fair level of services in health and 
education for Saskatchewan residents. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, in the Throne Speech debate one 
government member put forward two very interesting 
propositions. First he said that we shouldn’t be comparing 
Saskatchewan to other provinces. Next he said that 
Saskatchewan will have to be patient while this government 
tries to get it together. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, how else do we evaluate how we are doing 
in areas of taxation, economic development, job creation, 
taxation, health care, and highways, and growth, if we don’t 
look at our neighbours and see how we stack up against them? 
 
The fact that the government or NDP members would say we 
shouldn’t be comparing is I think proof that they know that 
under their stewardship we have not kept pace with our 
neighbours. And we are in danger of becoming the poor 
relations in Confederation. 
 
We have to be prepared to compare and we have to say we can 
be compared to our neighbours in other provinces and we can 
look good in the process. Well, as I say, we were told we 
shouldn’t compare and we were told we needed more patience. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I have to report to this House that as I go 



April 7, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 435 

around the province I note that the patience of our people is 
melting away faster than the winter snow. Our people have been 
patient — too patient. But, Mr. Speaker, that patience is fast 
wearing out. 
 
What is needed, Mr. Speaker, is to bring together the leaders of 
agriculture, industry, labour, and the Aboriginal community, to 
sit down together and to jointly devise a strategy for the 
economic renewal of our province. We need a plan to work 
together. We need a joint conference representing the leadership 
of all sectors of the Saskatchewan population. This is urgent 
and it should be a top priority of whoever is elected as the next 
Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
If we do not get economic renewal, then even with the very best 
of intentions we will not be able to maintain a proper 
infrastructure. We will not be able to hold our young people. 
We will not be able to have a fair level of taxation on the level 
with our neighbours. It is only through economic development 
that we will be able to maintain those social services which we 
all cherish. It is only through economic development that our 
future will be our children’s future, and that this province can 
continue to grow and develop and be strong and support those 
social programs in which we all take pride. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
pleasure to stand today and reply to the budget speech on behalf 
of the constituents of Humboldt, a great people who I admire 
very much. They’re a very forward-looking, a very creative and 
innovative people, and certainly the rest of the province 
acknowledges the way that area of the province has moved 
ahead in spite of NDP repressive policies. And so I once again 
would like to greet those people out there today and to 
acknowledge some of their thoughts through my reply to the 
budget speech. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what the people of the Humboldt constituency 
constantly tell me is they know that they have the resources, the 
human resources and certainly the natural resources, at hand 
and they have the desire to go ahead in this province and to 
build the province and to maintain their livelihoods and 
certainly to increase the opportunity for their children to stay in 
the province and hopefully to have some of their children come 
back. 
 
However, they have also told me that just in no uncertain terms 
that their children are leaving because they cannot make a wage 
that will leave some money in their pockets at the end of the 
day. And not only are their children leaving, Mr. Speaker, I’ve 
received several letters of late that indicates that there are a 
number of people in their 30’s and 40’s who are certainly 
deliberating and thinking very seriously about leaving our 
province and moving to Alberta or moving to another province. 
 
They are doing this and they tell me stories like this. They say 
. . . A couple in Humboldt wrote me mentioning that they have 
three children. The mother of these children chose to stay at 
home with the children. However, she was forced to go back to 
work just to pay the taxes that her husband has got to pay from 
coming from his cheque. And so she goes to work, Mr. Speaker, 

simply to pay the taxes that her husband must pay. 
 
Now when we talk about a better quality of life in the province 
. . . and we have often mentioned the violence that we’re 
experiencing within the province of Saskatchewan, certainly a 
number of young people experiencing difficulty because they 
don’t have work and they don’t have proper guidance 
sometimes, and they are getting into trouble. I think, Mr. 
Speaker, this woman’s letter to me gives a clear indication of 
what could be done to help the situation. If the taxes were 
lowered in this province, particularly our high personal income 
tax, I think that we would see many more people staying here. 
 
People have also indicated to me, Mr. Speaker, that the costly 
regulations associated with setting up business in this province 
is a major deterrent to them. People become very discouraged 
when they have to go through a barrage of paperwork and a 
lengthy waiting period to set up business in the province. So 
those are some very simple things. 
 
The other things that people are talking to me about, Mr. 
Speaker, is they’re saying, you know, this government has 
collected more taxes than ever. They’re spending $5.5 billion a 
year now to run the province. What is the matter? Where is the 
money going? And so I tell them, I don’t really have a great 
understanding of it because the government doesn’t divulge to 
us all of their expenditures and all of their income, and there’s 
no possible way for us to know at this point. However, it is 
evident that there has been mismanagement — terrible 
mismanagement — and incompetence on the NDP 
government’s part in every sector that we look at: in health care, 
in education, in municipal government. We look at our 
highways, Mr. Speaker, and we still have the same crumbling 
highways that we had when this government came into power, 
and they have gotten much, much worse. 
 
In the budget this year, Mr. Speaker, speaking of highways, I 
noticed that in the Humboldt constituency, we have a total of 
approximately about 24 kilometres of highway that will be 
patched. This is a shame, and it’s a disgrace that people have to 
take their children to school, that people in the health care 
service sector have to drive ambulances over roads like this, 
that farmers that are trying to transport their grain and their 
livestock to market are having to deal with a dangerous 
highway system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that has got to come to an end, and people are 
wanting to have designated taxes . . . they’re telling me they 
want to have fuel taxes, 100 per cent of that designated to 
highway. At least that way they’ll have a clear picture of what’s 
happening and whether or not there maybe needs to be another 
way of dealing with it. But if they get that clearly from the 
government, that government will do that, there is an area of 
predictability there for them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government . . . the NDP government ceases 
. . . or doesn’t seem to, rather, understand that we just cannot 
get along here the way we are going right now. They don’t 
seem to understand that Saskatchewan is not an island onto 
itself when it comes to competition. They don’t seem to 
understand that we need to be competitive with other provinces 
in order to flourish in this province. 
 



436 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 1999 

They don’t seem to understand that just because the government 
seems to appear to be doing well financially that most people in 
this province are not. And they don’t get the fact that the 
government cannot simply confiscate most of the income of the 
average worker in this province and hope to build a prosperous 
province. Because to build a prosperous province these people 
across the way need to understand that we must be competitive, 
we must have a level playing field. And we must have that 
playing field, level playing field, with our neighbours to the 
south and to the west and to the east of us. 
 
And the government across, Mr. Deputy Speaker, don’t 
understand that playing politics with a budget at this critical 
juncture in our history is an abandonment of the leadership that 
they were elected to provide. 
 
The NDP just doesn’t understand that it is to Saskatchewan’s 
advantage to become a have province. The NDP seem to be 
thrilled when we are so very poor. They seem to be very happy 
when they get increased equalization payments from Ottawa. 
But in reality, Mr. Deputy Speaker, increased equalization from 
Ottawa sends a clear signal that the NDP have failed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget as I see it is nothing but a political 
document. It’s obvious that the Minister of Finance went to 
great pains to use the budget document as a political tool 
designed to fight the Saskatchewan Party’s popular, credible, 
and realistic plans. But try as they might to adopt much of our 
platform they just couldn’t bring themselves to do it, Mr. 
Speaker. They couldn’t bring themselves to announce plans for 
a realistic and decisive tax system that would stimulate growth 
and produce a vibrant economy here in our province. But they 
insist instead on perpetuating prohibitive, high, income tax 
systems where our citizens are forced to pay taxes that they 
cannot any more take. 
 
As much as party ideologies may not be as strong as they once 
were, Mr. Speaker, with the NDP, one party ideology in the 
NDP is still very much alive — and that’s the belief that 
people’s money is better off in the pockets of the government. 
Yes, it is true that political pressure mainly from the 
Saskatchewan Party but from people throughout the province 
also, have caused them to act and offer a very minor reduction, 
very minor reduction with the most visible tax in this province, 
the PST (provincial sales tax). And we agree on that move but, 
Mr. Speaker, it’s only a very small part. 
 
We have no signs in this budget, none whatsoever, or in the 
Throne Speech that began the session this year, that the NDP 
government is serious about bringing responsible and 
considerable tax relief to the people of the province. It seems 
that the NDP is content to keep the people of Saskatchewan 
pinned to the mat with the monster of high taxation. And until 
the government does realize the damage that their high taxation 
policy is doing to this province economically and 
psychologically, damage will continue to be inflicted. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ve come to a point where if something 
is not done and done quickly, there will be no hope to see 
Saskatchewan advance up the ladder of economic prosperity. 
We’re already choking on the dust of other provinces who’ve 
realized that governments cannot continue to tax people to 
within an inch of their lives. 

Those provinces began cutting their taxes years ago and we’re 
seeing the results of that. We can see this in The Globe and 
Mail story clearing showing Saskatchewan dead last in terms of 
economic momentum. 
 
And we can see this in terms of the job numbers which have 
been recited many, many times in this legislature. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, everyone can see this except the members opposite of 
course, who should be absolutely embarrassed by their record 
on this front. 
 
We see tens of thousands of jobs created in provinces on either 
side of us. And in NDP Saskatchewan we lose jobs, the only 
province to do so. And it’s frightening to see that, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. It’s very frightening also to see that even the 
government, the inept NDP government cousin Glen Clark in 
British Columbia has a better record in job creation than we do. 
Now if that isn’t a damning indictment of a government, I don’t 
know what is, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I find it very interesting and telling when I look at 
the equalization payments received from the federal 
government in Saskatchewan. Just to explain to the members 
opposite, equalization payments aren’t the same thing as 
transfers from the feds for health care or other programs. This is 
a program who sees the poorer, so-called, have-not provinces, 
get a cheque from the Government of Canada to make up for 
the fact that they have failed to create their own wealth, their 
own prosperity. I think the equalization formula is a pretty good 
measuring stick as to see how very poorly this province has 
done in building an economy. 
 
(1500) 
 
Well let’s see, Mr. Speaker, in 1997-98 Saskatchewan was on 
the verge of becoming a have province for one of the very few 
times in its history. That year we received just $8 million in 
equalization payments. We were one step away from that leap 
from the unsuccessful to the very successful; one step from 
being classified as welfare recipients to becoming contributors 
to the nation. Now that would have been really something any 
government could have taken pride in. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, instead of jubilation and pride, do 
you know what we got from the NDP, Mr. Speaker? We got a 
bunch of hand-wringing and woe-is-me stories, that because of 
a strong economy our equalization payments were on the 
decline. The NDP Romanow government didn’t see that as 
good news — no way. Instead the then Minister of Finance, 
now the Minister of Economic Development, in one of life’s 
cruel little ironies said becoming a prosperous have province 
was really bad news because it would really be better to 
continue having to depend on large sums of federal revenue — 
federal welfare payments. 
 
It was better, according to her, to continue to live off the 
success of other prosperous provinces. And the fact that that 
minister is now in charge of building the economy of this 
province explains why we were the only province in 1998 to 
actually see jobs vanish right before our eyes. Once again this 
was a party, an NDP Party, that could not see past the needs of 
a government in order to start looking to the needs of a people. 
 



April 7, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 437 

If Saskatchewan had . . . had crossed that line and become a 
have province, it would have meant a strong economy, a 
thriving province. But for too many on the opposite side of the 
House, their views of the province does not extend too much 
farther than the doors of this building. They see Saskatchewan 
and government as one in the same. And it’s just not the case, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. When the government is doing well 
financially, it doesn’t necessarily follow . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the hon. member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — With leave to introduce guests? 
 
Leave granted 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 
also to the member for allowing the leave. 
 
I’d like to introduce to members . . . I thought this lady looked 
strangely familiar to me. I’d like to introduce to all of you a 
page from the last session actually, up in the gallery. Cara 
Renkas is seated in the Speaker’s gallery, and I’d like all 
members to join with me in welcoming her back to the 
Legislative Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

(continued) 
 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, what the people of the province need to know is, when 
it appears that the government is doing well financially, it 
doesn’t necessarily follow that the people are doing well. And I 
should direct that remark more at government members because 
the people of this province do understand that. 
 
And if there was ever a case study for this, it’s Saskatchewan in 
1999, Mr. Speaker. And as we continue down this path of ruin, 
it’s only going to get worse. As we continue, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, to chase our youth out of Saskatchewan, there is no 
one to pick up the tax burden. More and more taxes continue to 
be placed on the shoulders of fewer and fewer net contributors. 
And that just simply cannot be sustained. 
 
But yet the NDP still doesn’t get it. Politics in the place of good 
governance. That’s what the NDP is all about. Mr. Speaker, 
there are some very real issues that must be addressed in this 
province, and no matter how much political wallpaper the 
members opposite use, the problems remain. 
 
I find it extremely interesting that nearly four years after I 
raised the issue of the growing problems of child sexual abuse 
through the child prostitution trade — and I raised that in this 
legislature — the government has now seen fit, mere weeks 
before an election call, to bring in a Bill that makes it appear 

they actually care about the issue. 
 
For three years, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve raised this issue only 
to be greeted by members on the opposite side of the House 
rolling their eyes, shaking their heads, and thinking that this 
subject was something that did not need to be discussed. For 
three years they’ve claimed it wasn’t a problem. 
 
So why the change now, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Well perhaps the 
Premier made an uncustomary visit to his own riding. Or maybe 
he took a look at the NDP’s polling numbers when it came to 
justice issues and saw that sweeping these problems under the 
rug was no longer good enough in the eyes of the people. 
 
Did the NDP bring in this Bill that has proven effective in other 
provinces, Mr. Speaker? No. Did they adopt the measures used 
in Alberta that have already proven extremely successful? No. 
Did they provide more safe houses or spaces in drug and 
alcohol treatment centres for youth? No, they didn’t. Any 
actions that are substantial are beyond this government’s scope. 
 
When literally dozens of cars were stolen in Regina over one 
weekend a year or two ago, our Justice minister stood in his 
place right over there and he told us with a straight face that he 
didn’t think it was a real problem. It was only when their 
polling came back that the NDP thought that they’d better get 
on board in the fight against crime and in our streets. 
 
Do they really believe . . . even now, Mr. Speaker, do they even 
really believe it? Will they admit how serious these problems 
are under their government? I doubt it. 
 
So when I hear the Minister of Finance say safe communities is 
one of the targets of this budget, you will have to excuse me if 
I’m just a little bit sceptical about the authenticity of the NDP’s 
claims on either child prostitution or youth crime. 
 
Mr. Speaker, like any other department of the government, the 
NDP simply throws money at the situation and they think it’s 
done — the job is done. And they haven’t figured out yet that 
sometimes the problems go beyond funding. 
 
Yes, we have to provide adequate funding in all areas of 
government, but we also have to provide leadership in those 
areas if we want to effect real positive change. Simply opening 
up the cheque book, taking taxpayers’ money and throwing it at 
the problem is not enough, and taxpayers expect more. It’s the 
easiest thing for a government to do but it is not enough, not by 
a country mile, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In fact, spending estimates 
went up in 21 of 28 departments this year. But does that mean 
that services are going to get better? I doubt it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, of course this is the same argument, and we can 
use this argument in health care — the NDP cheer and they 
applaud whenever the health care budget goes up but never do 
they ask how the money is being spent. Never do they tell the 
people how the money is being spent. Never do they seem to 
look into how the money is being spent. Never. 
 
This seems to me to be a pretty irresponsible thing to do when 
the Health department now consumes 40 per cent of the total 
budget. It’s a lot of money, Mr. Deputy Speaker — over $1,900 
for every man, woman, and child in this province. 



438 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 1999 

And while the Saskatchewan Party is committed to matching 
this dollar for dollar with subsequent increases in future years, 
we also want to know how the money is being spent and we 
want to make sure it goes to front-line services. And we want to 
make sure it’s going to patient services. And we want to know 
for sure that it’s not going to administrative purposes to the 
extent that it has been put in by the NDP government because 
this administrative nightmare has caused complete decimation 
of our health services. 
 
The NDP don’t seem to want those answers, Mr. Speaker. I 
know in my area those questions are being asked. When people 
find out that the funding for a new hospital in Humboldt has not 
been slated for in the budget, they are very doubtful about this 
government and they ask, where is the health budget going? For 
goodness’ sake, why couldn’t we have had the money for our 
new hospital? We have been deliberating over this. We had our 
plans finalized. We had Sask Health people out there knowing 
exactly about all of these plans being completed, waiting for the 
call from the Minister of Health to submit the plans. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the call never came. And so on the 
behalf of those people in Humboldt, I made a phone call to the 
Minister of Health’s office and also to the capital management 
person, Leslie Parker. And I asked why, at the end of February, 
the good people in Humboldt hadn’t gotten a call that usually 
comes in November from this government, a call for capital 
construction spending. 
 
The answer I got from the minister’s office and also from the 
capital management person was that there wasn’t going to be a 
call going out. And I said well, the budget is about ready to 
come down very quickly here within a month. How can our 
hospital be considered for construction approval if in fact the 
people there can’t even get their plans in to the government? 
 
The minister’s assistant simply said, we don’t know yet if we 
can do this or something to that nature, and there may not be a 
call put out to health districts for capital construction projects 
for two or three months. 
 
What I heard from the minister and what the minister 
commented to the media on this matter was that health districts 
should have known that they could have submitted their 
proposals any time. That the policies had changed; everything 
had changed. 
 
Well the CEO (chief executive officer) in our health district had 
not heard about the changes. And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this 
leads a person to be a bit suspicious about the intent of the 
government and the intent of maintaining hospitals within that 
district of their intent to honour affiliates in that district, who 
happen to be the Sisters of St Elizabeth in Humboldt, to honour 
them in the ownership of that hospital. 
 
It seems like that district has gotten stonewalled left, right, and 
centre by this government, and there is a lot of people feeling 
that they have been misled. It is my hope, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that we will see money for a new hospital in Humboldt. And it 
is also my hope and the wishes of the people there that the 
sisters will not be deterred from maintaining ownership of that 
facility. 
 

Mr. Speaker, another area where expenditures continue to rise is 
in Social Services. This is another area we hear the government 
talking a really good game about making people more 
independent, about moving people from welfare to work. But 
do we ever see any concrete evidence of this? Today we have 
more people on welfare in Saskatchewan than we do farmers. 
 
The NDP sees this as a mark of their compassion. More 
welfare. Others, however, see this as a major cruelty. To allow 
someone to stay on welfare when they are perfectly capable of 
taking care of themselves is not compassionate. It’s cruel. Yes, 
there are those in our society who do need help — single 
parents, the disabled. However, single employables should not 
be on welfare if they are able-bodied, single employables. They 
should have the opportunities at hand, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to 
work. 
 
Welfare cannot be a way of life, Mr. Speaker. It is demeaning to 
people. It should be there in the case of the unforeseen 
emergency which happens from time to time. But people should 
be encouraged to make their own way in the world because the 
best social program, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is always a job. 
 
We also hear this government, the NDP government, bragging 
about more money for education and municipalities, Mr. 
Speaker. But let’s again look at the reality. The increase in K to 
12 education will barely cover the cost of increased teacher 
salaries negotiated without input from the SSTA. This could 
mean another increase in school taxes for property owners in 
many parts of this province. And property owners are already 
paying the highest property taxes in Canada. 
 
In terms of increased funding to municipal governments, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, municipal governments are still about $13 
million short of what they said they need just simply to 
maintain the services that now exist. Once again this could 
mean another increase in property taxes, especially since the 
RMs (rural municipalities) must raise cash to match the 
government’s funding if they want to see a penny. 
 
In terms of Agriculture, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have seen this 
government’s lack of commitment through and through and 
through, Mr. Speaker. Agriculture has barely rated a mention in 
either the Throne Speech or the budget. Our province’s lack of 
action during the fall and winter has left our farmers saddled 
with a farm aid package that is practically useless. 
 
And while our Agriculture minister was declaring the crisis 
over and leaving for vacation, the federal government was 
cobbling together a program that might be just fine for farmers 
somewhere in Ontario or Quebec, but it’s a true farce here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
This is a program where farmers have to spend hundreds of 
dollars, Mr. Deputy Speaker, just to pay for accounts . . . for 
accountants rather, because the forms are so convoluted. And in 
the end most of them are told that they don’t qualify for any 
assistance anyway. So those who have been hit the hardest 
during the last three years most likely will not qualify. 
 
(1515) 
 
The provincial government’s offer to hog producers will do 



April 7, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 439 

more to benefit the large hog barns because many of them have 
a major grain company backing them and they can afford to 
take the loans. But smaller hog producers say they won’t take 
the loans. They won’t take them even if they’re there because 
they won’t help them anyway. They say they simply don’t have 
enough cash on hand, and those loans will not keep them in 
business. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we hear so much of the grand plans of the 
NDP when it comes to economic development and job creation, 
but where’s the proof? The NDP continues to jabber on about 
the mythical 30,000 jobs that they say they’ve created. The only 
thing impressive about this figure is that those members can 
keep a straight face while mentioning it, because they know full 
well that it is a fantasy. 
 
The  NDP idea of economic development is to set up yet more 
boards, more bureaucracy. The Economic Development 
department’s budget is about $43 million. But when asked 
whether they ever use services provided by the department, 
such as REDAs (regional economic development authority), a 
tiny percentage of business people actually have done that. 
Only about 1.9 per cent have used our REDAs to establish a 
business. 
 
Instead of real economic development, namely creating an 
environment where entrepreneurs want to locate here, the NDP 
simply creates more work projects for government employees. 
 
I think if you ask the average business owner what would 
benefit them the most, they would tell you substantial and 
sustainable tax cuts, Mr. Speaker. All the government programs 
in the world can be put into place and nothing will happen if our 
taxes aren’t brought under control. 
 
The public relations exercise conducted by the NDP in the fall 
bared that out. Of the people who answered the NDP’s 
taxpayer-funded questionnaire, most people said the 
government should cut income tax. But like everything else, the 
NDP ignored what the people were saying. 
 
The member from Saskatoon Southeast said the only reason 
people want a cut in their income tax is because they’re filling 
out their tax forms at this time of the year. Now how 
condescending can you get. Here’s another example of 
government saying that people don’t really know what’s good 
for them so the government will make that decision for them. 
 
Do you claim . . . do you really blame people for being angry 
when they fill out their tax forms? Especially when it’s now so 
easy to compare our tax load to every other province. What do 
you expect people to think when their computer tells them they 
would be paying $3,000 less in tax if they were living in 
another province? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, from what I can tell, the only people in 
this legislature who despise tax cuts more than the NDP are 
what’s left of the Liberal caucus. At least the NDP pretends that 
they want to cut taxes, but we have the existing Liberals who 
have decided that tax cuts are just not a priority in 
Saskatchewan right now. 
 
My God, what a statement. I didn’t think any party could fall 

farther out of touch than the NDP, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but the 
Liberals have managed to show us that they are also nowhere in 
touch with what the citizens of Saskatchewan are clearly 
saying. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan can rest assured that 
there is one party though in this province willing to fight to free 
them from the bonds of repressive taxation. And we have no 
choice. The long-term damage being inflicted on this province 
by the NDP must be stopped. 
 
Let me give you one example where good intentions simply are 
failing because of high taxation and no jobs in Saskatchewan. 
 
At the Carlton Trail Community College in my riding, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, they receive both federal and provincial 
money to provide academic and job training for students. And 
that’s a great thing. It seems like a very good thing. 
 
But in the end, Mr. Deputy Speaker, little is being accomplished 
because the school is having tremendous problems placing 
students in apprenticeships. Because the agriculture sector has 
suffered economically, 77 of those trainees could not be placed. 
Some have been placed throughout the province but many in 
other areas are not. And many of them have to wait lengthy 
periods, sometimes up to three to six months to be placed. 
 
So even though the Agriculture minister declared the farm crisis 
over in January; the farm crisis carries on. It carries on into the 
machinery manufacturing industry; it carries on throughout the 
entire province; and it hurts everyone in this province. And this 
has contributed to the lack of apprenticeships for students there. 
If there is no economic growth, Mr. Deputy Speaker, businesses 
will continue to diminish in our province and where will our 
young people find work? How many of them will make their 
lives in Saskatchewan in their near future? 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s clearly, clearly true that the NDP simply don’t 
have a clue what’s going on . . . what it’s going to take, rather, 
to get this province moving in the right direction. They don’t 
understand that, if they would simply get out of the way and let 
business and entrepreneurs create wealth in this province, it 
could be done. 
 
And the best way they could get out of the way is to lessen the 
tax burden. They could also get rid of unnecessary and 
excessive regulations, red tape, and look to see how their labour 
laws are killing businesses. If they don’t do that, we’re going to 
continue to have fewer and fewer taxpayers picking up a greater 
and greater share of the load. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in the coming election I expect the members 
opposite will tell the people of Saskatchewan that the province 
simply cannot afford greater tax cuts but the truth of the matter 
is that we can’t afford not to cut taxes. This is truly a critical 
juncture, Mr. Deputy Speaker. If the NDP are allowed to carry 
on with their ruinous policies in this province, Saskatchewan 
will continue to fall back and there may be no hope of recovery. 
We have to act now to get Saskatchewan back on the right track 
and the only way to do this is a realistic plan for tax reduction 
— something the government has failed to provide to the 
people of the province. 
 



440 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 1999 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to just quote from a weekly 
commentary of the Canadian Taxpayers Federation, their 
commentary on the provincial budget, 1999. And it goes like 
this: 
 

It was enough to make your head spin. Within minutes of 
tabling the 1999 provincial budget, the government’s spin 
doctors were out in full force touting its merits. Spending 
was up almost $400 million, including 195 million on 
health care. The debt was reduced by a mere 101 million to 
11.4 billion. And the PST was cut by one point from 7 per 
cent to 6 per cent. 
 
The government would have us believe that this year’s 
budget is the best thing since sliced bread except of course 
they’re using our dough. Certainly any tax relief is 
welcome news but there happens or appears to be an 
enormous gap between the government’s spin and the 
truth. Let’s try to separate fact from fiction. 
 
The government’s spin in the budget was: Saskatchewan 
has the lowest sales tax rate in the country. 
 

The reality, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that is technically true 
except that Alberta has no sales tax at all. And taxpayers should 
keep the bigger picture in mind. 
 
The budget did little to deal with our overall tax burden. If you 
earn an income, we have the second highest income taxes in the 
country. If you drive a vehicle, we have one of the highest fuel 
taxes in the country. And, if you own property in the city or on 
a farm, we have the highest property taxes anywhere in Canada. 
 
The next government spin, since 1995 income taxes paid by the 
average Saskatchewan family have been reduced by over 10 per 
cent, and that is in addition to the 33 per cent reduction in sales 
tax. The reality is this. Again the government is playing fast and 
loose with the truth. 
 
The NDP government raised taxes by hundreds of millions of 
dollars from 1991 to 1995 in the first place, including hiking the 
sales tax from 7 per cent to 9 per cent. So for them to suddenly 
claim taxes have been reduced is a bit of a stretch. 
 
Also bracket creep, by which inflation pushes taxpayers into 
higher income tax brackets, has quietly resulted in hundreds of 
millions in higher tax revenue over the past eight years. 
 
The next government spin, the PST cut will put $100 million a 
year back in the pockets of taxpayers. Well the reality is yes, 
but on the other hand bracket creep increased provincial income 
tax revenues by almost a hundred million this year alone. 
 
The next government spin in the budget was, the PST cut will 
stimulate consumer spending and help the economy. The reality 
is yes, it will be a small shot in the arm, but will the tax relief 
announced in the budget deal with the problem of brain drain 
and out-migration? No, it won’t. Will it make our tax system 
more competitive with our provincial neighbours? No, it won’t. 
Will taxpayers actually have more money in their pockets at the 
end of the day? No. 
 
Higher payroll charges, rising utility rates, higher, we could call 

them taxes, and bracket creep will see to that. In this budget the 
government continues to whisper what we have been saying 
loud and clear for many years — the people of this province 
need and deserve meaningful tax relief. 
 
Lower taxes will stimulate growth, create more jobs and 
opportunities for our young people, and ultimately more 
taxpayers. A large, diverse, and growing tax base is the key to 
the long-term sustainability of our social programs. 
 
With an election looming, the government may have wrapped 
its political brain around tax cuts, but their heart just isn’t in it. 
 
And with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I just want to close today 
by saying that for the reasons that I put forward in my speech 
today, and due to the very fact that there was no vision put 
forward by the NDP for this year or the years ahead, that there 
was no vision for meaningful tax relief to our people, no vision 
for creating an economically prosperous province — I will not 
be voting for the budget, but I will be voting for the amendment 
posed by the member from Melfort-Tisdale. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a privilege 
once again as the representative of the great constituency of 
Melville to enter into a debate with respect to the recent budget 
presented by the NDP government. A constituency which 
boasts a variety of entrepreneurs, both from the urban and rural 
centres, Mr. Deputy Speaker, people who truly believe in their 
communities and the viability and the continuing effort to 
sustain our small communities and hope for our future and hope 
that the NDP government, for the short time that they will 
continue to be in power, do not miss any more of the 
opportunities that they have missed in the past to create some 
economic activity in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, before I go on, I’ve sat and listened to 
debates here, both following the Speech from the Throne, and 
as well debates with respect to the recent budget. It still saddens 
me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that what seems to be a highlight from 
both sides is the ongoing shroud that overshadows this 
venerable institution when fingers continuously are pointed, and 
people reminisce about the wrongdoings of former and perhaps 
even some present members of this venerable Assembly. 
 
That’s sad. And that’s something that people of this province 
are getting fed up with hearing. I have to agree with the member 
from Kelvington-Wadena: people do not want to hear about 
poverty; they do not want to hear about hungry kids. We don’t 
want to hear about any of that, but we also do not want to hear 
any more about the wrongdoing of elected members to this 
venerable institution. 
 
Where have things fallen off the rails and gone wrong? How are 
we ever going to clear this up and eliminate this embarrassment 
from this great province of ours. When will this come to an end. 
 
People of this great province built what we have today because 
of their ethics — because of their work ethics. And you know 
something, Mr. Deputy Speaker, words like honesty, integrity, 



April 7, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 441 

trust, loyalty, commitment, and dedication are still words that 
are held in very high esteem as values to people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
(1530) 
 
But they are saddened and have become totally cynical because 
their elected members do not have those words any longer it 
seems in their vocabulary, in their repertoire. That’s what’s 
saddening to this . . . promises made in advance of being elected 
to work hard to save a hospital, and then subsequently after 
being elected to support the closure of the Plains hospital is one 
of the things that creates cynicism. 
 
Those people give a different meaning . . . those people give a 
different meaning, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a different meaning or 
a new meaning to the term “trust me I’m a politician.” 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we in the Liberal Party believe in the 
people of Saskatchewan. We believe that communities in rural 
Saskatchewan need some help from a government who has 
become less caring. One that boasted about caring for people of 
Saskatchewan but it, since 1991, have completely abandoned 
the rural Saskatchewan. It has been decimated over this last 
eight years with the closure of hospitals, with the loss of nurses, 
with the loss of our doctors, with the loss of our infrastructure 
to rural communities, with our embarrassing conditions of our 
highway system. 
 
You know when we talk about any kinds of plans for the future 
of this province — we haven’t seen any plans. The only plans 
that we’ve seen from this government is cut and slash and close. 
There weren’t even any sound plans. 
 
The ill-conceived idea to close the Plains hospital was not even 
well thought out. That was bad enough. But now they had to 
close it one year in advance of the date that it was to be closed 
— for political purposes nothing else — and we will continue to 
see the ill effects of that for sometime yet to come. 
 
There is no light at the end of the tunnel as far as seeing the 
completion of the General Hospital in downtown Regina at this 
point in time, and that’s because of no planning, no thoughts 
about the future, no consideration for people that needed to use 
these facilities, primarily the people from rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m confident that the Liberals can and 
will create a work environment which treats front-line health 
care workers with a dignity and respect that they truly deserve 
for a cost of about 60 per cent of the budget that’s been 
proposed by the NDP. 
 
With the creation of 10 to 12 regional hospitals and making a 
modest investment in additional services at each of these 
regional hospitals, there will be an opportunity to keeping rural 
beds open, there will be an opportunity for people seeking 
diagnostic and surgical services in those smaller communities in 
their local community so that they’re close to home. They’re 
close to their work environment and close to their families, not 
having to travel great distances for health care services as they 
now do. 
 
It would as well relieve the pressure that’s so desperately on the 

hospitals, our big hospitals here in Saskatoon and Regina, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. There needs to be something to alleviate the 
severe pressure, the serious pressure that exists currently — the 
waiting lists, people that call who are suffering, who are 
concerned about becoming drug addicts because they’re kept 
under medication in order to ease their pain and suffering while 
they wait and wait and wait for their surgery. 
 
By expanding the diagnostic treatments, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
throughout those 10 to 12 regional hospitals, this is a 
commitment that the Minister of Health today is not prepared to 
make. The Minister of Health accuses the opposition of 
promoting private clinics. That is not what’s being promoted. 
We have them now. People are forced, people are forced to go 
to private clinics now because they can’t wait. They can’t wait. 
 
They languish in emergency room corridors. They’re told that 
their surgery is put off and it gets put off longer and longer so 
they can’t wait. So they have no alternative. Those with means, 
what do they do? They go to Alberta; they go to the Mayo 
Clinic. A two-tier health care system already created by an NDP 
government — that currently exists. 
 
By keeping all our rural hospitals open, by making a 
commitment not to close any more beds, that’s a commitment 
that the associate Health minister is not prepared to make, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, but we need to have that kind of a 
commitment for people in rural Saskatchewan. The Liberals’ 
health care priorities as well will create more jobs and more 
opportunities. 
 
We have also proposed to increase the budget in lots of areas 
and reduce the budget in areas which we do not believe are the 
real priorities for the people of Saskatchewan. And we’ve 
heard, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have reports in our local 
newspapers from last fall that tell us about the waste, the 
continuous increases in government advertising. Are these the 
kind of priorities that we need? 
 
Saskatchewan government departments hiked their advertising 
cost to $5.15 million in the last fiscal year, up from $2.9 million 
a year earlier — a 78 per cent increase in the area of 
advertising. Mr. Deputy Speaker, that money could have been 
better spent to a more proper health care system. 
 
I just want to quote from a well-known politician who spoke in 
this House on April 22, 1991, and I quote: 
 

Finally, what about the health-care system. Much can be 
said about this, and much will be in the days ahead as I 
bring my remarks to a close — a health-care system that 
we see today where doctors and nurses and other 
care-givers are worried about intolerable working 
conditions, and difficulties of stress which manifest 
themselves today with the nurses coming to this 
Legislative Building to protest what’s happening. 
 

And it goes on: 
 

What in the world’s gone wrong with medicare and health 
care — 197 beds, 197 people, 113 beds in Saskatoon, 
about 200 in Moose Jaw, Yorkton, and Regina, I think in 
round terms, closed down. What in the world has gone 



442 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 1999 

wrong? 
 
They say that the costs are getting out of control . . . 
 

And it goes on, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I quote from the then 
leader of the opposition in this legislature, now the sitting 
Premier. 
 
So what has changed since 1991? Why are we still asking, what 
in the world has gone wrong with our health care? Why has it 
been so ignored and allowed to deteriorate to the extent that it 
has? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are other areas which we talked 
about and we have a grave concern for, and we talk about it 
daily in this House, and that’s the future for our young people. 
When we now hear that our young people going to universities 
are going to be faced with a horrendous increase in tuition 
costs, what kind of incentive is there for them — for them, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, to continue on with an education here in this 
province? And once they obtain that education, what 
opportunities do they have to recover the costs of their efforts? 
 
Well I’ll tell you. What the Liberals are proposing is that for 
1999 we’ve reviewed all these budgets, and what we would do 
is offer to these . . . In 1999 a Liberal government would 
introduce a scholarship program which would provide $1,000 
per year — 1,000 a year — to every first-year and second-year 
student enrolled in the full-time university studies at the 
University of Saskatchewan, University of Regina, or any of the 
SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology) campuses. 
 
That’s called investing in our future, Mr. Deputy Speaker — in 
our young people. Twenty-two million dollars per year is what 
the investment would be to provide those $1,000 scholarships 
for first- and second-year students. Well worthwhile 
investment, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Far better investment than 
some millions of dollars invested in a broken-down, Guyanese 
electrical company. Monies that could better be invested here in 
this great province of ours. 
 
We’re also concerned about our rural communities that have 
grain elevators closing down and no opportunity for those small 
communities to have any say as to whether or not there may be 
some opportunity for them to maintain these elevators. 
 
From the date of notice . . . What the Liberal platform would 
propose is from the date of notice of an elevator closure, Mr. 
Speaker, local community groups would have 180 days to 
determine whether or not they want to take over that elevator at 
fair market value. Communities facing closure of grain 
elevators will have two questions to answer. Does saving our 
elevator make economic sense? And if so, is it a priority of our 
community? It will be a community decision to decide whether 
or not they proceed with that kind of an investment. 
 
A Liberal government would provide the funding to assist one 
group per community to complete such a feasibility assessment. 
The cost for these feasibility assessments would be shared on a 
75 per cent/25 per cent basis to a maximum provincial 
contribution of $60,000 per community. 
 

This is believing in our smaller rural communities. This is an 
investment that government should be making in rural 
communities throughout this great province of ours, not 
neglecting and ignoring them, not allowing the infrastructure to 
deteriorate to the extent that it has. And, Mr. Speaker, highways 
affect all of those things and all of us, as do the streets and 
roads in this province. I’m sure that if more of the members of 
government travelled throughout the highways and byways of 
this province they would recognize that they need to increase 
the budget for Highways by a great deal more than $15 million. 
They promised $250 million. They have not yet achieved that 
goal; they have not yet kept that promise. 
 
A Saskatchewan government would . . . Liberal government 
would make highways and streets a top priority. Gasoline taxes 
which were once targeted to ensure that our highways and 
byways, our roadways were in proper repair — this year $370 
million will be raised for the provincial coffers from gasoline 
taxes. Our position is to commit all those highway taxes to what 
they were meant, is for highways and streets in our province — 
75 per cent or 277.5 million to the Department of Highways and 
Transportation budget; the balance to cities, towns, villages, and 
municipalities to build and maintain their roads and their 
infrastructure. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are those as well, there are areas in the 
budget where there is and can be found waste. There are areas, 
as I pointed out, in advertising, there are areas in positions that 
need to be looked at. There is a need for some review of our 
taxation policies in this province in order that there may be 
economic activity created, in order that there may be an 
attraction for people to come to this province. That is 
desperately necessary. 
 
But the other thing that’s necessary is not to turn away people 
who want to come in and invest at no cost to taxpayers. And 
I’m going to refer back to the missed opportunity of this NDP 
government in the 1992 proposal by a Calgary-based 
organization to bring in a cogeneration operation which would 
have created hundreds of jobs at no cost to taxpayers, would 
have eliminated the need for landfill sites, and would have 
created all kinds of economic activity and employment in 
east-central Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And you know what happens when people work in this 
province, you know what happens when people work in this 
province — it may be news to them — but when we get all 
kinds of people working, they pay taxes; they buy goods and 
services; they pay the provincial sales taxes; they pay personal 
income taxes; they pay school taxes and property taxes. I don’t 
know why that this government cannot seem to get it through 
their heads to invite, to welcome, to open up the doors, and ask 
people to invest in this province. Why invest in broken down 
electrical companies? Why doesn’t the government invest that 
money back here into our province to create that kind of activity 
that we desperately need? 
 
In future years, Mr. Speaker, I know that the position that the 
Liberal government has taken, that the Liberal Party has taken 
with respect to future tax cuts and significant debt paydown are 
credible, Mr. Speaker. And for those that would choose to sit 
down and closely analyze . . . 
 



April 7, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 443 

(1545) 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the hon. member for Athabasca on his 
feet? 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, to ask for leave to introduce 
guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My apologies and 
my thanks to the member from Melville for the interruption. 
But spring is here and Easter’s here and so is the Easter break 
and so the Easter-break kids are here. And I have a couple that I 
want to introduce to the Assembly today. 
 
I have in your gallery, Mr. Speaker — I’ll ask her to stand as I 
name her — I have my daughter, Kellie, and her cousin from 
Buffalo Narrows, Courtney — and have Courtney stand. 
They’re here to watch the proceedings and they’ve actually 
been doing a lot of work in the office for me and so far they 
have not been paid, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I want to ask this Assembly to kindly welcome these two 
young guests from northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

(continued) 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There are other areas 
in government where cuts and savings can be found. A Liberal 
government could also make budget cuts through government 
to save millions of dollars by eliminating unnecessary middle 
management jobs, Mr. Speaker, and some of those who choose 
to champion the cause of political appointees — there are those. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there has been evidence — and how soon they 
forget — of what has happened, and I’ve seen it happen in this 
province in 1982. In 1982, the wanton dismissal of not only 
middle management positions, but of positions throughout, 
throughout government in order to make room for the friends of 
people of the party that was taking power. That happened in 
1982, wanton dismissals, even as low as clerk positions. And 
guess what happened in 1991 after this government took over in 
1991? The same thing. No excuses. Just a clear dismissal of 
hard-working, long-term, committed, dedicated civil servants 
who were wantonly dismissed with no regard to their future and 
the future of their families, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’ve seen that — and not for any cost-saving measure — but 
only to replace those people, those hard-working civil servants 
with patronage appointments, with friends of the party that 
came into power. That’s not the Saskatchewan way, Mr. 
Speaker, that the people of this province, each time a 

government changes, have to look forward to fear for their jobs 
and their security and the future of their families. 
 
We have long-time dedicated civil servants and we have had . . . 
but unfortunately they’ve fallen under the axe of those 
governments that come to power and cut and slash without 
giving any thought to what was happening to these long-time 
dedicated civil servants. We believe that we could eliminate 400 
jobs from the civil service — through attrition, through 
retirement, through severance packages — and 200 jobs from 
Crown corporations. It happened before only to replace those 
jobs. 
 
This is out of the total of — and someone is saying it’s 600 out 
of a thousand — this is out of a total of 10,000 jobs, 10,000. I 
repeat that for the individual that quoted it as being 600 out of a 
thousand. It’s out of 10,000 jobs, less than 3 per cent at almost 
all middle management positions. 
 
This is not something that anybody particularly enjoys doing 
but you see major corporations, major operations in the last 
decade that have done that, have re-organized and have 
downsized. But not this government, they don’t believe in that. 
They just believe in eliminating people and replacing them with 
their supporters. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another area that we have some problems with is 
in the area of travel, and I know my colleague from Wood River 
has outlined the costs related to travel. When you talk about our 
Liquor and Gaming Authority for one year, over half a million 
dollars, Mr. Speaker, over half a million dollars in travel — for 
what? There needs to be some justification for that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a budget that has ample opportunities for 
cost-saving measures to the taxpayers of this province. It has a 
great deal of opportunity for allowing taxpayers to be less and 
less burdened by taxes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we often hear people on both sides talk about . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order. Now all hon. members 
will recognize that it’s not necessary to be shouting at one 
another across the floor. And I’ll ask for the co-operation of all 
hon. members to allow the Leader of the Third Party to have his 
remarks be able to be heard. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There are some other 
areas where there can be savings made, as I mentioned, some of 
those in the areas of Economic and Co-operative Development. 
That $49.2 million budget for that particular department can 
certainly be reduced. It goes to regional and economic 
development authorities. We do have REDAs; we do have 
people; we do have chambers of commerce; we do have very 
capable people that are able to determine the needs for creating 
economic activity in this great province of ours. 
 
We don’t need to have advertising and communications budgets 
go from $750,000 in one year to two and a half million dollars 
over a period of six years. We don’t need that kind of 
expenditure. That money can be better put towards the needs of 
people and putting the people as our first priorities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a budget that can certainly find a great deal 



444 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 1999 

of savings and we believe that the Liberal platform has found 
those savings. We would be able to apply it and it would be for 
the benefit of the people of Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This budget is a 
rather different budget in that so much of it goes in one 
direction, namely to health care — a hundred and ninety-two 
million dollars, which is really an unprecedented increase in 
provincial funding for health care. There’s scarcely been 
another budget in the history of Saskatchewan I dare say, that 
gives this kind of increase to one particular area of government, 
namely health care. And so there’s no doubt then that this 
budget is all about better health care. I want to raise some 
questions about that in a few moments. 
 
This budget also is rather remarkable in that in addition to 
having an 11 per cent increase in funding for health care, there’s 
a reduction in the provincial sales tax. A 1 cent reduction which 
many people . . . the opposition obviously are looking for more. 
This is a step in the right direction to lower taxes. 
 
And there’s a third component to this provincial budget, namely 
paying down the legacy of provincial debt. This is the sixth 
straight balanced budget. And the government, and I would as 
part of the government, would say that this is a balanced 
approach to the provincial household. 
 
However in looking at this particular budget these last number 
of days since the budget was introduced, I’ve also been looking 
at the television news that carries pictures of the tragedy 
unfolding in Bosnia and in Kosovo. And in sharing my remarks 
today I would like to measure in some respects the public 
expectations here in Saskatchewan and the presentation of this 
provincial budget against what we see unfolding halfway 
around the world in Bosnia and Kosovo. 
 
There we see nightly the drama of forced displacement of 
families — families from all generations as well. The elderly 
wheeled out of Kosovo in wheelbarrows. I’m sure you’ve seen 
some of those graphic pictures, Mr. Speaker, and other 
members have seen them. Pictures of orphans, of widows, field 
hospitals where children and adults are having shrapnel 
removed, some of the miracles that they’re even alive to have 
the shrapnel still removed. 
 
Pictures of vast oceans of people waiting to cross the border 
into Macedonia with little, if any, food or water. Pictures of 
homes destroyed in Kosovo and in Bosnia, of bridges burned, 
bridges destroyed by bombing, buildings destroyed, utilities 
destroyed. 
 
And I look at all of these pictures and I look at our provincial 
budget, and I look at the reaction of the opposition and I listen 
to that and to the public expectations. And I ask myself, how do 
we measure our needs here in Saskatchewan, and more 
particularly, how do we separate our wants from our needs in 
crafting a provincial budget? 
 
I ask myself, what more do we need here in Saskatchewan? Do 
we need more money put into highways? Do we need better 
highways across the province meriting, as the opposition would 
give in their election platform, an increase of $50 million a year 

for better highways? Is that what we really need? 
 
Do we really need more tax relief beyond what we’ve already 
seen — 2 per cent reduction in the provincial sales tax a couple 
of years ago, 2 per cent reduction in the provincial income tax 
last year, a 1 per cent reduction in the provincial sales tax this 
year. Do we really need more tax relief? 
 
The opposition amendment to the budget motion says exactly 
that — oh, we must have more tax relief. I doubt that, Mr. 
Speaker, in the light of a more searching examination of public 
priorities. 
 
Some would say we need to put more down on the provincial 
debt. That’s a cautious, conservative voice and one that needs to 
be heard still, one that’s heard less and less as we move away 
from the legacy of debt and deficit. 
 
Some would say that we need to put more money into health 
care, more money than was put into health care in this budget 
— $192 million more isn’t enough. We need to put more 
money into health care, more into a increased or enhanced 
prescription drug plan for the province, perhaps more for home 
care, perhaps more for more nurses in hospitals. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Speaker, about public priorities in the light of 
what we see happening in many places in the world; the public 
priorities that we need to bring to bear here in Saskatchewan. 
 
A very prudent politician once said, and I quote: 
 

If we can produce in such abundance in order to destroy 
our enemies, we can produce in equal abundance in order 
to provide food, clothing, and shelter for our children. If 
we can keep people employed for the purpose of 
destroying human life, surely we can keep them employed 
for the purpose of enriching and enhancing human life. 
 

This politician was the Rev. T.C. Douglas, well-known to 
Saskatchewan people. And he raises that what I would call 
moral or ethical question about what we do as a society in terms 
of promoting life and valuing human life and enriching and 
enhancing human life. There’s no doubt about it that the public 
expectations here in Saskatchewan are that we need more and 
better. 
 
Let’s start with health care. There’s no doubt about it that 
people want more health care, they want better health care, they 
want it sooner; they don’t want to wait for it. They don’t 
particularly want to pay for it either. They want it and they want 
it now. 
 
(1600) 
 
And there is much in this budget that addresses that public 
agenda. An increase of $195 million, an 11.3 per cent increase 
over last year. Much of this goes to the health districts across 
the province — 139 million of that. 
 
Another 13 million is invested in physicians and health 
professionals. Another 5 million goes to additional funding for 
cancer programs. Included in the funding for the health districts, 
in 139 million for the health districts, is money for a settlement 



April 7, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 445 

with the nurses that’s going on in the province right now. And 
indeed $50 million to deal with the millennium problem of Y2K 
(Year 2000) compatibility in equipment. 
 
There is much in this health budget that is good. But I must 
confess, I have to ask how much of this budget really addresses 
fundamental alternatives in health care, addresses what I . . . the 
wellness model that the government has adopted. Fifty million 
dollars for equipment to ensure compliance with Y2K may very 
well be necessary. I would even go so far as to say if I had a 
heart attack on New Year’s Eve I would probably want to make 
. . . I’d probably want that heart monitor to have been checked 
out and to be fully compliant with Y2K. 
 
But here is a question of wants and needs again and public 
priorities. And basically we have just in that segment of the 
budget alone, a quarter of the increase in spending on health 
care just going to compliance on Y2K. 
 
And I ask myself, what if we had taken an equal amount of 
money, $50 million, and directed that into new programs or 
even existing programs, but fully addressed at health 
enhancement, wellness, sickness/accident prevention. What 
kind of difference would have that kind of investment make 
across Saskatchewan? 
 
We now have indeed three communities I believe in northern 
Saskatchewan that still don’t have sewer and water facilities. 
And this is less than a year away from the millennium. That’s a 
sad commentary on life in our province and in some respects 
the priorities that successive governments have had in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I look, Mr. Speaker, also at the programming in Social Services. 
Very few people have talked about this in the budget debate so 
far. The overall budget for Social Services has been increased 
from 540 million to 578 million. 
 
And I do want to say that this is one positive initiative in this 
budget, I believe. It puts money into life enhancement. It 
expands benefits basically to needy children in Saskatchewan 
— all of this increase in Social Services. 
 
Now some people in the opposition have said, well the welfare 
caseloads are going up in Saskatchewan. This is simply not the 
case. Social assistance caseloads here in Saskatchewan continue 
to decline and indeed have declined over the last four years, 
14.7 per cent. And the fact that there is an additional $38 
million in funding for Social Services where the overwhelming 
majority of these funds go to help children is a testimony to the 
fact that in this area the province is on the right track. 
 
It isn’t what many people in Saskatchewan might call for, 
especially those who would want tax reductions in their own 
pockets, and yet this is the kind of priority that really goes to 
addressing human need and building the social priorities of the 
province, not just for our generation but for the next generation 
as well. 
 
People will know, most people will know in Saskatchewan at 
least, that Saskatchewan has introduced one of the foremost 
new social programs in all of Canada within the last couple of 
years, namely the Saskatchewan Child Benefit. 

Along with the Saskatchewan Child Benefit — incidentally an 
increase of 33 per cent in funding for this program that targets 
benefits to families with children — there have also been 
increases in the employment supplement that helps families to 
get off of welfare. 
 
There’s been a 15 per cent increase in funding for the 
employment supplement, and increases in funding for family 
health benefits, extended family health benefits, also to help 
break down the welfare wall and to become independent and to 
secure jobs in the job market. 
 
So I think this is an important dimension of the budget that has 
largely gone ignored, and that is the priority that has been 
placed on the low-income families in this budget. And maybe 
part of the reason that it’s been ignored is because, dare I say, it 
contrasts too sharply with the calls for tax reduction? You can’t 
have it both ways. You can’t initiate programs to help needy 
families if you continue to call for unrealistic tax decreases as 
the opposition does. 
 
And in some respects I think the government should be a little 
bit more, dare I say, forthright or congratulatory in talking 
about some of the things that we’ve done in Social Services and 
what we are really doing to help low-income families. 
 
There’s one other area that I’d like to comment on just briefly, 
Mr. Speaker, and that has to do with the kind of perspective we 
bring to long-term issues — long-term issues in economic 
development. I want to just give one example this afternoon. 
 
In this budget there is no increase in funding for reforestation 
by the province and I really have to wonder about that. Yes, 
we’ve done a wonderful job, some would say, in putting money, 
investing money into the health care system. Here’s another 
area though that really begs for investment of funding. It takes a 
long-term view to put money into reforestation. You don’t see 
the results for 80, 100 years, if you’re lucky. 
 
And yet in Saskatchewan we have over 300,000 hectares of 
logged-over land that has not been sufficiently regenerated. 
This is a huge amount of land that represents a vast amount of 
lost wealth to the province, not now, but for future generations. 
 
And I dare say that future generations will pay dearly for the 
fact that we aren’t making the kind of investment in 
reforestation that we need to make here and now, and nor have 
successive Saskatchewan governments. This just isn’t one of 
the public priorities of . . . well basically of, I suppose we have 
to say, Saskatchewan people, or else that it would be reflected 
in government priority. It’s one that I think we need to look at a 
bit more and take a lot more seriously. 
 
I want to say that in this budget I think we as New Democrats 
have proven our ability to manage the provincial economy in a 
balanced fashion. We have achieved a balance between better 
health care, lower taxes, and less debt. There’s no doubt about 
that. That’s been one of the hallmarks of our last six budgets 
that they all share in common; a very balanced, common sense 
approach to the governance of the province. 
 
I think we need to say that when the present government took 
office, it took hold of a legacy of debt and mismanagement and 



446 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 1999 

it moved beyond reckless expenditure to more prudent fiscal 
management. After a decade of excess, what else could you do? 
Your hands were tied behind your back. Even if you didn’t 
want to exercise prudent management, circumstances would 
have forced any government to do so. 
 
This government has been consistently committed to fiscal 
integrity, to balanced budgets, to not just eliminating deficits 
but paying down the debt. And we’ve paid that down by 25 per 
cent from 15 and a million dollars, we’re down to $11.5 billion 
now. 
 
So we’ve moved beyond the legacy of mismanagement and 
debt, excess, fiscal irresponsibility to balanced and common 
sense government. But I’d like to suggest that it might be time 
for us now to move a bit beyond just balanced budgets and 
common sense to some of the basic social needs that we still 
have here in our province. 
 
Yes, we’ve restored stability to Saskatchewan but we still have 
huge challenges, any number of areas where instability still 
exists in the lives of Saskatchewan people. We’ve cleaned up 
the financial deficit but we still need — make no mistake about 
it — we still need to attack the human deficit in this province. 
 
We have lowered taxes in this province over the last number of 
years. Slowly but steadily we have lowered taxes but we still 
have a long way to go for a fair tax system. And I’m 
encouraged in this budget that there is provision for an 
examination of the present tax system. And I want to say here 
on behalf of the people I represent in Saskatoon Sutherland that 
this examination of the provincial tax system cannot be just an 
exercise in lowering taxes, it has to be an exercise in making the 
tax system fairer and more progressive based on ability to pay. 
 
We have reformed the health care system. But as I’ve said 
earlier this afternoon we still have a long way to go to 
implement a wellness model of medicare. And I look for this 
government to turn to that agenda in the future. We’ve brought 
a balanced approach to government but poverty and racism and 
injustice still weigh far too heavily on far too many 
Saskatchewan people. There is a huge unfinished agenda for us 
to engage in, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Franklin Delano Roosevelt in his 1944 State of the Union 
Address to the American people said this: 
 

We can not be content, no matter how high the general 
standard of living may be, if some fraction of our people, 
whether it be one-third or one-fifth or one-tenth is ill-fed, 
ill-clothed, ill-housed, and insecure. 
 

And President Roosevelt went on to talk about a second Bill of 
Rights in the United States under which there would be a new 
basis for security and prosperity — a new Bill of Rights that 
embellished economic truths and economic security. 
 
And some of the things that he talked about in terms of that 
second Bill of Rights for the American people was for example 
the right to earn enough to provide adequate food and clothing 
and recreation. And that’s something we need to address here in 
Saskatchewan, that we need jobs for our people. We need jobs 
that are good jobs to provide adequately for food, clothing, and 

even for recreation of Saskatchewan people. 
 
And we need to work on our Child Benefit Program, and our 
employment supplement, and our supplemental health benefits 
to encourage more and more people in that transition to the 
workplace. 
 
(1615) 
 
Roosevelt went on to talk about the right of every family to 
decent housing. And there’s still far too many people in 
Saskatchewan who do not have sufficient housing, decent 
housing, safe housing. This is a huge agenda that we don’t talk 
about much as a society any more. Most of us are pretty content 
to be safe and secure in our homes and worry about paying our 
own mortgages. 
 
But I say here, in Saskatchewan at least we have a tradition of 
being our brother and our sister’s keeper. And we should not 
and we can not be content to be safe and warm in our own 
homes if our brothers and sisters don’t have homes that are 
decent and safe and warm. 
 
And certainly the right to adequate medical care and good 
health. We’ve done relatively well here in Saskatchewan on that 
score. We have a long way to go. That task will never be ended. 
Disease, sickness, and accidents are no respecter of person or 
position or pocketbook, and that’s why, to our credit here in 
Saskatchewan, we have always held to the principles of 
medicare. And we have recognized that right, simply by being 
alive, that every human being has to adequate medical care and 
good health. 
 
Roosevelt talks about the right to adequate protection from 
economic fears of old age, sickness, accident, and 
unemployment. We have a long way to go here. 
 
Many have private pension plans, many in their workplace have 
benefits that go along with the job — dental benefits, 
prescription drug benefits, life insurance benefits, accident 
disability benefits. But there are far too many men and women 
in Saskatchewan who don’t have those benefits. And we need to 
address that as part of building our society here in 
Saskatchewan and taking care of people and putting them first. 
 
As Roosevelt said, and I quote again: 
 

We cannot be content, no matter how high the general 
standard of living may be, if some fraction of our people, 
whether it be one-third or one-fifth or one-tenth, is ill-fed, 
ill-clothed, ill-housed, and insecure. 

 
We have a huge unfinished agenda then facing us as 
Saskatchewan legislators and Saskatchewan people. We need to 
do things like increase the food and clothing allowance for 
people on social service. 
 
We need to begin helping the working poor even as we are 
helping those who are on welfare. People who may not have 
children but . . . and qualify for the child benefit, but who still 
need benefits that are accorded those who are on welfare right 
now. And this needs to be added to the agenda of social change 
and reform here in Saskatchewan. 



April 7, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 447 

We need to do more for families with autistic children. And I 
say families with autistic children, because heaven knows that 
the children need help, but when you’re dealing with autism, 
the parents and the siblings need help as well. And we need to 
do a lot more in terms of providing palpable support for these 
families in Saskatchewan. There’s a huge task to be addressed 
here. 
 
And don’t we need to do more for those in society who are 
physically handicapped in so many different ways. We’ve made 
some good starts but we have a long journey in all of society, 
Canadian society, to deal with issues of access for people who 
are handicapped. 
 
Single parents, single parents need better maintenance 
enforcement and better access to their maintenance enforcement 
officers. That is another agenda that needs to be met by this 
government. 
 
Workers need better occupational health and safety standards 
and enforcement in our province. It’s good, but it isn’t good 
enough. There is so much that we need to do. And the list goes 
on and on. 
 
And so I come to the proposed amendment by the opposition 
that whines about taxes, and then totally, totally ignores the 
legacy that has led to such high taxes here in Saskatchewan. 
 
And I say, rather than indulge in an agenda of the selfish epic of 
the strong who would want lower taxes for themselves and for 
their children and for their friends and for their neighbours, I 
say before we start to lower taxes on a jihad to lower taxes, we 
need to take care of many of the unfinished agendas that exist in 
Saskatchewan, the standard of living and the level of security 
that Saskatchewan people have and need to have in many 
instances. 
 
And so I don’t buy this amendment at all in any way, shape, or 
form. I’m convinced that we here in Saskatchewan, at our best, 
are our brother and our sister’s keeper. That we don’t indulge in 
an epic of the . . . selfish epic of the strong. That we do use 
government as a positive instrument of change, to build a just 
and a compassionate society, and that we are doing just that 
with this budget. 
 
We need to do a lot more as I’ve said, but we need to keep our 
eye on the priorities that meet human need. And we need to go 
beyond that and we need to look at our position in the world, 
measure our needs and our wants, and separate the two. 
 
And finally, I think we need to be thankful for the many good 
things that we have here in Saskatchewan and the many 
blessings that we do enjoy here in Saskatchewan that are so 
much in absence so many places in the world. So . . . and no 
end of public expectations, this budget attempts to deal with 
some of those expectations. There’s a lot more that we have to 
do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Hon. members, it is my duty to advise the 

House that the Minister of Finance wishes to exercise his right 
to conclude debate after which all hon. members will be 
precluded from entering into debate. Is the Assembly ready for 
the question? I recognize the Minister of Finance for a 
maximum of 20 minutes. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
let me say that it’s a honour for me to rise today to close the 
debate on the 1999-2000 provincial budget. 
 
Before I go into my remarks, I want to thank my constituents in 
Saskatoon Mount Royal for allowing me the privilege of 
representing them in this Legislative Assembly. Their support 
and the support of all Saskatchewan residents has made it 
possible for our province to put an end to the destructive fiscal 
and economic policies of the 1980s, and continue moving 
forward to a future of hope and opportunity. 
 
And I want to say a few words about that, Mr. Speaker, just to 
contrast what it was like when this government came to power 
to what it is like today because we hear a lot of doom and 
gloom from the opposition. Well I want to tell the members 
opposite that I met with a couple of very astute and well-known 
and capable business people in Saskatoon a few weeks ago, and 
I’ll be frank with the opposition. What they wanted to say to me 
was there are a few things that our government, they felt, really 
hadn’t done as well as we could and they wanted to share that 
with me. 
 
And I started explaining the difference between our government 
and the previous government, and these two business people — 
who explained that they’d never been members of any political 
party — said to me, wait a minute, don’t misunderstand us. We 
don’t want to go back to the way it was when they were in 
power. They said, we remember what it was like in the late 
1980s, and I remember it, Mr. Speaker, because I was practising 
law in downtown Saskatoon; and I’ll tell you, they want to talk 
about gloom and doom — that was the late 1980s, trying to 
make a living in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. We didn’t have 
people pay . . . worrying about income taxes and complaining 
about their income tax rate when those people were in power. 
You know why? Nobody was making any money — that’s why. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, these people talk about . . . they 
talk about modest tax relief in the budget. And the amendment 
to the main motion in support of the budget coming from the 
opposition says the tax relief is too modest. Well I just want to 
take a minute to remind the members opposite and the people of 
the province what kind of tax relief we got from them when 
they were in power because the first act of this government 
when we were elected in 1991, Mr. Speaker, was to reduce the 
expanded PST that had been brought in by the members 
opposite, Mr. Speaker. You know what they did? They put a tax 
on restaurant meals. But they weren’t satisfied with that so they 
put a tax on used cars. But they weren’t satisfied . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order! Order. Order. 
Order. Order. I’ll ask for order on both sides of the House. Hon. 
members have had several days to put their remarks on the 
record, and we now . . . I’ll ask the members of the House to 
allow the Minister of Finance to be heard. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The members 



448 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 1999 

opposite say call the election. It’s like a bunch of turkeys 
calling for an early Christmas — that’s what that’s like, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well as I was saying, they’re complaining 
about so-called modest tax relief. We’ve cut the PST by 33 per 
cent in the last few years, Mr. Speaker. What did they do? They 
put it on used cars. They put it on children’s clothing. They put 
it on restaurant meals. They put it on lottery tickets. And you 
know what? As of January 1, 1992, they wanted to harmonize 
the PST with the GST (goods and services tax). They wanted to 
put the PST on all goods and services, Mr. Speaker. That’s what 
they wanted . . . (inaudible) . . . and now they talk about modest 
tax relief. 
 
Then they go on in this amendment to the motion in support of 
the budget to say they want to stop the youth from leaving the 
province. Now we all remember when they went to power in 
1982 and their slogan was to bring the million children home. 
Well you know what, Mr. Speaker? Between 1985 and 1991, 
under them, we had record out-migration out of this province — 
15,000 people a year leaving Saskatchewan. That’s what we 
had. And that situation has turned around quite a bit. 
 
But before I leave this topic of tax relief and our record versus 
their record, Mr. Speaker, let me say this. That if we weren’t 
paying $2 million a day . . . $2 million a day, Mr. Speaker, 
interest on the debt that those people left behind, we could not 
only eliminate the PST, we’d have $100 million left over, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Now all hon. members on 
both sides of the House will recognize that the Chair is having 
much difficulty being able to hear the remarks of the Minister 
of Finance. 
 
Order. And the Chair asks for co-operation from members on 
both sides of the House to allow the remarks of the minister to 
be heard. 
 
(1630) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I can hardly 
hear myself think because the members are yelling so loudly 
over there. But it’s . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Now I’m sure the Minister of 
Finance will also want to resist the urge to comment on matters 
related to the Chair’s ruling and proceed with his speech. And 
I’m sure the hon. members will — order — will want to allow 
the minister to be heard. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Listening to the members opposite reminds 
me of something that the Minister of Agriculture once said in 
the House which is: when you throw a stick in the dark and you 
hear a dog yelp, you know you’ve hit the dog, Mr. Speaker. 
Well, so much for them and their record. 
 
And I want to say to the member from Kelvington-Wadena, I 
was talking to a reporter from Wadena and the reporter said to 
me she had been talking to the member from 

Kelvington-Wadena who said her response to the budget was 
apparently well it doesn’t go far enough. Well I’ve got news for 
the member for Kelvington-Wadena, Mr. Speaker. When you 
say that somebody isn’t going far enough, you’re also saying 
they’re going in the right direction, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And that is where we’re going. And the 
reason, Mr. Speaker, is because we’re not listening to the 
chirping from the opposition, we’re listening to the people of 
the province. And what they’re telling us and what they’ve told 
us is that the focus of the budget should be better health care, 
lower taxes, and a commitment to debt repayment and sound 
financial management — and that’s what we’re doing, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And if we look at health . . . I want to tell the members opposite 
and the people of the province, Mr. Speaker, that in 1996 the 
Health budget was $1.56 billion; today it’s $1.9 billion, Mr. 
Speaker. We’re meeting the needs of Saskatchewan people. 
We’re making the largest investment ever in our health system. 
 
Now the members opposite, especially the Liberals, like to say 
that this is because of the federal reinvestment in health. Well I 
want to say that we should give credit where credit is due, Mr. 
Speaker, and we should acknowledge that this year we’ll get 
$67 million more money from Ottawa for health care — $67 
million. And that is part of the $195 million of new money 
we’re putting into health care, Mr. Speaker. Because for every 
dollar the Liberals in Ottawa are coming up with, we’re coming 
up with $2 from the people of the province — that’s our 
commitment to health care, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I want to say that what I really like about the health care 
budget — the largest expenditure in health care in our 
province’s history, Mr. Speaker — is that every penny of that 
new money is going to be directed to front-line services for 
people, Mr. Speaker. And we’re going to target areas like 
shorter waiting lists for surgery, which we need to do; better 
cancer care; more health services for women; and improved 
working conditions for nurses and other health professionals. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And I’m pleased to say, Mr. Speaker, that 
the response to the budget from the University of Saskatchewan 
health care administration professor, Allen Backman, he said he 
was overjoyed with the increased investment for health 
services. And he said, most importantly, Mr. Speaker, it was 
targeted to services that people need. And that’s what we’re 
doing, Mr. Speaker — we’re moving forward. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people want services they can 
count on when they’re ill but they also want services they can 
count on to keep them well. And we are maintaining, Mr. 
Speaker, a comprehensive array of health services in this 
province like renal dialysis in more communities, wider 
immunization programs for kids, expanded home care, 
advanced clinical nursing services in more communities, and 
better access to advanced medical technologies like MRIs and 
CT (computerized tomography) scanners. 
 



April 7, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 449 

We’re also investing in new hospitals, nursing homes, and 
health care facilities in communities around the province; 
expansion of critical services like home care, emergency 
transport and mental health services, Mr. Speaker, to name just 
a few of the things that are being done. 
 
We’re making major progress building a health system for the 
future, Mr. Speaker, and that’s going to be a . . . that’s going to 
be a publicly funded single-tier medicare system, Mr. Speaker, 
something that was pioneered in Saskatchewan . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And the members over there can yell from 
their seats all they want but the people of Saskatchewan will 
never forget that medicare was introduced in this province over 
the objections of the Liberal Party whose leader tried to kick 
down the door of this Chamber to stop it from coming in, allied 
with their allies in the Saskatchewan Party who together formed 
the Keep Our Doctors Committee to try to keep medicare out. 
 
And I’m not going to get into the litany of comments from the 
member from Arm River and the Leader of the Liberal Party, 
Dr. Melenchuk, and the Leader of the Reform Tory 
Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Hermanson, who have said repeatedly 
that what they really want is private hospitals in this province. 
That’s what they want, Mr. Speaker, because at the root of it 
their vision is that you should get what you can pay for. Their 
vision is that you should be able to get faster health care if 
you’ve got more money. That’s their vision, Mr. Speaker; that 
is not our vision. Our vision is to keep building the public 
health care system that we have. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that The Globe and Mail 
featured a story about home care recently. They pointed out that 
Canadians want a seamless health care system, where you can 
go from the hospital to home and you can have home care 
support you. And it went on to say that home care should be an 
integral part of a seamless health system and they said in 
Saskatchewan the reshaping of medicare in this respect is well 
underway. And most people that examine it, Mr. Speaker, know 
that, regardless of what the opposition may have to say about it. 
 
Well I want to say a word about education, Mr. Speaker. And, 
as I said in the budget address, I’ll stand on our record over here 
compared to what they did over there because I’ll repeat what I 
said in the budget address, Mr. Speaker, which is this: when this 
government came to office in 1991, the provincial government 
was spending more money servicing the debt left behind by the 
Tories when they were in power, more money on interest 
charges on the debt, Mr. Speaker, than we were spending on 
education, for the education of young people in this province. 
 
And today we’ve had a turnaround because we’re going to 
spend $250 million more on education this year than we’re 
going to spend servicing the public debt that they left behind, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And that’s what we should be doing. 
 
As for the Liberal Party and their new platform, I want to say 

this . . . and Dr. Melenchuk was caught up on this last night in 
Saskatoon by the teachers because the Minister of Education 
pointed out that the Liberal platform, even though they chirp 
about education, the Liberal platform doesn’t contain one new 
cent for K to 12 education. That’s how much priority the 
Liberals give to education. So much for them. 
 
And then we have, then we have the Tories. What do they 
propose in their platform? Appropriately released on Halloween 
last year, what they propose is that we freeze education funding 
and that we freeze health funding. 
 
And then we have the Liberals and Conservatives, who say in 
their own platforms that education shouldn’t get any more 
money, complaining about the education budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well I’m here to tell the opposition that this budget contains a 
big increase for education. In fact we will be spending $140 
million more on education this year than we spent just three 
years ago. K to 12 education, Mr. Speaker, the funding has gone 
up more than 10 per cent just in the last two years; university 
education up 7 per cent; SIAST and regional colleges up 9 per 
cent this year. And they’re complaining about it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But there’s more — there’s more. This budget not only invests 
in our youth through education, it invests $67 million in our 
children through the Saskatchewan Action Plan for Children to 
ensure that kids have access to the basic economic and social 
opportunities they need to succeed. So we’re spending there 
too, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I have to say when I was at Pleasant Hill School in my 
community — and this happens all over the province —I saw 
the kids in the pre-kindergarten program getting prepared for 
life and given the same opportunities that other kids have. And 
I’ve been to the school feeding programs and helping to make 
breakfast for the kids, Mr. Speaker, because kids have to be 
well-fed and well nourished to want to be in school and want to 
learn. 
 
And there are some with a Tory-type mind that have said to me, 
well why should the state provide food? The parents should do 
that. Well yes, they should, Mr. Speaker. But if we’ve got 
problems in our community and some of those kids are going to 
go hungry, we’re going to do something about it, and that’s 
what we’re doing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And then, of course, we have the 
opposition saying we’re not doing enough for highways and 
they’d do so much more. Well I want to tell the opposition and 
the people of the province, Mr. Speaker, that this year the 
budget invests $235 million to repair and maintain highways. 
That’s $66 million more than three years ago to keep building 
and improving the provincial system of highways and planning 
our transportation system. And not only that — $10 million in a 
new municipal-provincial infrastructure program. 
 
So we’re doing a lot. And the members opposite will say it’s 
not enough, that they would do more. Well that’s their job, Mr. 
Speaker. Their job is to criticize. Our job is to get on with the 
job of building the transportation system. And that’s what we’re 



450 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 1999 

going to keep doing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well we have the opposition parties being 
very critical, Mr. Speaker. But I guess what I’d like to say is 
this. There was a philosopher who said, progress, far from 
consisting in change, depends on retentiveness. Those who 
cannot remember the past are content to repeat it. And you 
know, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think people are going to forget the 
past. They are not going to forget what it was like when the 
Tories were in power and they are not going to forget the legacy 
that is left behind. 
 
I was reading a letter in The Star-Phoenix a while ago from a 
Tory who was saying, why don’t the New Democrats forget 
about the Tories and what they did when they were in office? 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, it would be nice to forget about 
the Tories but it’s hard to forget when every day I’m writing out 
a cheque for $2 million. For what? For nothing, Mr. Speaker. 
Just to pay the interest on the debt that they left behind. Two 
million dollars a day, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So it’s hard to forget. It’s hard to forget. And you know, I guess 
from the bantering over there, I guess somebody threw a stick 
into the dark and hit the dog again because the dog’s really 
yelping over there now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well, so much for the opposition. I think what we need to do, 
Mr. Speaker, is look at the positive side and how we’re moving 
ahead in the right direction. 
 
The opposition likes to talk about taxes. In 1995 and 1996 we 
reduced income taxes and took 6,000 people off the income tax 
roll. Low-income people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In 1997 we reduced the education and health tax from 9 per cent 
to 7 per cent. 
 
In 1998 we reduced Saskatchewan’s personal income tax rate 
from 50 per cent to 48 per cent of the basic federal tax. 
 
And in this budget, Mr. Speaker, which I gather the members 
are going to oppose, we’re reducing the provincial sales tax by 
another point. It’s down from 9 per cent to 6 per cent in just a 
few years and it’s applied to the lowest range of goods and 
services anywhere in Canada, which could be contrasted with 
the Tory record which was to put the PST on everything — all 
goods, all services. That’s their plan — that’s not our plan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Well the result of these tax cuts since 1995 means this. It means 
for an average family, a two income family taking in about 
$50,000 a year, their provincial income taxes have gone down 
by about 10 per cent and their sales tax has gone down by about 
33 per cent, Mr. Speaker. So we’re making progress but we’re 
making progress as we can afford it. 
 
We’re not going to slash taxes and go back into deficit and debt 
like the members opposite propose. We’re not going to do that. 
We’re not going to slash taxes so that we can freeze health care 
and education spending. We’re not going to do that either. 
We’re going to reduce taxes as we can afford it. We’re going to 

maintain public education and public health care, which people 
want us to maintain. And we’re going to continue to pay down 
the debt they left behind. 
 
(1645) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — So, Mr. Speaker, let me say that the record 
of the government is clear. And the result of the record is sound 
financial management as reflected in this year’s budget — the 
message of which is better health care, lower taxes, and less 
debt. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’m proud of this budget. I’m proud to stand 
by it. And I won’t compare our record, and stand with our 
record against the record of the members opposite any day. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And that is why, Mr. Speaker, I will be 
opposing the Liberal and Tory amendment, and I will be 
supporting the motion in favour of the budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The division bells rang from 4:48 p.m. until 4:51 p.m. 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 13 
 
Krawetz Toth Bjornerud 
D’Autremont Boyd Draude 
Gantefoer Julé Heppner 
Osika Hillson McPherson 
McLane   
 

Nays — 27 
 
Flavel MacKinnon Shillington 
Upshall Johnson Whitmore 
Serby Lautermilch Cline 
Kowalsky Van Mulligen Teichrob 
Trew Lorje Sonntag 
Scott Nilson Murray 
Hamilton Junor Stanger 
Jess Wall Kasperski 
Ward Murrell Thomson 
 
The division bells rang from 4:52 p.m. until 4:58 p.m. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 30 
 
Romanow Flavel MacKinnon 
Shillington Upshall Atkinson 
Johnson Whitmore Serby 
Lautermilch Cline Kowalsky 
Van Mulligen Teichrob Bradley 
Trew Lorje Sonntag 
Scott Nilson Murray 



April 7, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 451 

Hamilton Junor Stanger 
Jess Wall Kasperski 
Ward Murrell Thomson 
 

Nays — 14 
 
Krawetz Toth Bjornerud 
D’Autremont Boyd Draude 
Gantefoer Julé Heppner 
Osika Hillson McPherson 
Aldridge McLane  
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Agriculture and Food 

Vote 1 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:01 p.m. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 


