





























































Hansard: April 01, 1999


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 397 
 April 1, 1999 
 
The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, the petition I want to present this morning comes from 
the area of the Parkland Health District. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
abandon any plans to reduce acute care or close any more 
hospitals in the Parkland Health District and to release the 
district’s three-year strategic plan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition come from the 
community of Hafford. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have 
petitions to present today on behalf of Saskatchewan’s 
disenfranchised widows. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to have the Workers’ 
Compensation Board Act amended whereby benefits and 
pensions are reinstated to disenfranchised widows and 
whereby all revoked pensions are reimbursed to them 
retroactively with interest to April 17, 1985. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from the Saskatoon, 
Moosomin, Moose Jaw areas — Moose Jaw in the main, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
abandon any plans to reduce acute care or close any more 
hospitals in the Parkland Health District and to release the 
district’s three-year strategic plan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

The community involved, Mr. Speaker, is Hafford. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As well to present 
petitions. Reading the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
abandon any plans to reduce acute care or close any more 
hospitals in the Parkland Health District and to release the 
district’s three-year strategic plan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the petitions I have in my hand are signed by 
individuals from the Hafford, Biggar, and Regina areas of the 
province. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
citizens asking for a review of parental rights. The prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide a review process with respect to family 
intervention to ensure the rights of responsible families are 
not being violated. 

 
Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
communities of Melfort and Nipawin. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
today, and it’s to increase highway spending in Saskatchewan: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
finally show a serious commitment to roads and highways 
in Saskatchewan by urging it to increase its highways and 
roads construction and maintenance budget by $300 
million over the next five years as called for in the 
Saskatchewan Party’s election platform. 
 

People who have signed this petition are from all over 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too rise 
today to present petitions on behalf of the people of our 
province, and the petitioners have signed this petition because 
they need a real farm aid package. And the prayer reads as 
follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
demand that the federal government work with 
Saskatchewan to put in place a farm aid package that 
provides real relief to those who need it, and that the 
provincial government develop a long-term farm safety net 
program as it promised to do when it cancelled GRIP 
against the wishes of farmers. 
 

The signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Domremy and Wakaw, Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 



398 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 1999 

Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My petition from 
citizens of Saskatchewan. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call on federal and provincial 
governments to dedicate a significantly greater portion of 
fuel tax revenues toward road maintenance and 
construction so Saskatchewan residents may have a safe 
highway system that meets their needs. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The signatures on these petitions and others that have been 
presented are from the communities of Saskatoon, Unity, 
Macklin, Cut Knife to Waldron, from one end of the province to 
the other, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 
petitions on behalf of the citizens that are concerned over the 
severe financial crisis that there is involving our farm 
community at this time. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call upon provincial and 
federal governments to immediately take steps to end 
unfair world subsidies and provide farmers with prompt 
relief from declining incomes. And act as watchdogs 
against rising input costs which are harming the rural 
economy. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will every pray. 

 
Those who’ve signed these petitions, Mr. Speaker, are from all 
across the province. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I join with my 
colleagues in bringing forward petitions today from the people 
of around Saskatchewan who are sick and tired of this highway 
situation. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call on federal and provincial 
governments to dedicate a significantly greater proportion 
of the fuel tax revenues toward road maintenance and 
construction so Saskatchewan residents may have a safe 
highway system that meets their needs. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed the petitions here are 
from Shaunavon, Vanguard, Killdeer, Rockglen, Assiniboia, 
Crane Valley, Limerick, St. Victor, Climax, Frontier, Val 
Marie, Outlook, Eastend.  
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The prayer for 
relief comes this morning from the RM (rural municipality) of 
Weyburn No. 67 and I’ll read the prayer on their behalf. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately start work on the rebuilding of our secondary 
highway system to provide for safe driving on what are 
becoming known as pothole roads to enter into 
negotiations with SARM and SUMA for a long terms plan 
of rural road restitution reflecting future needs and to 
provide safety for all drivers as the new trucking regulation 
changes safety factors on these roads. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will every pray. 
 

And these folks all come from the community of Weyburn, Mr. 
Speaker, and I’m happy to present it on their behalf. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the petitions presented at the last 
sitting have been reviewed and found to be in order. Pursuant to 
rule 12(7) these petitions are hereby received. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 19 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for SaskTel: what studies and 
safeguard has SaskTel undertaken to ensure the operators 
of small security monitoring businesses that there will be 
no job losses if SaskTel enters the security monitoring 
field? 

 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I shall 
on day no. 19 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Municipal Affairs, Culture and 
Housing: for the year 1995, how much funding went from 
Saskatchewan Lotteries to the Saskatchewan Seniors 
Mechanism? Second question: which member 
organizations of the Saskatchewan Seniors Mechanism 
received these monies and how much did they get? Third, 
what were the operating and administrative costs of the 
umbrella organization known as the Saskatchewan Seniors 
Mechanism? 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, I have similar questions for the years 1996, 
1997, and 1998; and I so present. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 19 ask the government the following question 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. The Chair is having some 
difficulty being able to hear the hon. member from Cypress 
Hills provide his notice for a question and seeks the 
co-operation of all members of the House. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — To the Premier of the province, Mr. Speaker, 
I ask the following question: 
 

Does your government support the war effort of NATO 
and Canada in Yugoslavia and does your government 
support ground troop intervention in this war? 



April 1, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 399 

Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to give notice 
that I shall on day no. 19 ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the minister in charge of SPMC: how many paper 
shredders have been purchased by the government since 
January 1, 1998, and at what cost? 
 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Research Projects in Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday 
was a very good day for Saskatchewan universities, for 
Saskatchewan research and development, for the Saskatchewan 
economy, for Saskatchewan’s future, and for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The minister told us about the Synchrotron project in 
Saskatoon. The member from Sherwood and I were very 
pleased to be at a ceremony at the University of Regina with the 
Minister of Economic Development who announced funding for 
two major projects at the University of Regina where many of 
my constituents attend and one of my children are students. 
 
The funding is from the Canada Foundation for Innovation. The 
projects are for a sustainable heavy oil research facility and for 
an institute for information research. These projects will have 
significant commercial applications for two of Saskatchewan’s 
key economic sectors — oil production and information 
technology. They demonstrate our commitment to economic 
growth and job creation. Jobs for our best and brightest 
students. And they show equally our commitment to innovation. 
 
I vaguely remember, Mr. Speaker, a Canadian television show 
called Here Come the Seventies — the favourite viewing of the 
opposition. But, Mr. Speaker, yesterday shows once again that 
for the rest of Saskatchewan, here comes the new millennium. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Party Candidate for Thunder Creek 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Saskatchewan Party hosted a nomination for Thunder Creek last 
evening in Mortlach. There were 553 people in attendance. I 
stood and counted each and every one of them as they came 
through the door. There were busloads of people from all over 
the constituency and dozens of carloads of people. 
 
It was a bright and enthusiastic crowd. There were two very 
well-qualified candidates, both of whom who would make a 
great MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) for the 
constituency of Thunder Creek. All parts of the constituency 
were represented, jamming the school gymnasium in Mortlach. 
 
The meeting was originally scheduled, Mr. Speaker, to be held 
at the community hall but it was quickly realized that it would 
not be large enough to handle the crowd that was anticipated. 
 
The candidates spoke about a new beginning for Saskatchewan, 

one filled with dreams and hope and opportunity, one of new 
jobs and keeping our young people here in home; a turning 
point in Saskatchewan’s history that the people of 
Saskatchewan will be talking about for decades, offering the 
same kind of promise that the settlers originally had here in 
Saskatchewan. The candidates also spoke of the challenge of 
the new job as being an MLA and the work they look forward 
to. 
 
At the end of the evening, after a spirited campaign the 
Saskatchewan Party members selected as the new candidate for 
the Saskatchewan Party and the next MLA for the Thunder 
Creek constituency — Mr. Lyle Stewart. 
 

Easter/Passover 
 

Mr. Whitmore: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last night at 
sundown began the most solemn and sacred and joyous 
weekend in religious calendars of the two great religions in 
western civilization. 
 
The feast of Passover began last night, the feast which 
celebrates the liberation of the children of Israel from bondage 
in Egypt. For Christians, today is Holy Thursday, celebrating 
the Passover supper where we were given the commandment, 
love thy neighbour as thyselves. Many Christians have their 
own supper today to remember . . . in the remembrance of this 
Last Supper. 
 
Tomorrow is Good Friday and of course Sunday is Easter. In 
this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, we promote no particular creed, 
but at this season of contemplation, regeneration, and rebirth, in 
both the physical world and, we hope, our personal lives, we 
acknowledge the profound and humbling lessons of the season. 
 
Both religions in the purest form lead us towards peace among 
all people, as the Hebrew word shalom indicates. Both have at 
their core the belief in the ultimate triumph of good over evil, of 
love over hate, of joy over suffering. 
 
With the lessons of Easter and Passover in our hearts and 
minds, Mr. Speaker, we wish all members and all people peace, 
safety, and fulfillment. Shalom. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I join with 
the member from Saskatoon Northwest in just extending a 
happy Easter through you to each one of the members in this 
Assembly. 
 
As we’re all aware, Easter is a special time of the year. It’s a 
time when Christians throughout the world celebrate not only 
the death, but I believe, Mr. Speaker, when it comes right down 
to it, the life of Easter and the resurrection of Easter Sunday 
morning. 
 
Certainly as we look at Easter, Mr. Speaker, it’s indeed a timely 
event in the fact that it speaks of springtime and it speaks of 
new life. Mr. Speaker, as many people across our ridings, 
certainly across this province, we know will be celebrating 
Good Friday and having special services; they’ll be celebrating 
on Easter Sunday with special services; and I know many of the 



400 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 1999 

members will probably take the time to join with their 
constituents in celebrating this special time of the year. 
 
So to each and every one, on behalf of the Saskatchewan Party 
caucus, we extend to you a happy and a very pleasant Easter. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

St. Ecribus Day 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, today is St. Ecribus 
Day. Ecribus, from whose name we get the French word écrire, 
or to write — is the patron saint of scribes and journalists. 
 
A Fransican friar in the French Alps in 1237, Ecribus, was 
murdered at his table while translating on parchment the 
seventh commandment, “Thou shalt not bear false witness.” 
 
Legend has it that on this day, until noon, writers are released 
from their rigid and sacred standards of veracity. For this brief 
moment they are able, even encouraged to slant or falsify their 
writings before returning to their high standards, Mr. Speaker. 
 
To the love children of St. Ecribus in the gallery, happy April 1. 
You’ve got an hour left. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Thunder Creek Sask Party Nomination 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, last night was a homecoming of 
sorts in the Thunder Creek constituency. From the where are 
they now file, former Tories Lyle Stewart and Devine minister 
Rick Swenson once again went head to head for a party 
nomination. It wasn’t the thriller in Manilla nor the bungle in 
the jungle. It was merely the repeat in the creek. 
 
You see, 14 years ago these two went head to head for the party 
nod for the Tories. Now they ran for the Sask-a-Tory party. 
Now they’ve got room for everyone — Tories to Sask-a-Tories, 
Reformers and former Tories, and of course those stuck in the 
reformatory. It’s no wonder they want a united alternative. 
 
It seems confusing so we’ve made it easier for them. Rather 
than four different membership cards, we’ve put it all on one 
simple card. In the middle is the Sask-a-Tory card, not good 
anywhere else outside of . . . well, it’s not good anywhere; a 
Reform card, well it’s not good east of Manitoba; a Tory Party 
card, it’s not good west of Manitoba; and a united alternative 
card — well it’s just not good. Last but not least, Mr. Speaker, 
we have a “get out of jail free” card for those former Tories, 
now shut-ins watching from some of Saskatchewan’s finest 
correctional facilities. Just like the Tory party, this multi-sided 
membership card conveniently . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. The hon. member’s time has 
expired. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Indian Federated College Annual Powwow 
 

Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

Saskatchewan Indian Federated College is celebrating its 21st 
annual powwow. Hundreds of dancers and dozens of drum 
groups from across North America will be in Regina on April 3 
and April 4 this weekend. The dancers come from all Canadian 
provinces and 12 American states. 
 
Originally, the powwow was started to promote cross-cultural 
awareness on the U of R campus and to strengthen First Nations 
culture. The SIFC (Saskatchewan Indian Federated College) 
Powwow was and is a spiritual, cultural, and social gathering 
for First Nations peoples. It also kicks off the North American 
powwow season. 
 
One of this year’s highlights, Mr. Speaker, is a special teen girls 
dance in honour of Lily Daniels who has been a dance and 
cultural teacher for 20 years. And a special hoop dance will be 
held on Sunday to honour Terence Littletent, world champion 
hoop dancer. 
 
I would like to send my congratulations to all powwow 
organizers and to all the participants. Thank you very much, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Newspaper Headlines 
 
Mr. Ward: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As we prepare to go 
home to our constituencies to carry the good news of our 
balanced budget, it’s nice to leave the opposition members with 
some of their good news in their constituencies. 
 
The headlines in their papers around the province read: “1998 
was good to Elrose,” Eston Press Review; “Residential building 
permit values in city of Melfort doubled from $1.2 million, 
November 1997 to $2.7 million end of November last year”; 
“Grenfell site of $10 million grain facility,” Whitewood Herald; 
“Alliance Pipeline project to begin near Stoughton this 
summer,” Saskatoon Star-Phoenix. 
 
Spinning gold into straw or “Spinning straw into gold in 
Assiniboia” — sorry, Mr. Speaker — Moose Jaw This Week. 
 
And a bonus for this week, Mr. Speaker, “Southern Crafts: New 
home-based business and venture in Kipling,” The Kipling 
Citizen. 
 
It’s the same old story, Mr. Speaker: good news for 
Saskatchewan — sour Tory faces. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Charity Foundations 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, my question this morning is for the Premier. Mr. 
Premier, we know, we now know that several of your MLAs 
ran their constituency offices through NDP (New Democratic 
Party) charity foundations in the early 1980s and . . . sorry, in 
the late 1980s and the early 1990s. In every case these 
foundations were run by NDP activists. 



April 1, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 401 

They built up cash surpluses — which was against the rules. 
They filed incomplete financial records. The records they did 
file show questionable expenses. And every one of them was 
struck from the corporate registry for failing to file financial 
returns as required by law. 
 
Mr. Premier, these are the facts. Many questions remain 
unanswered. There is one way to clear up everything. Open the 
books. 
 
Mr. Premier, will you ask these NDP-run charity foundations to 
release all their financial records? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Speaker, another day, 
another desperate attempt by the Saskatchewan Tory Party to 
climb out of the political gutter in which they find themselves in 
Saskatchewan. Trying to climb out not by dint of honest effort, 
Mr. Speaker, but trying to climb out by trying to drag others 
into that political gutter with them. Why are they doing that, 
Mr. Speaker? They’re doing that because as a party they’ve 
been totally discredited in Saskatchewan. They’ve tried to 
change their name hoping that might save them, and it hasn’t 
done that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What I say to the Saskatchewan Tory Party is stop your 
American-style politics as you’ve been doing for these last 
number of days. Do it the Saskatchewan way. Do it by saying, 
first of all, you’re sorry for the mess that you created in 
Saskatchewan in the 1980s. Do it by getting rid of the Tory 
staffers that continue to work for you. Do it by stopping and 
refusing to have Tories run for you in this next election, and 
returning the money that was stolen from the people of 
Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Premier, in the past few days we have raised questions about six 
NDP (New Democratic Party) charity foundations. There are 
three more we are aware of: The Victoria Avenue Community 
Foundation rented office space to the Minister of Social 
Services from 1990 to 1993. It built up a surplus of nearly 
$3,500 during that time. 
 
The Regina Wascana Plains Community Foundation was set up 
by the SPMC minister’s campaign manager, her business 
manager, and her election-day organizer. It never filed a single 
financial statement. 
 
And the North-East Community Foundation was set by Will 
Olive and two members of the North Broad NDP foundation. It 
never filed a single financial statement either. That’s the total of 
nine NDP charity foundations. 
 
Mr. Premier, it’s time to open the books. Will you ask the NDP 
activists who ran these foundations to release all their financial 
records? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I was interested to 
read in one of the local journals the other day, comments by that 
member opposite, where he said in the Legislative Assembly 

and talked about, quote, “inappropriate use of MLA expense 
money.” Later, Mr. Speaker, outside the Assembly that member 
said, I quote, “acknowledged the money may have been spent 
on legitimate constituency expenditures.” 
 
So what we have here, Mr. Speaker, what we have here is a 
pattern, is a pattern of fearmongering, of slinging mud inside 
the Legislative Assembly, and then outside the Legislative 
Assembly another story emerges entirely. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet and while we’re talking 
about surpluses, Mr. Speaker, I have a question for that 
member. Can that member inform the House, can he let the 
people of Saskatchewan know what his plans are for the 
unspent balance in the Progressive Conservative bank account 
in the Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce in Canora, 
Saskatchewan, in his constituency? What are his plans for that 
money, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. The Chair asks for the 
co-operation of all hon. members to allow the question to be 
heard when it’s put and the answer to be heard when it’s 
provided. Order. 
 

SaskPower Delta Project 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
questions this morning are for the minister responsible for 
SaskPower. Mr. Minister, I understand there’s a new 
development with your $100 million computer upgrade over at 
SaskPower secretly code named the Delta Project. We have 
been told, we have been told, of a secret little deal cooked up 
between Bill Hyde, your NDP colleague’s campaign manager 
and Gord Gunoff, the new Liberal campaign manager. We 
understand that Bill and Gord got together and signed a little 
deal saying that any current SaskPower employee who works 
on the Delta Project would get paid $28 per hour regardless of 
their normal rate of pay. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you confirm this? Will you release the 
agreement signed between Bill Hyde and Gord Gunoff 
regarding the Delta Project? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, first of all I’ll refer to 
the member from Kindersley referring to this secret 
arrangement, this highly classified Delta Project which is 
referred to in the annual report I think — highly, highly 
suspicious deal that was explained and debated by the member 
from Thunder Creek in estimates last year, where the member 
from Thunder Creek said we should sell our computers in the 
Power Corporation because they cost too much. That’s what he 
said. And if I had time I’d go back and refer. Today the member 
from Kindersley a year later — a year later — catches up and 
finds that there’s this secret project, that’s been debated in the 
Assembly, that’s referred to in the annual report. 
 
I say to the member opposite this is no secret. It’s the report of 
doing a different arrangement of computers in SaskPower. 
There is no secret arrangement. And I say to the member 
opposite lean over and ask the member from Thunder Creek 
about the project because he knows all about it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



402 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 1999 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, the 
problem with this deal between Bill Hyde and Gord Gunoff is 
that it’s unfair to other workers. We’re talking about existing 
SaskPower employees. If someone is making about 15 bucks an 
hour and all of a sudden they get slid over to the Delta Project 
at 28 bucks an hour, that’s a huge increase. 
 
Mr. Minister, who picks the workers for the Delta Project? Is it 
Gord Gunoff, the Liberal campaign manager? Mr. Minister, 
I’ve read the Liberal platform — code-named not so secretly, 
platform light. And let me give you a little advice. I wouldn’t be 
taking any management advice from these people over here. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you release, will you release the agreement 
signed between Bill Hyde and Gord Gunoff regarding the Delta 
Project? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I will not take advice from the 
Liberal Party on how to run the province, but one thing I won’t 
take is advice from Tories on how to run the Crowns. That’s for 
sure. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1982 . . . in 1982 when that member was 
working with Grant Devine to build or destroy the Crowns, the 
debt in the Crowns was 3.3 billion when they took over. And 
they said they were going to sell assets, sell assets in order to 
pay down the debt. And they sold off Saskoil, they sold off the 
Potash Corporation, they sold off Sask Mineral, they sold off 
the coal mines, and did the debt go down? The debt went from 
3.3 billion to 5.4 billion. 
 
Now, Mr. Member, I will not take advice from you on how to 
run the Crowns because you would, as a farmer, be selling your 
tractor and saying that’s a good deal because I have less debt on 
my farm, but the problem would be in your case the debt would 
actually go up. 
 
No, we won’t take advice from that member. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Farm Aid Program 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Mr. Minister, farmers and bank managers are telling us your 
farm assistance program will not solve the financial crisis. The 
Sask Party recently received a copy of a letter from a general 
manager of a credit union in Kindersley constituency. He wrote, 
Mr. Minister, to say four things: the farm aid package in its 
current form won’t work; the application process is so 
complicated that farmers are paying to accountants upwards of 
$600 just to fill out the forms. Mr. Minister, also the assistance 
is needed right now but it won’t get to farmers until September; 
and the payment should be based on cultivated acres in order to 
simplify calculations and speed up payouts. 

 
Mr. Minister, that is exactly what we’ve been saying for the 
past six months. Will you finally admit that your government 
has failed Saskatchewan farmers, and will you push the federal 
government to pay out emergency assistance before spring 
seeding based on cultivated or seeded acres? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 
is asking questions about the program and I think we’ve made it 
very clear that from the beginning we went in this program 
under protest. If he’s making, if he’s making these accusations 
here, I agree that the program is complicated. I agree it doesn’t 
quite hit the mark but I ask you to . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . yes, exactly. I ask you to, have you talked to the federal 
minister? Have you gone to see the . . . or written the federal 
government to tell them this? 
 
It seems to me that you’re on all sides of the issue like your 
leader who a year ago said — when the Finance minister, 
agreed with the Finance minister — it’s an Ottawa problem, 
they should put the money in. Then he went a few months later 
to 70 per cent, 30 per cent and then at the end he said, just put 
your 40 per cent in. With friends like that, the same leader who 
advocated cutting federal government agriculture budget, I 
wouldn’t talk about anything if I were you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Minister, I don’t think anybody on that side even understands 
the AIDA (Agricultural Insurance Disaster Assistance) 
program. A farmer called the Premier’s office and was really 
unhappy about paying this $600 for an accountant when he 
probably wasn’t going to qualify. Do you know what the 
response was . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — From the Premier’s office. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — From the Premier’s office, they told him to 
find nine other farmers, go together, the ten of them, and maybe 
they’d get it done for $60 a piece. 
 
Mr. Minister — hello! Do you have any idea on that side what’s 
going on? You don’t even realize what the program is about in 
any office on that side. And, Mr. Minister, it was you who 
concluded in January the farm crisis was over. Now you’re 
freely admitting the farm assistance program you signed with 
Ottawa isn’t going to work. 
 
Mr. Minister, you failed Saskatchewan farm families and you 
blew it. How many Saskatchewan farmers have applied for 
financial assistance through AIDA? Can you tell us that? How 
many farmers have been approved for AIDA assistance? And 
what is the average amount of assistance granted to farmers in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not going to get 
irritated today by this member’s lack of consistency, but I 
could. I could. I mean, here these . . . the credibility of this 
operation across the floor, is not . . . is non-existent. They get 
up and talk about put your money and put your money in — 
that weakened our position of trying to get the better, best deal 
for Saskatchewan farmers and Saskatchewan taxpayers — 
helped by the Liberal Party, helped by Mr. Hermanson who just 
said, just put your money in — the leader of the Conservative 
Party here. And now he says the thing’s no good. Well you 



April 1, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 403 

can’t have it both ways. You can’t have it both ways. 
 
And I’ll tell you what. I agree with you that this is not a good 
program. But you’re trying to pin it on this government who 
you were forcing into going into the program. 
 
I mean, your credibility is zero. Zero. What I will give you 
credit for is taking $635 million annually out of Saskatchewan 
farmers’ pockets, Mr. Speaker. Crow benefit, two-price wheat, 
deregulation, and your chief, Mr. Hermanson, wanting to cut 
federal budget, that he succeeded to do and the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Next question. 
 

Liquor and Gaming Authority Budget 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
when it comes to anyone other than his political friends, the 
Premier says that the cupboards are bare. Well the liquor 
cabinet isn’t bare. Mr. Speaker, from a freedom of information 
request, we have learned that the ’96-97 travel expenses for 
Liquor and Gaming Authority was over half a million dollars. 
The following year it went up to almost $570,000. 
 
My question is to the minister: when everyone else is being told 
to tighten your belt, how can she justify to the taxpayers that 
they must shell out half a million dollars so NDP hacks can 
travel to wine-tasting shows in the Bahamas or bingo 
conferences in Vegas? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the 
Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority there are a number 
of areas that received increases in the previous year. One was in 
the area of travel . . . that you saw many people who had 
experiences in other places with casino development and 
gaming development. They also have a broad range of 
experience in product development and in new initiatives in the 
Authority. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we take an opportunity for training and 
development within the Authority whenever we can. And I see 
here an opposition member who stands up who says how they 
would treat the public service in this province, is to do away 
with 600 middle managers, Mr. Speaker, also their support staff 
and services. 
 
So I think there’s a vast difference between the way the public 
service is trained and developed in this province through our 
government and through what they would do to people who are 
supporting and serving this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well she’s right, Mr. Speaker, and it’s a 
case of priorities. And as you heard they’re in favour of jet 
setting their friends around the world instead of doing what the 
priorities of the people of Saskatchewan are. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier is telling everyone who is negotiating 
with the government that 2 per cent is all you get — 2 per cent 
every year for three years. This 2 per cent a year hike — like it 

or lump it — may apply to nurses and other health care 
professionals but it doesn’t apply to the Liquor and Gaming 
Authority. No sir, their travel budget went up 8 per cent in one 
year — 8 per cent in only one year. 
 
How does the Premier justify an 8 per cent increase in the 
Liquor and Gaming travel budget when he is only prepared to 
give the nurses 2 per cent? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When we’re 
talking about some of the expenses that increased in Liquor and 
Gaming, you can isolate one or two areas where people have 
taken the opportunity to go to conferences to learn more about 
what we need to do to have a well-regulated, controlled, and 
limited gaming environment in this province. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we can also point to areas that we were going 
through some one-time expenses when we were developing the 
casinos in the province. We’re going through some one-time 
expenditures when you want to be able to travel and make 
certain they’re operating smoothly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we believe that we should know those and 
make certain that we have a well-regulated, controlled, and 
limited environment, not only on the liquor side of our 
operation, Mr. Speaker, but on gaming which is far from Jim 
Melenchuk who says what he would do, is do away with 600 
jobs in the Crowns and other government departments. 
Unnecessary middle management, Mr. Speaker, targeting 
managers who provide technical support and services to 
government on all sides of the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Nursing Shortage 
 

Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, for the past few months the 
NDP has been claiming they’re hiring more nurses. Remember 
at the last session when the Minister of Health claimed to have 
virtually hired 200 nurses and we found out that wasn’t the 
truth. Then recently the NDP had to close 64 beds because they 
realized they didn’t have enough nurses. Now they claim to be 
on this great recruitment drive. 
 
Well according to an internal memo from the Regina Health 
District, the NDP are having problems with their hiring. It 
seems according to this March 12, 1999 memo for the week of 
March 8, the NDP made contact with 30 nurses of which 14 
applied, yet only 7 were hired. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question to the minister, why is it with such a 
severe nursing shortage that of 14 nursing applicants, only 7 
were hired? Did the nurses turn them down once they realized 
the terrible morale and working conditions that this NDP 
government has created in the health system? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
what I can report to the member, and I have a report from the 
Regina Health District that indicates that as of yesterday, March 
31, the Regina Health District has hired 76 nurses to the Regina 
Health District. 



404 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 1999 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, again we see the minister is 
happy to instruct us about the figures for her department, but 
now it’s time to reveal some numbers for the minister’s 
edification. There were 115 unfilled nursing vacancies in the 
Regina Health District. You’re saying you filled some by the 
end of March 31. But as of the figures we had there is only 12 
of those positions that were actually permanent full time, less 
than 10 of those positions permanent full time; 22 temporary 
full time; 26 permanent part time; 55 temporary part time. 
 
Didn’t the minister listen to any of the concerns of nurses 
regarding recruitment and retention? The nurses need the job 
security that only comes with permanent full-time employment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question to the minister, does the minister 
really believe that the 64 beds will ever reopen when all you 
ever offer is these part-time jobs? Don’t you regret laying off 
the 600 nurses three years ago? Will you admit that that was a 
dumb mistake? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, as I indicated to the 
member in my previous answer to his question, the Regina 
Health District, as of March 31, 1999, has hired 76 nurses for 
the Regina Health District. But I can also report to the member 
that 32 of those positions are permanent full-time positions, Mr. 
Speaker, and I think that’s important. 
 
As the member will also know, that the issue of the 
casualization of work is being presently negotiated at the 
bargaining table. Mr. Speaker, we are extremely interested in 
ensuring that we are able to offer through our health districts, 
permanent full-time employment to all health providers in the 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Crime Statistics 
 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Justice. Mr. Minister, a few days 
ago Statistics Canada reported that Saskatchewan has the 
highest rate of sexual offences in Canada — the highest, Mr. 
Minister. Saskatchewan now has this appalling number to 
accompany the province’s other first-place positions: the 
highest murder rate, the highest break and enter rate, the highest 
rate for car theft, and the highest violent crime rate, and an 
extremely high rate of children being sexually abused through 
the child prostitution trade. 
 
Mr. Minister, what is the NDP government doing about this 
nightmare of runaway crime so that our communities and our 
streets are safe again? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This 
government’s policy is to provide safe communities in 
everything that we do. We work with many of the issues that 
arise. As the member opposite knows, this report around 
reporting of sex crimes has two aspects to it. 
 

One of the aspects is that many of these crimes are crimes 
against children. And we are in Saskatchewan a place where we 
have some special ways of making sure that these crimes 
against children are reported. We have a Saskatoon child centre 
and a Regina child centre that deal with these kinds of crime in 
a way that leads the country in how you respond to some of the 
most difficult crimes that happen in our community. 
 
And we know that working together with Social Services and 
Justice officials, police, and also the education and health 
system, we are able to address and report some of the crimes 
that are not being dealt with in other parts of the country. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, I would just like to say to the 
Minister of Justice that the record in this province tells the tale. 
The very fact that there are numbers of children on the streets of 
Saskatoon and Regina constantly being abused, and whatever 
programs this government has put in, whatever efforts they 
have made are minimal. They’re not working; they’re not 
enough. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on Friday the Finance minister quoted the Premier 
of Saskatchewan saying, we must constantly pursue our dreams 
including the dream of a safer world. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the Premier’s dream is a nightmare for 
many communities in Saskatchewan. In fact some of the worst 
crimes and prostitution problems are in the Premier’s own 
constituency. Just a few days ago there was a shocking report 
on television about a woman who was attacked on a downtown 
street near a service station in Regina. The same newscast 
indicated that a businessman is now keeping 24-hour watch on 
his place of business to stop thieves from breaking in. 
 
Mr. Minister, after seven years of NDP government 
Saskatchewan finds itself on the top of the worst crime lists. 
 
The Speaker: — The hon. member has been extremely lengthy 
in her preamble. And I’ll ask her to go . . . Order. I’ll ask her to 
go directly to her question now. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Minister, while the Premier spends his time 
dreaming, what are you doing to end the nightmare of crime 
that has infested so many of our communities? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, these members opposite like 
to use some of these figures, and we know that especially the 
lead-off statistics that were used by the member opposite 
around sex crimes are particularly bad numbers. 
 
And I’d like to quote a clinical psychologist who works in this 
area, and Dr. Doug Jergens says: 
 

These are particularly bad numbers to use to try to 
determine the rate of offense behaviour in the population. 
 
According to Statistics Canada, Saskatchewan leads . . . 
(these results but) “Reporting rates can change, due to 
factors that are unrelated to the actual frequency of 
offending.” 
 



April 1, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 405 

It would be much more appropriate to look at anonymous 
surveys to deal with some of these things. 

 
We in Saskatchewan have been taking our resources and 
working together with people in the community to deal with the 
children that are caught up in the sex trade, to deal with the 
communities that have some of the issues that are coming up. 
And we will continue to work with the people in the community 
and the police to respond to all of these issues so that we have 
safe communities in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 237  The Agricultural Implements 
Amendment Act, 1999 

 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move first reading 
of a Bill entitled The Agricultural Implements Act. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 238 — The Negative Billing and Check-off 
Options Regulation Act 

 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move first reading 
of Bill 238, the Act is to regulate the negative billing and 
check-off options. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 22 — The Special Payment 
(Dependent Spouses) Act 

 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 22, 
The Special Payment (Dependent Spouses) Act be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly I 
would like to make a statement in regards to an historic event. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 

Creation of Territory of Nunavut 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Speaker, I rise in the House today to 
announce that today, on April 1, 1999, is an historic day for 
Canada. Today marks the creation of a new territory, the 
territory of Nunavut. The map of Canada is transformed today, 
Mr. Speaker, as the previous Northwest Territories is divided 
into two new territories. The central and eastern portion 
constitutes Nunavut, with the capital city of Iqaluit, and the 
western part remains as the Northwest Territories. 
 
Nunavut is a vast territory, Mr. Speaker, containing one-fifth of 

Canada’s land mass or approximately two million square 
kilometres. Approximately 85 per cent or a little more than 
20,000 of its 24,000-some people are Inuit, and so it seems 
fitting, Mr. Speaker, that they should name their territory 
Nunavut, meaning “our land” in the Inuit language, Inuktitut. 
 
The idea of dividing the Northwest Territories is not new, Mr. 
Speaker. The creation of the Nunavut Territory is the 
culmination of years of negotiations and the result of the 
Nunavut land claims agreement in 1993, the largest land claim 
ever settled in Canadian history. Inuit leaders have been calling 
for a separate territory with its own government since the 
1970s. 
 
The historic significance of this event is demonstrated by the 
fact that this is the first time the configuration of Canada has 
been altered since Newfoundland joined Confederation in 1949, 
the fiftieth anniversary of which we celebrated just yesterday, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Like the arrival of Newfoundland, the creation of Nunavut is 
another significant step in the building of our nation. It is a 
timely example of the Canadian federation’s ability to 
accommodate the cultural and linguistic diversity of its different 
regions and populations. As Canadians, we can take pride in the 
exceptional achievement that the creation of this new territory 
represents. Canada has been able to redraw its map in a 
democratic, peaceful, and a co-operative manner. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on February 15, 1999, Nunavut’s 19-member 
Legislative Assembly was elected and are being sworn in today. 
This is a consensus-style government, Mr. Speaker, where 
MLAs sit as independents in a non-party system. On March 5, 
1999, the newly elected members chose their Premier, Speaker 
and seven-member cabinet. Premier Paul Okalik is not only the 
newest Premier in Canada, Mr. Speaker, at age 34 he is the 
youngest. 
 
Nunavut will operate on a . . . as a public government, Mr. 
Speaker, with law making powers similar to those of the 
Northwest Territories and the Yukon governments. All 
residents will be able to vote, run for office, and fill jobs within 
the public service. Because the Inuit make up the majority of 
the population, the Nunavut government will reflect Inuit 
culture and tradition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today we recognize the enormous opportunities 
and challenges before the Nunavut government as it works to 
re-establish self-sufficiency for its future generations. I would 
like all members to join with me in welcoming Nunavut to 
Canada. Through you, Mr Speaker, we extend our best wishes 
to the new territory of Nunavut and its people and offer our 
commitment to work together to build a strong relationship with 
Saskatchewan and with all of Canada. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, also for permission to respond to 
the statement. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, today is an historic day not only 



406 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 1999 

for the people of the Northwest Territories but for Canada as a 
whole. Some day I believe we’ll all remember sitting in the 
Assembly today, the day when the two new territories were 
recognized and came into being — Nunavut in the east, and the 
new yet to be released unnamed territory in the west. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the establishment of Nunavut as a distinct territory 
under its own government fulfils the desired aspiration of the 
eastern and central Arctic Inuit to control their own destinies. 
This form of self-government is unique to Nunavut. 
Representing approximately 85 per cent of the population in 
Nunavut, the Inuit form a clear majority in the Territories and 
will therefore have a clear majority in the Territories. And they 
will have a primary influence in the public government to be 
elected by all residents. 
 
The combined effective creation of Nunavut and the 
implementation of the land claim agreement will provide the 
residents of Nunavut with eagerness and a tool to promote 
economic growth, political stability, and overall increases in a 
standard of living for everyone. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the official opposition and the people 
we represent, we’d like to congratulate the people of the 
Northwest Territories on their victory of self-government. 
 
Last summer I had the wonderful opportunity to spend time in 
Yellowknife at a public accounts meeting, and the 
representatives in the Assembly and the other people who met 
there were waiting with unconcealed excitement and 
enthusiasm for today. It seemed to me that the only real issue 
that hadn’t been resolved was which area would keep the very 
unique licence plates they have in the Territories. We recognize 
that it was a long and difficult struggle for the Inuit and we 
congratulate them today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — With leave, Mr. Speaker, to also respond to that 
comment. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today does truly mark 
a milestone in Canadian history, a day witnessing the creation 
of a new territory in Canada, Nunavut from the central and 
eastern half of Northwest Territories. In this Assembly, Mr. 
Speaker, we feel a profound pride and attachment to this 
development since this was once the Northwest Territories 
before the creation of Saskatchewan and Alberta in 1905. 
 
Since then this province has grown and prospered, sometimes in 
spite of the government of the day, but this new experiment for 
our Inuit brothers and sisters in self-government, provides a 
shining beacon and hope for the future. 
 
The creation of Nunavut today joined by the celebrations 
yesterday for the 50th anniversary of Newfoundland joining 
Confederation shows the Canadian dynamic is always 
changing, always evolving, and capable of accepting and 
making changes which would be difficult in other places such 
as the former Yugoslavia. 
 

There is no doubt in my mind that the creation of Nunavut will 
mark a new stage in that Territory in terms of economic 
development and the development of Inuit pride, much as the 
creation of Saskatchewan marked a new stage in our economic 
development and development of provincial pride. 
 
Through you, Mr. Speaker, I wish to extend on behalf of the 
Liberal caucus the warmest welcome to the newest member of 
Confederation, Nunavut, and its people. We share with them the 
pride they feel on this day and pledge to work with them to 
build a strong relationship between ourselves and Nunavut, as 
not only are we both descendants of the Northwest Territories 
but we are also all Canadians. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to present a 
motion to the House regarding the members’ statements in 
regards to the creation of the Nunavut Territory. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
member for Kelvington-Wadena: 
 

That the Legislative Assembly request the Speaker to send 
copies and transcripts of the members’ statements in 
regards to the creation of the Nunavut Territory to the 
Legislative Assembly of Nunavut. 

 
Thank you. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
(1100) 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Ward: — In the spirit of open and accountable 
government, Mr. Speaker, I table the answer to question no. 33. 
 
The Speaker: — The answer to item no. 1, question 33 is 
provided. 
 
Mr. Ward: — And in the spirit of open and accountable 
government, I table the answer to question no. 34. 
 
The Speaker: — The answer to item no. 2, question 34 is 
provided. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion moved by the Hon. Mr. Cline that the Assembly resolve 
itself into the Committee of Finance, and the proposed 



April 1, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 407 

amendment thereto moved by Mr. Gantefoer. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well yesterday, Mr. 
Speaker, we spent some time looking at some of the record and 
I think that’s what we’re doing here is we’re looking at the 
record, the record as indicated by the stats that we use, basically 
coming from Stats Canada, and the record of the people that are 
in this House and the record of the people in Saskatchewan 
from their personal experiences. 
 
And we spent considerable amount of time looking at the record 
of this particular NDP government in job creation and the fact 
of the disaster that it was and the arrogant attitude that’s over 
there, still trying to feel that they are the creators of jobs and the 
creators of a tomorrow for the children of this province which 
we all know from our experiences they are not. 
 
We also spent some time on health care, Mr. Speaker, and 
dealing with some of the issues that are out there, the concerns 
that are out there, and essentially the very two-tier kind of 
system that’s being created in this particular province, very 
much a two-tier system. We can find that about half the 
province gets one level of health care; another half of the 
province gets a totally different level of health care. 
 
But this morning, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to spend some time on 
the highway situation. And first of all there is one thing that I 
need to agree with the NDP over there, and we’ll get that out of 
the way very quickly, and that is the fact that there needs to be a 
lot of input from our federal government. I too have spent some 
time in the United States and talked to them about how their 
highway program works where the federal government kicks in. 
 
Our federal Liberals have totally left off the west half of Canada 
in highway hell. If we look at the stats of what’s going on, there 
is money for eastern Canada — millions and millions of dollars 
on a yearly basis. And when we look at what the federal 
Liberals want to do for the western part of Canada, it’s zero 
after zero after zero, year after year after year — no 
justification, no validity for that decision. It’s a typical arrogant 
Liberal attitude that’s out there. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, we still can’t just say it’s a 
federal responsibility and we’ll leave our highways alone. 
We’ve had our provincial NDP, Mr. Speaker, as you know very 
well, say that they have a certain amount of money they’re 
going to set aside, spending it over 10 years. 
 
Well for the last numbers of years they’ve been way behind 
their spending. Basically if they’re going to spend it over 10 
years, it’d make sense to start spending it now. They somehow 
say, well we’ll spend next to nothing now, and we’ll spend next 
to nothing year after year; somewhere at the end of that time 
we’ll find these millions and millions of dollars and we’ll dump 
it all into highways. 
 
Well at the rate they’re going, when they put out all of those 
dollars to be spent in the last year, there won’t be enough 
highway contractors to spend it. They won’t be out there. 
They’ll have to find them from out of province, which is a 
disaster for our highway contractors, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Furthermore, by leaving these highways deteriorate year after 

year instead of spending the money that they’ve allotted to it, 
by the time — if they ever do get to spend that money and I 
doubt if they will, Mr. Speaker, because if they were serious 
about it they would be doing it right now — but by the time 
they get around to spending it, the highways will be in such bad 
shape they won’t even be able to bring them up to the standards, 
which are sub-standards of where they are right now. 
 
Let’s just look at the road program for RMs that this 
government has put in place. They told us in their budget that 
they had put money in place for RMs to build roads. Well that’s 
a very laudable move, Mr. Speaker, very laudable. Now let’s 
see how far it really gets. It gets you 530 feet, 530 feet of road 
per RM. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, they could have probably taken that money 
and given it to the schools and they could have at least built a 
racetrack for their track and field events. Because that’s only as 
much as it is — 530 feet per RM. 
 
I’m not sure how they’re going to designate this. We’ll 
probably have one of those big signs that they tend to want to 
build whenever they think they’re doing something on 
highways. And there’ll be a big sign that says, the next 530 feet 
is built by your NDP government. 
 
And then at the end of that — and it won’t take long to get long 
to get there, 530 feet — there’ll be another big sign: and the rest 
of Saskatchewan, we’re not doing anything. Great signs. 
 
Mr. Harrison has expressed his concern over that, and I don’t 
blame him. When he has to go to his people from the RMs and 
say, I’ve basically given you a high school race track and that’s 
the extent of help that you’re going to get, it’s not very good. 
 
It’s a broken record. It’s going to result in broken wheels. We 
have ducks in ruts and lumps of highway surface flying through 
the air. And our NDP over there are doing next to nothing on it. 
 
That’s their record, Mr. Speaker. That’s their record. They’re 
not spending the money they set aside. And the record is that 
we have the worst highways in Saskatchewan — the worst 
highways. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, being an open-minded sort of a person and 
always ready to learn something, I picked up a newspaper 
yesterday which is named after one of our grassland rodents, 
prairie dog, and thought we’d see what that had to say. An 
interesting section in that paper. It discussed the polls that the 
Saskatchewan Party had held; polls that indicate that we’re 
around 51 per cent. And in this NDP paper it states they have a 
poll too. And it disagrees with ours but they’re not going to tell 
anyone. They’re not going to tell anyone. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we all know the usual time that you don’t 
want to tell anyone anything is when you have bad news — 
when you have bad news. 
 
And then there’s a heading in the paper, Mr. Speaker, that 
reads, “Can the opposition catch the NDP?” Yes, we can. Yes, 
we can. 
 
Pictured on that same page where that heading lies, Mr. 



408 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 1999 

Speaker, is a picture that I’m sure, I’m sure resembles very 
much the member from Saskatoon Riversdale wearing a crown 
and a dress, Mr. Speaker — wearing a crown and a dress. Very 
interesting. 
 
I’m sure if we pin that throughout Saskatoon Riversdale, Mr. 
Speaker, we’ll have gas jockeys coming out of every service 
station that’s left in there wanting to run against him again. It’ll 
be amazing, Mr. Speaker. But maybe this was just taken from 
an election campaign or poster that they plan on using in 
Saskatoon Riversdale. Very interesting. 
 
But like I said, I was open-minded and I enjoyed reading the 
paper. It’s available for free for anyone that wants it, and I 
suggest you pick it up and read some of those pages. 
 
A comment or two on the farming situation. And we received 
many, many calls from farmers saying first of all that the whole 
program just doesn’t seem to want to work. It’s difficult; it’s 
complicated. And the concern is there that at the end of the day 
there probably won’t be enough money coming through to pay 
for the accountants that will have to fill it out. 
 
And it’s a shame, Mr. Speaker, that farmers who are astute 
businessmen are given a form that’s so complicated that they 
have to go out and hire an accountant to fill it out. And then at 
the end of the day there’ll be next to no help coming. 
 
And why is there next to no help coming? I think we need to 
follow through what our Minister of Agriculture exactly said 
and did. And there’s three points we need to bring out because I 
think that will let the people of Saskatchewan who are watching 
understand why Ottawa came through with so little. 
 
Our Minister of Agriculture, Mr. Speaker, sat down at that 
particular table and he was asked a question about 
Saskatchewan finances. And our Saskatchewan Agriculture 
minister blushed with pride and he said the following: yes, we 
are balancing our budget in Saskatchewan and we even have a 
surplus. But there’s one more statement that he made: and there 
is no agricultural problem in Saskatchewan. He’d made that 
statement earlier. Ottawa knew it. 
 
So here are these three comments from our Saskatchewan 
minister. We balanced our budget; we have a surplus; and — 
guess what? — we have no problem in agriculture in 
Saskatchewan. Now how much money could we have? Well, 
Mr. Speaker, it isn’t very amazing that we got the paltry amount 
that we got. And I think when we find out where the money 
actually is going to end up at, it’ll be mostly in eastern Canada. 
It’ll be mostly in eastern Canada. 
 
We just talked about what the federal Liberals have done with 
the road situation. The same thing’s going to happen with this 
amount. We should’ve had an Agriculture minister who was 
there negotiating — negotiating hard. He negotiated weakly — 
and that is with “ea” in case the members opposite can’t quite 
follow that — he negotiated very weakly and not even very 
regularly, Mr. Speaker, because he wasn’t at all the negotiations 
that were supposed to take place. 
 
But I think we need to set the stage for something before that. 
We all know that our Premier visions himself as being a 

national figure on the national scene — likes to make a big 
scene out of being seen with Prime Minister. Prime Minister 
from time to time, as we know, comes to Saskatchewan. We 
also know our Premier meets with him in other places. And not 
once, not once, Mr. Speaker, has a single person in 
Saskatchewan heard him stand up and tell the Prime Minister of 
Canada: we need some aid and this is what we need. Not once 
has he spoken up for the people of Saskatchewan in that way. 
He sends off our Minister of Agriculture, and we’ve just 
discussed how effective that happens to be. 
 
Mr. Speaker, need to say a word or two about the situation 
about justice and crime and safety and security for the people of 
this province in this province of Saskatchewan. As we all heard 
this morning, when a Saskatchewan Party Justice critic asked a 
number of questions and listed the very dubious and shameful 
record, record — I repeat that again — the record in 
Saskatchewan. Whether we talk about car theft, whether we talk 
about murders, whether we talk about break-ins, whether we 
talk about crimes against our children, we have faired terribly, 
Mr. Speaker. That’s the record, and that’s a record that the NDP 
government over there has to take the responsibility for. 
 
And yet in a very arrogant way they’ve said, oh, but we’re 
doing new and unique things. They may be doing new things, 
they may be doing unique things, but how effective are they 
being new and unique? If it doesn’t solve the problem, it 
doesn’t do any good, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we need to go ahead and take our justice . . . look at our 
justice system in Saskatchewan and work through those so that 
people in this province can live the way they want to live. It’s a 
great province to live, great province to be in but people in this 
province need to feel secure. They need to feel safe. And they 
don’t feel that during the time that this NDP government has 
been in charge of those issues. 
 
(1115) 
 
Mr. Speaker, on that particular issue — and I mentioned the 
situation involving children — we’ve had a few issues in 
Saskatchewan in recent times that have shown the arrogance of 
our Social Service minister in particular. Situations where 
parents and families want and feel they need some more say in 
what and how their families operate. And in those situations, 
our Justice department in a very arrogant way has gone ahead 
and made some decisions. 
 
One of our newspaper pundits made a statement that it may 
have been the right decision, but the process was wrong. Well 
the process is almost always wrong when the Social Service 
department interferes in what happens in families in 
Saskatchewan, and also very often the decisions are wrong. 
Process is almost always wrong and the decisions are very often 
wrong. 
 
I have many examples on my desk, Mr. Speaker, where Social 
Services just swoop down, broken up families, and then after 
two or three months of a lot of legal costs they return the family 
to itself again saying, well, we were wrong. Not quite correct. 
They don’t usually admit they’re wrong. 
 
Meanwhile the family has been broken up, costs have been 



April 1, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 409 

incurred, and Social Services then walks away without an 
apology, without covering the legal costs. And it’s made 
families in this province very fearful. The place where there 
ought to be the most security and the most safety are the 
families of this province. Our Social Service department is 
eroding that and putting fear into the family situations 
wondering when they’re going to swoop down with one of their 
plans to disrupt the family situation and disrupt the upbringing 
and the safety and the security of children in their own homes. 
It needs to be addressed, Mr. Speaker, and there are many 
people across this province that are joining with that concern. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve spoken on job creation, on taxes, on health 
care and the rights of parents, on the farming situation, on the 
road situation. I’d probably like to spend a fair bit of time on 
education because that’s my professional background, but I’m 
sure our Education critic will very ably explain to the people of 
this province how the budget that was there and as it was touted 
had money put into it for education doesn’t even cover the costs 
of the teachers’ union salaries. 
 
And what are the school boards supposed to do with the 
increased costs for their utilities, for their power, for their gas, 
for their buses, for their window repair, for the janitors, for the 
caretakers? None of that’s included and it will show up, Mr. 
Speaker, on the tax notices that will go back to the people in 
Shellbrook and Spiritwood. 
 
And at the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, from 
Shellbrook-Spiritwood, we will have a new MLA coming. I 
keep getting phone calls from that area on a regular basis, Mr. 
Speaker, saying, what can we do, what can we do to get a 
different member in here? What can we do to get some 
representation as we ought to have it? 
 
Mr. Speaker, in light of those sorts of things, I will be 
supporting the amendment and there is no way I could support 
the budget as presented by this NDP government. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for this opportunity to 
take part in this important debate. The budget ushers 
Saskatchewan into a new century of opportunity and prosperity, 
a budget which takes a balanced approach — debt repayment, 
tax cuts, enhanced services — a balanced common sense 
approach. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a budget is a blueprint of a party’s philosophy. 
Examine a budget carefully and you can determine the priorities 
of that government. Well this budget offers a degree of hope 
and reality never witnessed before, a budget that offers the 
people an opportunity to enter the millennium with a feeling of 
anticipation and hope not the doom and gloom offered by the 
members opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, economic growth is vital if a province is to grow. 
Saskatchewan is blessed with many natural resources and with 
the industrious, inventive people our province led all of Canada 
in economic growth for the five years from 1992 to 1997. In 
1998, we had the highest employment ever in this province. 
 
Slower growth is predicted over the next five years, but we will 

still see modest growth, increase of growth on growth. Our 
30,000 job target was met in 1998, and a job growth of 3,000 is 
forecast for 1999, and an average growth of 5,200 per year to 
2003. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the employment numbers are a lot better than 
when the Tories were in office in the 1980s. Job numbers, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, are going in the right direction, which of 
course is up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, despite the downturn in the agricultural sector and 
the significant drop in the price of oil, the constituency of Swift 
Current had a record year in its economy. I was so glad when 
the member opposite the other day mentioned all of the good 
things about Swift Current. Swift Current has prospered during 
the reign of the NDP in this province. 
 
The mayor Paul Elder stated on February 13, 1999 that the local 
economy in almost every category outperformed previous 
years, and in some cases established new records, thanks to the 
policies and the directions of this NDP government. Swift 
Current now boasts a population of 16,113 people — the first 
time the city reached this level in 10 years. 
 
And here again, the opposition cries that we are losing 
population. Well I am here to advise you that Swift Current is 
growing. The city council is aware of the pressure of low 
commodity prices on the expanding economy but they are still 
confident of positive economic growth in 1999. 
 
A few examples just of this economic growth is as follows: Ag 
Growth, a public company with its head office in Swift Current 
is aggressively pursuing acquisition opportunities and is rapidly 
expanding. Most of their markets, 80 per cent of it, is with the 
Americans and so they are prospering very well. 
 
Housing starts reached new heights in 1998 and industry 
officials believe that the demand for housing should be 
sustained in 1999. 
 
The Real Canadian Wholesale Club opened its store in a 52,000 
square foot facility in January — on budget and schedule. Why? 
Because many local workers, contractors, and suppliers 
benefited from work at this project. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, these are just a few examples of the 
economic growth which was evidenced in Swift Current. 
Agriculture, natural resources, northern development, 
value-added industries, research and development, local 
economic development, and more support for small business are 
the keys to a prosperous, growing Saskatchewan. And of course 
this government believes and advocates these policies. 
 
Agriculture is vital for the economy of Saskatchewan. There’s 
no way that we can forget about agriculture. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, the current plight of the Saskatchewan farmer is a 
complex issue. It cannot, it cannot be solved just with simple 
solutions. Our farmers are the most efficient in the world and if 
given the level playing field would compete with anyone, 
anywhere. 
 
But they cannot compete with the United States subsidies or the 
European subsidies. Our federal government abolished all the 



410 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 1999 

subsidies long before they needed to, while the Europeans and 
the USA (United States of America) only abolished 20 per cent 
of theirs, and have continued their subsidies. How can we 
compete with them? The budget of Saskatchewan cannot 
compete with the national purse of the United States or of 
Europe. 
 
Mr. Speaker, even if the federal government had not eliminated 
the Crow rate, the farmers today would probably have survived 
this latest downturn in commodity prices. It would’ve gone a 
long ways to help. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government believes in agriculture and is 
prepared to assist the farmers. One hundred and forty million 
will be spent on the ill-advised AIDA program. We know that 
this is a flawed program but we also know that it is a federal 
program. And we know that our Minister of Agriculture did 
everything that he possibly could to get a better deal. But did he 
get support from the opposition? No way. Every time he took a 
step to gain better things for the farmers, they nixed it. And then 
they had the gall to sit over there and tell us how to do it. 
 
There’s $20 million in loan assistance for the hog producers — 
value-added again — which will of course help agriculture. 
Eighty-five million to top up the NISA (Net Income 
Stabilization Account) account; they reduced the crop insurance 
premiums; no PST (provincial sales tax) on farm machinery; 
exemption on diesel fuel; 17 million for agricultural research 
and development. This government works for agriculture but 
will need federal help to compete with the foreign subsidies. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the oil company plays a very important 
part in the economy of this province and especially in the 
southwest. The drop in crude oil prices slowed down activity in 
the oil patch this past year. However, with the increase to over 
$15 a barrel there is a healthier state of mind in the oil industry 
because of that. The price hike provides a glimmer of optimism 
for the people in this industry. 
 
The southwest was the lone area where drilling actually picked 
up in 1999. A natural gas deal south of Swift Current saw 75 
wells drilled compared to five a year earlier. 
 
The opposition has called for lower royalty rates to stimulate 
activity in the oil patch. I’m saying that if the price of oil 
remains above the $15 a barrel just for a little while longer, the 
activity will take place as producers will realize a fair return on 
their investment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, policies adopted by this government have received 
strong support from the oil industry. They welcome the 
reclassification of the oil in the southwest, the deep rights 
reversion program, the establishment of the new petroleum 
technology research centre in Regina. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, in speaking with the oil officials and so forth, 
time and time again, the oil companies invest heavily in 
Saskatchewan because they admire the stable Romanow 
government in Regina. Talk to them sometime and they will tell 
you that this is one of the things which they really like. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — Order. Now the member 
should be aware that using members’, sitting members’ names 
is not allowed in debate except in a direct quotation lifted off 
. . . out of an article. And I know that the hon. member from 
Swift Current recognizes that. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. What is 
important for the province is that Saskatchewan’s economy was 
able to withstand the downturn in oil revenue and the depressed 
commodity prices in agriculture because of the economic 
diversification fostered by this government. Value-added 
products, less bureaucratic tape, small business incentive, all of 
these helped us to weather this storm. 
 
The investment dealers for instance point to Saskatchewan’s 
economic growth as being due in large part to admirable 
government management of provincial finances. The most 
indebted provincial economy in the country, thanks to the 
Tories, has now reduced the debt burden to the provincial 
average. Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have a more diversified 
economy thanks to the policies of this government. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, health care is a great concern to the people 
of Saskatchewan. Of course I take a special interest in medicare 
as the southwest was the location of Health Region No. 1, as 
I’ve said time and time again, and this served as a model for 
medicare first for the province and later for the rest of Canada. 
The citizens of the southwest Saskatchewan are proud of this 
fact and rightly so. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is obvious to all people that the number 
one priority in this budget is health. The hundred and 
ninety-five million increase, more than 11 per cent above last 
year, represents the largest new investment in health in the 
history of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the budget consultations held throughout the 
province, the people stated time and time again that their 
priority was health care. This increase of a hundred and 
ninety-five million in health is just another indication of how 
this government asks for input from the people and then reacts 
to their concerns. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 1.9 billion health budget, the largest 
health investment in the history of this province, will improve 
and enhance health services for all the people of Saskatchewan. 
There’s been a lot of debate about the waiting time for surgery. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, this budget will provide the funds for the 
Minister of Health to introduce the recommendations contained 
in the report just recently released concerning waiting lists. 
Another example of how this government listens to the people 
We listened to the people’s concerns and then acted upon them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the scourges of this point in our history is 
cancer. Daily we read about the horrible effects of this dreaded 
disease. This budget will provide for improved access to cancer 
treatment and perhaps, just perhaps, a cure will be found to 
eradicate this deadly killer. 
 
Another area which has been earmarked for additional funding 
is the whole area of women’s health, such as the new bone 
density equipment to aid in the early detection and treatment of 
osteoporosis. Again we listened to the people’s concerns. 



April 1, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 411 

Mr. Speaker, this budget will also address the issue of retaining 
and/or recruiting doctors, especially in rural areas. In the past 
many of our Saskatchewan-trained doctors would leave the 
province. In fact during the Tory reign in the ’80s, only 35 per 
cent remained in the province. 
 
An Hon. Member: — How many? 
 
Mr. Wall: — 35 per cent remained. In 1998 that figure had 
doubled. 70 per cent, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of the Saskatchewan 
graduates chose to remain in Saskatchewan — 70 per cent, and 
this did not happen by accident. This government recognized 
the issue and took immediate steps to remedy the issue. 
 
And finally, but very important, this budget will provide for 
improved working conditions and compensation for nurses and 
other health workers to ensure the best possible health care. 
Contrast this with the Hermanson Texas audit of health 
workers. Don’t be fooled by the Tories’ proposed audit. It is a 
direct attack on health workers. The Tories feel that the health 
workers, including nurses, are inefficient and that savings could 
be recouped on the backs of these dedicated workers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I could spend hours on listing the initiatives 
contained in this budget on the enhancement it will provide for 
health care. Items such as new hospitals in northern 
Saskatchewan where they are going to be built where they are 
needed — not like in the ’80s where they were needed to try to 
garner votes . . . votes, as was done in the ’80s. 
 
Expanded home care and mental health services, expanded 
CAT (computerized axial tomography) scan capacity; cancer 
outreach treatments and kidney dialysis in more communities; 
funds to ensure vital medical components such as heart 
monitors will be Y2K (Year 2000) ready. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the other day one of the members opposite 
attacked the health district in Swift Current — the birthplace of 
medicare and the home of health district no. 1. 
 
I want to mention just a few of the things which have here. We 
have a new chemotherapy outreach program so that residents of 
the great southwest no longer have to make the long trip to 
Regina or Saskatoon for treatment. The outreach program saves 
patients time, money, and inconvenience. 
 
Our wellness programs which provide health monitoring, foot 
care, and health education are really catching on. We began 
with five locations serving an average of 350 people in 1994. 
Last year, programs were held in 11 locations a month and 
served 2,251 people per month. This program helps prevent 
health problems or in some cases, catches the problems early. 
Wellness works, Mr. Deputy Speaker, an argument lost on the 
members opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other day the member from Rosthern rose and 
applauded the excellent care he had received during his recent 
illness, the ambulance which transported him to the hospital, the 
doctor who performed the surgery, and the nurses who cared for 
him during his recovery. 
 
Mr. Speaker, most of the people of this province would agree 
wholeheartedly with his assessment of the health care, and I 

will agree with it wholeheartedly as I received the same kind of 
care during my recent short stay in the General Hospital. No 
wonder surveys show that over 90 per cent of the patients using 
the health system rate it as excellent or very good. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I find it incomprehensible that the 
member opposite then stated that the ambulance would . . . that 
he was afraid that the ambulance would take him to the wrong 
hospital. Did he feel it would end up in Prince Albert or perhaps 
Swift Current? 
 
Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan we provide 72,000 road 
ambulance trips every year and more than 800 trips by air 
ambulance. That’s 200 trips per day. Our skilled, dedicated 
paramedics and EMTs (emergency medical technician) provide 
life-saving emergency services to the people of Saskatchewan 
day in and day out. Mr. Deputy Speaker, the ambulance crews 
do an assessment of every patient they pick up. Then in 
constant communication with the dispatcher and the medical 
staff, they determine what type of emergency service the patient 
needs and proceed accordingly. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for the member to suggest the 
transfer of patients by ambulance to wrong destinations is a 
regular occurrence stretches the truth to the greatest degree. Mr. 
Speaker, did the member really worry whether the ambulance 
would arrive at the correct destination or is this another 
example of the fearmongering tactics of the members opposite 
— a tactic which they are become masters at. 
 
Mr. Speaker, does the member derive perverse pleasure from 
trying to instill fear among the elderly, the grandparents, the 
young, about a system which is dependable, safe, and efficient. 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, a blatant form of fearmongering in hopes 
of quick, political gain. This tactic will not be accepted by the 
people of this great province; people who co-operate with each 
other, are compassionate, and are the lifeblood of this great 
province. 
 
Then, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on March 22, the member from 
Saltcoats quoted extensively on the health program in Swift 
Current as stated by Shirley Douglas. He took great pains to 
take some of the quotes of Shirley Douglas but he stopped short 
of the whole story. So I just want to help him a little bit with 
that. 
 
One of the quotes the member used was as follows: 
 

The privatization of health care is slow, it is incremental, 
and it is massive. The dismantling of the national health 
care system is by design, not by accident. 

 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, suddenly this quote refers to the 
health system in Swift Current — not nationally — but it refers 
to Swift Current. I realize Swift Current is a great city. I realize 
that it has great economic growth. I realize that many people are 
envious of all the things we have going for us. But to claim that 
it represents the national scene is just a little stretch of the 
imagination, of which he has a lot. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, perhaps because he wasn’t there 
while I was, he failed to mention the Shirley Douglas 
impassioned plea for the people to work with the one and only 



412 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 1999 

party which would guarantee that medicare would survive — 
the NDP. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, then she made a 
scathing and I mean a scathing attack on the Saskatchewan 
Party. The party that would dismantle medicare and would give 
us American-type medicine, privatization, two-tiered. And 
there’s no way that we’re having any of that. That was the part 
that he forgot to mention. 
 
Of course I will apologize because he wasn’t there and perhaps 
he didn’t know that this had happened. But there was a 
candidate there who was there and heard this attack and his 
head was on the desk. And you know who I’m talking about. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this 1.9 billion budget truly represents the 
importance this government places on medicare as compared to 
the statements made by the members opposite. 
 
The Tory health policy — let’s just take a look at it very 
quickly. Mr. Speaker, the Tory health care policy is really all 
about an audit. Their value for money audit means that control 
over the health system becomes the job not of the doctors, not 
of the professionals, not of the health boards, but of the 
accountants. Their value for money audit is the only way they 
can come up with any new health care money. By auditing the 
work of front-line caregivers and their support networks, the 
Tories hope they will find the money for all their other health 
promises. 
 
Remember their plans for health — and education for that 
matter — are to increase the budget by only the amount of 
inflation. So where are they going to get the money for the new 
equipment? We won’t get any new equipment. 
 
Where will they get money to have contract settlements? There 
won’t be any contracts. They’ll probably abolish them and 
probably try to take away any gains which they have made. 
 
How are they going to pay for new doctors who we will need in 
the system as our population continues to grow? Where will we 
have enhanced services? We’ll go back to the dark ages. 
 
And where would we be today if those Tories were governing 
during this massive federal down cutting of support for the 
health system. The people know who introduced medicare. 
They know who are opposed to it. And they will show it in the 
next election. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, another thing which is very important to 
the people of Saskatchewan, of course, is education. As I was 
involved in the education scene for many, many years, I take 
quite an interest in this. This budget invests over $1 billion — 
our largest investment ever in education and training to prepare 
Saskatchewan people for success in a rapidly changing, highly 
competitive, high-technology economy. As the Premier stated 
to a group of grade 11 and 12 students at the Swift Current 
Comprehensive High School just recently, that learning for a 
living — that’s right, learning for a living — will become the 
way of life in the future. 
 

The funding for the Saskatchewan’s kindergarten-to-grade-12 
school system totals more than 550 million — an increase in the 
operating grants to schools, an increase in capital funding for 
school improvement, and increases to school boards through 
grants in lieu of property taxes. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’m very proud and excited about the 
initiative to be undertaken by the Education minister to discuss 
the roles of schools in Saskatchewan. The review’s objectives 
will be to provide those with an interest or an involvement in 
education an opportunity to discuss society’s changing 
expectations about the role of schools in Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, we hope that they will reach a consensus on 
what we can expect from our schools and what our schools can 
expect from our communities, our families, and other agencies 
to support children and youth. This new education initiative 
provides a real opportunity for all stakeholders to make their 
views known. It is also an opportunity that should not be missed 
by the people of this great province. 
 
Secondary education has been covered by a lot of the previous 
speakers and so forth, so I’m not going to spend too much time 
on it, other than they did get additional funding for their 
programs and for their capital construction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the things which I would like to talk about, 
a little bit about, is our . . . this government’s plan on balanced 
budgets. Working together, the Saskatchewan people took this 
province from the brink of financial disaster to a place where 
we are among the best in all of Canada. The budget is balanced 
and includes a plan for three more balanced budgets. With those 
three more balanced budgets, even with the tax reductions and 
new investments and services, this will be nine straight years of 
balanced budgets. this one being the sixth year. Saskatchewan’s 
record of balanced budget is second to none in all of Canada. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we promised to pay down the debt to 
reduce the mortgage on our children’s future, and we have. In 
1994 Saskatchewan’s debt stood at almost 15 billion, and we 
know who we can thank for that. Today it is down to about 11.5 
billion. So in other words, 23 per cent lower than it was in 
1994. And we have a plan to pay down the province’s debt 
reducing it to 10 billion in 2003. 
 
Lower taxes, the other part of it. Paying down the debt, 
balancing the budget, lower taxes. This budget cuts the 
education and health tax rate from 7 per cent to 6 per cent. The 
members opposite said, oh yes, well who put it up to nine? We 
did. We know that. But why? They forget to say why we did 
that. We had to in order to look after some of the financial 
obligations which were put to on us by the Tories, who had year 
after year deficit budgets — deficit budgeting all the way 
through. 
 
And so what we have is that in the spring in the last two years 
we have cut back the education and health tax by 3 per cent. A 
great record, and a record that we should be proud of. What it 
does is it puts back $300 million into the hands of the family, 
the businesses, the municipalities, the educational institutions. 
This all puts back money, which of course will again then be 
used to create jobs and increase the economy. 
 
Saskatchewan people will also save approximately 30 million a 



April 1, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 413 

year in provincial income taxes as the result of the tax changes 
announced in the recent federal budget. So that since 1995 
income taxes paid by the average Saskatchewan family have 
been reduced by over 10 per cent. No small feat in itself. And 
over the next 12 months we will consult with the people of 
Saskatchewan in adopting and designing a new system of 
income tax for Saskatchewan. 
 
(1145) 
 
And now let’s take a look at the Tories’ tax policy. Elwin 
Hermanson, the Fearless Fosdick of this party spawned in the 
darkest of night states: 
 

I’m glad I’m not the Finance minister and have to go 
around this province talking about this small reduction in 
taxes, small reduction. 
 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don’t think he has to ever worry 
about that because there is no way, no way in this whole wide 
world that he will ever be in a position where he will be able to 
determine what taxes will be cut and how they will be cut. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — A tiny cut — what’s a hundred million dollars? 
What’s a billion? This is the typical attitude that the Tories had 
in the ’80s and they still have it and they will drive this 
province into deficit spending once again if and when they ever 
gain power. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with an attitude like that, 
they can forget about that. 
 
They introduced deficit budget after deficit budget until they 
had a debt of $15 billion, a province on the brink of bankruptcy, 
and leaving a debt to be paid by our children, their children, 
their grandchildren, because the debt is so massive. These are 
the people who are asking for support from the hard-working 
citizens of Saskatchewan. 
 
Trust us, they say. Our numbers just don’t add up, but trust us. 
We will lead you to the promised land. Promises of increased 
debt; promises of privatized health care. Promises. Promises of 
cutbacks in essential services such as education and health; 
promises of long-term debt; promises of workfare for the poor, 
the downtrodden; promises of increased wealth for the large 
corporations; promises to destroy rural Saskatchewan. Promised 
land? No, thank you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a good budget, as someone wrote on my paper and 
I didn’t write this — yes, yes, yes, a thousand times, yes that it 
is a good budget. And as I mentioned in my reply to the Throne 
Speech, I referred to the Throne Speech as being the real 
McCoy, the job that sent the Tories reeling. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, this budget delivers the knockout punch — 
a balanced budget and a budget that shows this government 
listened to the people and then acted on it, down and out. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is absolutely no way that I could possibly 
support the amendment, but my goodness, I will 
enthusiastically support the motion. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m really 
delighted to be here today and represent the people of my 
constituency of Kelvington-Wadena and to make sure that I go 
on record telling everyone in the Assembly and the ones that are 
watching that we don’t support this budget, that we support the 
amendment, and that we have very good reasons for not 
supporting this budget. 
 
I think that the people in this province know that the budget that 
was presented a week ago is talking about expenditures of $5.6 
billion in the year 1999-2000. That’s $1 billion more than when 
this government came in in 1991-92. A billion dollars — 20 per 
cent more spending than they had nine years ago. 
 
Now we all know that there is very few people in this province, 
if any, can say they’ve had an increase of 20 per cent in their 
income in the last nine years. And if they do, I’m sure they have 
something to show for it. 
 
The people of my constituency are saying, June, you know what 
we have to show for this? We have a health care system that’s 
in a crisis. We’re spending more money than ever on health care 
and we have 53 less hospitals. The health care in rural 
Saskatchewan — if you can call it health care — is something 
that the people are saying it’s not even something that can be 
recognized as care; they feel like second-class citizens. 
 
The roads and the highways have deteriorated to an 
embarrassment and also a health hazard. Rural Saskatchewan 
itself has been ignored; not only the RM but programs like our 
provincial parks that . . . and regional parks that have no 
funding any more. Funding has gone to provincial parks but the 
regional parks have not had any money. And area after area has 
been cut. 
 
I think that the government is probably remembering what the 
president of SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities) said about this budget. He called it a black day 
for rural Saskatchewan. And that’s what it is. 
 
The education system is suffering, probably right across the 
province, but I think the headline in today’s paper underlines 
what the school boards are saying. They’re saying school 
divisions are reeling from this budget. They know they’re going 
to have to go back to the taxpayers of this province and say 
we’re going to have to up the mill rate again. They’re going to 
have to get more money out of your pocket. And taxpayers, 
landowners are saying, I have no more money to give. But 
education is a government priority. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party has three priorities, four priorities. The 
first one is health care, and we’ll be talking more about it, but 
the people are saying, how can you tell me that their 
government is spending more money on health care than they 
ever did? What have we got to show for it? And we all know 
that there’s no answer to that question. There’s nothing that is 
tangible that we can put our fingers on, to show for where this 
$1.9 billion is going to. So we have to ask and we have to go in 
and find out where is the money going to? 
 
When we look at the big picture in this province, and that 
includes the Crowns because I’m sure everyone knows that the 
spending of the Crowns is 40 per cent of government spending. 



414 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 1999 

We have an interesting statistic that was given out by the 
Provincial Auditor. I think that probably the members opposite, 
when they looked at it, probably cringed because they would 
have a tough time explaining things like 1991 expenses, and . . . 
up to 1998. And our accumulated deficit at the end of the year 
in 1991 was $7.885 billion. That’s in 1991. That includes the 
general program. It also includes some of the enterprises, like 
SaskEnergy and SaskPower, Liquor and Gaming, SaskTel, and 
some of the other ones. In 1998 the accumulated deficit was 
8.972 billion. 
 
Now we may say that we’ve got a . . . have paid down some of 
the debt. But when we take the whole picture into 
consideration, we don’t have . . . we don’t see our debt going 
down — we see the debt going up from 7.885 billion to 8.972 
billion. 
 
We often talk about the taxes . . . the interest charges that we 
are paying as citizens of this province. In the year 1991, it was 
1.53 billion. Last year, 1998, the interest payment was 1.175 
billion. That is again an increase. That’s not . . . When I hear the 
members opposite talking about the $2 million that we spend 
every day on interest payments, you haven’t done one thing to 
help that. The people of this province are still paying interest at 
the same rate as they did 10 years ago. 
 
And the numbers are not being disputed — the numbers that the 
Provincial Auditor is talking about. We can’t just take one part 
of the financial picture and say, this is what’s happening in 
Saskatchewan. When you look at the big picture, we are 
spending more money on interest than we were in 1991. That’s 
thanks to this NDP government. 
 
I’m going to go into a few other issues that I wanted . . . before 
I close this book up, I just wanted to make one comment about 
the Department of Agriculture. I’m sure that the farmers in my 
area are going to be just delighted when they hear that this week 
has been declared Orchid Week. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — Why is the member on 
her feet? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — With leave to introduce guests? 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In 
your gallery, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to introduce a 
nominated candidate for the upcoming election. And that’s Mr. 
Mark Wartman, who will be the candidate running because 
Suzanne Murray, of course, unfortunately we’ve lost her. But I 
think that Regina Qu’Appelle Valley is exceptionally lucky to 
have two such fine candidates in a row. 
 
So if the Assembly would join me in welcoming Mark here 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

(continued) 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’m sure the Minister of Health wants me to repeat the fact that 
he declared this week Orchid Week . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . oh the Minister of Agriculture declared this Orchid Week. 
All the farmers in Saskatchewan that are out planting their 
orchids are probably just delighted that we have now had 
Orchid Week. 
 
We have a government that in 1991 spent $827 million on 
agriculture and in 1998 we spent $251 million on agriculture. 
That’s typifies what this government believes is important when 
it comes to agriculture. It’s not spending the dollars there, it’s 
making sure that people know that it’s Orchid Week in this 
province. 
 
The government has also in their budget talked about the $10 
million that they were going to be spending . . . giving as an 
increase to rural municipalities. When that’s broken down it’s 
7.5 million to urban municipalities, 2 million to rural 
municipalities, and .5 to the North. 
 
Now when we divide that out between the nearly 300 
municipalities in this province we’ll see that they each get 
around $6,000. Six thousand dollars for the RMs that have their 
roads deteriorating, the RMs that have been asking for an 
increase, RMs that have been cut back by as much as 75 per 
cent since 1991 are now going to get $6,000. 
 
And not only they don’t get it, they have to come up with an 
additional $6,000 of their own before they get it. It’s a matching 
grant. I don’t think they’re going to get too many bouquets of 
flowers or praises of acclamation from the RMs in this province 
. . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Orchids. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Yes, maybe some orchids. 
 
The budget also says they’re going to pay $235 million for 
highways, up 7 per cent over last year’s budget. That’s of 
course an increase and it’s needed very badly. But one of the 
things that hasn’t been underlined is the fact that $5 million out 
of that is the same money that was introduced under RMs when 
we talked about the program for thin-membrane highways. So 
we can talk about it in RMs and we can talk about it in 
highways and it’s the same dollars. 
 
I think people get into it and they’re going to start saying, how 
many more times are we going to congratulate ourselves . . . or 
are they going to congratulate themselves for the same amount 
of money. 
 
I was interested to read an article by Diane Francis a while ago 
when she was talking the brain drain from Canada, and I think 
that Saskatchewan probably typifies this. The brain drain, fact 
no. 1, some 23,000 Canadians are enrolled in American 
universities. This is up 10,000 from 1986. The past 50 years the 



April 1, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 415 

alumni that went into the Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
have founded 4,000 companies with $232 billion sales 
worldwide. We are losing our people from Canada but we’re 
specifically losing them from Saskatchewan. 
 
The province of Saskatchewan, we have shown in many reports 
that Saskatchewan’s economic momentum finish is skidding to 
a stop. The report in The Globe and Mail this week talked about 
. . . ranked the provinces, and Saskatchewan was again ranked 
as the worst out of the 10 provinces. It placed last in three 
categories and second last in one. And this is the kind of 
problem, the hurdles that people of Saskatchewan are facing 
when they’re trying to deal with . . . have a business in this 
province. 
 
I think one thing that maybe not all the farmers in 
Saskatchewan have heard, but I think it’s important that they 
know, is one of the members opposite wanted to talk about 
farmers and treaty Indians as the ones who get this break on 
sales tax. From the start, farmers have had certain exemptions. 
They’ve had exemptions on farm machinery and repair that 
saves them $62.9 million. They have exemptions on fertilizers 
and pesticides and fuel tax that’s saving them $225 million. 
 
I don’t think you’ll find many farmers out there thinking that 
the government has done them a real favour by giving them 
exemptions on commodities that of course are the one area of 
our economy where they don’t have any choice about the prices 
they’re getting. They don’t have any choice about adding on or 
downloading their cost to anybody else. They take what they 
can get in the system that we have. 
 
(1200) 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I took issue with a statement made by one 
of the members opposite when they were talking about social 
services and what the government is doing for young people, 
especially the ones that are in need that are going to food banks. 
I have a letter here; it was directed to the Social Services critic 
of our party and it was from the Hunger in Moose Jaw, Inc.  
 
The people there are saying and advising the government, 
pleading with them to recognize the fact that child hunger is a 
growing issue in communities across this province. In 1993 
when Social Services began to deal with the children who were 
going to school hungry, they started serving between 30 and 40 
lunches a day. Today in Moose Jaw they are serving over a 
hundred lunches, and there has never been one amount of 
increase in funding from Social Services to address this very 
serious problem. 
 
There are people that are . . . the people that have written this 
letter are working with these children every day. They rely on a 
core group of volunteers to make and deliver lunches for the 
lunch program. The community of business contributes with 
discounts or donations to the food costs, and the volume of 
fundraising needed to sustain a program is taxing on the staff, 
the organization, and is unsustainable in this present form. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is the type of thing that the real people 
in this province are trying to bring to the attention of this 
government. We have our most vulnerable people in our 
society, our children, are facing something in a province like 

Saskatchewan we shouldn’t even have to think about. They 
shouldn’t have to think about going to school hungry in 
Saskatchewan. If the things that your government opposite are 
saying is true, then why is the number of children on the street, 
the number of children that are hungry increasing? 
 
There has to be somebody looking at the whole idea of saying 
what is government about? Government is about providing 
infrastructure and providing for the needy people of this 
province. They asked in very big letters, and they’re asking not 
for themselves but for the children. The provincial government 
has been called upon to drastically increase its funding for the 
children nutrition and education program. This is something 
that every Saskatchewan citizen would probably be 
embarrassed if they knew that the number of children that need 
lunches at school is increasing. 
 
There’s been a direct cost for the already overloaded health care 
system as well as the future of our society. Hunger in Moose 
Jaw has been monitoring the impact of the new national child 
tax benefit and the changes to the provincial social services’ 
package on a number of children who need our services. Now I 
hope the members listen to this statement because it’s what the 
executive director talked about. What she said is: 
 

Unfortunately we did not see a decrease in the number of 
children accessing lunches as they studied the new social 
assistance package.” 

 
I think that is the kind of statement that the members opposite 
must talk about or think about when they talk about their report 
card, about what they’re doing for the people in this province. 
They’re doing nothing for the people that are very, very needy. 
 
I also would like to talk a minute about children that are . . . 
have special needs in this province when it comes to education 
and for having a chance to go forward and make their life, 
fulfill all the potential that they have. I think there’s a statement 
first of all that we should talk about. It’s a summary of a UN 
(United Nations) convention on the rights of children. And it 
stated: 
 

The right of disabled children to special care and training 
designed to help achieve self-reliance. and a full and 
decent life in society is the right of every child. 
 

Now we have in this province a government that is not looking 
at the special children, the children that are covered under this 
article 23 of the UN rights. We have to ask what systems the 
Department of Education and Health have in place for 
intellectually disabled young people in this province. 
 
The Department of Education had to overall . . . the need to 
overhaul its mandate, the special education policies. And it’s 
not good enough to have a task force committee on the project 
paid for by the government. It’s in effect for two years and then 
they don’t have to be obligated to put any of the 
recommendations into effect. All this is, is one more 
make-work project. 
 
Teaching a child with Down syndrome is more difficult than 
teaching a autistic . . . is not more difficult, pardon me, is more 
different than teaching an autistic individual. They can’t be 



416 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 1999 

lumped into one strategy and then just left. 
 
Individual education plans must be set in place to ensure that all 
intellectually disabled children get the best education possible. 
And it’s one thing that we haven’t seen the government 
working on in their capacity as the people . . . as the one who is 
looking after our children, our most prized possession. 
 
We also have had many contacts from people in the 
Saskatchewan community home association who are trying to 
again work with disadvantaged youth in this province. Their 
mandate and their desire is to help get these young people back 
into society and to ensure that they aren’t part of the crime 
statistics as they get older. 
 
And there are so many needs out there that are not being 
addressed. And not only that, they haven’t had the opportunity 
to even get together and discuss some of the things that they are 
learning through trial and error themselves. The government 
isn’t providing the foundation that they need to help these 
people learn from each other. It’s like reinventing the wheel 
every time they have to turn around. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the other issue that I’m greatly concerned 
about is this government’s idea that they are standing up for 
women in this province. In fact I’ve got a headline in a paper 
that says, “NDP listens to women.” The minister offered a 
progress report on the work of the secretariat. The organization 
has set up a Web site for women’s groups across Saskatchewan 
to help them share information, and that’s a powerful tool. 
Well, is sharing information the most powerful tool that women 
in this province need? 
 
It was interesting to look at the budget and see that the 
Women’s Secretariat is one of the very few departments that 
actually had a decrease. They went down 22 per cent in 
funding. And I think what the government has really been doing 
for women in this province, or their big step forward for women 
was in the budget. It was very obvious that instead of saying the 
words “men and women”, government’s real big move forward 
was saying “women and men”. I had 15 people tell me, did you 
notice that? The government is now saying “women and men”, 
instead of “men and women”. That’s what they’re actually 
doing for the women in this province — putting us first by 
saying it in words. 
 
But are they doing it when it comes to actual help for the 
women that need real help? We had women . . . We saw in the 
budget there was going to be $800,000 for women’s health. 
Well we can say already that 350 of that came from the money 
that you cut out of Women’s Secretariat. And then the rest of it 
came from putting items like fetal alcohol syndrome and fetal 
alcohol effects into the women’s area and taking out of Health. 
 
There’s no additional funding for women. What there is, is 
moving money around so that they can say, look what I’ve done 
for women. We’ll say “women” before “men”. We’ll take the 
money out of one account and put it in another and say, gee, 
look what we’ve done for women. What women really need is 
this government to recognize them as individuals, equal, and 
having the same rights as everybody else in this province, not to 
just give them a designation as “women” and then “men”. 
 

When my colleague talked today about the rate of sexual 
offence, and we said that the average in Canada was 101 for 
every 100,000; in Saskatchewan, it’s 183, which is far, far 
above the national average, and it’s something that I think you 
should all be embarrassed about. And also, if you want to talk 
about what we’re doing for women, 8 out of 10 of those were 
females, and a third — a full one-third of them — were under 
the age of 12. Twelve years old. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s a couple of the news releases that 
were put forward by the government — pardon me, Mr. 
Speaker — that were put forward by the government that I 
found quite amusing. One of them was from the municipal 
policing costs when it says that . . . announced that $4.1 million 
is available in 1999-2000. That’s great. We’re happy. 
 
But the next statement says, “The figure reflects a significant 
increase over the $1 million spent last year”, then: “for the three 
months the program was in effect.” So for one full year we’re 
going to get $4 million. For one three-month period last year, 
we got $1 million. Four times one is four. Guess what? There’s 
no increase. Significant increase, we say. 
 
I don’t know how many wordsmiths we had looking at this kind 
of issue, but I would think that the people of Saskatchewan 
have a lot more intelligence than you’re giving them credit for. 
Because when you look at this type of thing, it’s an insult to the 
people of this province when they have to read this kind of 
garbage in a news release that’s supposed to be telling them 
what government is doing with their money. 
 
This one sentence is one that I find really amusing. It says, 
“Budget invests in Saskatchewan’s cultural industries.” Have 
no problem with the cultural industries. I think it’s great people 
have an opportunity to show talents in very many areas of life. 
But this sentence is . . . somebody tell me what it means: 
 

The investment will strengthen production capacity, 
encourage the development of culturally significant work, 
and support increased self-reliance for the industries. 

 
Now listen, “support increased self-reliance.” Wow. Now I 
don’t know if that kind of jargon is something that people in 
this province think is . . . make them feel important, but that is 
one of the silliest statements I’ve heard in a long, long time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s a number of issues that I could be talking 
about but I think that it’s important to probably get on with the 
budget and start talking about the details of it in each 
department and make sure the government recognizes there are 
other ways to spend our money. But I want to finish by talking 
about . . . by reading you a sentence that was written by George 
Bernard Shaw. It says: 
 

Reasonable men and women adapt themselves to their 
environment. Unreasonable men and women try to adapt 
their environment to themselves. Thus all progress is the 
result of unreasonable men and women. 
 

Got it? 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think that we can talk about party policies 
and maybe that’s the scary and sad part about government in 



April 1, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 417 

Saskatchewan is the politics part of it. When we ask a question 
to the other side of the House the only answer we ever get is 
rhetoric about individuals — as an individual. 
 
And I think one of the first things that Mr. Speaker advised me 
when I became a member of this Assembly was that I was never 
called by my first name because in this Assembly I’m not an 
individual. I represent the 17,000 people of 
Kelvington-Wadena. And they have voted to say that I’m the 
person that they want to be here making their speeches and 
standing up for them. 
 
And I think that they have the right to decide, and we’ll wait 
and see. We will see what’s happening. But in the meantime I 
think what they have a right to do is get questions answered 
from the people who decide how the money is spent, from the 
people who make the policies. And we’ll let election day decide 
what’s going to happen to the few of you that are left after that 
day. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, my colleague and I have now been the ministers 
of Health for the province of Saskatchewan for about six 
months. Mr. Speaker, before I get into the text of my remarks I 
want to say thank you to the people that I represent, the 
constituents of Saskatoon Nutana that have elected me as a New 
Democratic Party member of the legislature since 1986. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was elected as a New Democratic Party 
candidate in 1986, 1991, and 1995. In all of those elections, Mr. 
Speaker, I’ve enjoyed the support of the majority of the people 
who have voted in my constituency. Mr. Speaker, I came to this 
legislature as a New Democrat. I’m here as a New Democrat, 
and when I leave this legislature, Mr. Speaker, I will be a New 
Democrat. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said these have 
been challenging months as the Minister of Health. I have spent 
a great deal of time around this province and in the city of 
Regina. And, as is my practice, I’ve usually been available in 
my constituency office on Fridays in order to meet with the 
people that I represent. 
 
I want to say to the constituents back home in Saskatoon 
Nutana that for the last several Fridays I’ve not been there, but I 
want them to know that Judy Gossen, who is my constituency 
assistant, has passed on their messages and remarks and I am 
aware of all of the contact that have been made to my 
constituency office. 
 
(1215) 
 
My point, Mr. Speaker, is I want the people back home to 
know, even though I’ve been the Minister of Health for six 
months, I’ve been away a lot, I still know what is going on back 
home and I send people there my very best wishes. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s fair to say that we’ve worked 
extremely hard in the last six months to ensure that health 

remains a top priority for the people of this province and for our 
government. Our government has, of course, had to balance the 
many competing interests and many competing demands on a 
variety of issues and areas. 
 
Health is not, Mr. Speaker, and should not be the only priority 
of this or any other government in this province or in this 
country. Areas like education and highways and social 
programs, economic development, and northern development 
are extremely important to the people that we serve as 
legislators. 
 
Last year’s unbudgeted expenditures, fire fighting in the North 
for instance, and farm aid have had a tremendous impact upon 
our government’s decision-making process and the kinds of 
decisions that we’ve made for this fiscal year. These decisions 
have been taken in the context of our government’s deliberate 
decision to balance program spending increases with debt 
reduction and tax reduction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, despite all of these pressures, this budget marks a 
major investment in the health and well-being of our 
Saskatchewan people. Together, Mr. Speaker, I believe that 
we’re continuing to build a world-class health system that 
serves the needs of our province. We’re investing in 
individuals, we’re investing in families, and we’re investing in 
our collective future. 
 
In this budget, Mr. Speaker, provincial health funding grows to 
$1.9 billion per year. This is an increase of more than 11 per 
cent over the 1998-1999 budget year. At $195 million, this is 
the largest increase in the health budget that I’ve seen in my 
entire time in the provincial legislature. In fact, Mr. Speaker, 
it’s the largest dollar increase ever in the history of our 
province. 
 
We believe that this is extremely good news for our health 
system. This is a good news budget for our citizens because 
we’re making unprecedented investments in the health of our 
families now and into the future. 
 
We’ve underlined in policy, Mr. Speaker, and practice, our 
commitment to a strong, coordinated, integrated, and responsive 
health system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, health care is a passionate issue for the people of 
our province. It’s been a passionate issue in the political 
discourse in the history of this province. Mr. Speaker, it has 
been and it is and it always will be this way. 
 
It was a passionate issue in the 1930s when Matt Anderson 
organized the local health care co-operative around Bulyea. It 
was a passionate issues in the 1940s when the people around 
Swift Current organized a health district to provide medical 
coverage in their local region. It was a passionate issue, Mr. 
Speaker, in the ’60s when community clinics were starting up in 
Regina, Prince Albert, Biggar, Lloydminster, Wynyard, and 
other towns and cities across our province. 
 
And of course, Mr. Speaker, it was a passionate issue in the 
1960s when medicare was born. The doctors went on strike and 
American money and the opposition parties tried to strangle 
medicare at birth. 



418 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 1999 

Not since the introduction of medicare have there been so many 
questions and so many conflicting opinions about the kind of 
system that we want for the people of this province. It’s an 
emotional debate. A debate that doesn’t lend itself to a clear 
discussion of the facts. A debate that often generates more heat 
than light. And too often, Mr. Speaker, the opposition paint a 
picture of chaos rather than confidence, focusing on crisis rather 
than co-operation. And too often, Mr. Speaker, we see pointing 
fingers instead of helping hands. Rhetoric as opposed to solid 
debate. 
 
Today the very face of health care is changing and it’s changing 
rapidly. We’re engaged in a real and fundamental debate about 
the kind of health system that we want for our children, for our 
children’s children, and for ourselves. Mr. Speaker, I believe in 
the bottom of my heart that the people of this province want a 
health system that is fair, that is compassionate, and a health 
system that’s available to all. 
 
Like wolves in sheep clothing, the enemies of medicare are 
extremely deceptive. They create the illusion of having the best 
interests of our health system in mind. They talk about reducing 
stress on the public system by allowing people a private option. 
They play on public anxiety about waiting times, claiming a 
two-tier system would result in quicker service for everyone. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is an illusion and it hides a real menace. 
Two-tier medicine means cadillac care for those who can afford 
it and the rest of us can go to health in a handbasket. Well I say 
no, Mr. Speaker, and our government says no. Health care is too 
important to go to the highest bidder. Health care is too 
important to be based on wealth rather than need. And health 
care is too important for us to value credit cards over care and 
compassion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government that I represent believes in a 
single-payer, public medicare system providing high quality 
health services for everyone. Compared to the American 
system, Mr. Speaker, the gold standard if you like, they don’t 
lack for money, they spend more than $4,000 per person per 
year on health care — double what we spend. And what do they 
get, Mr. Speaker? The shortest life expectancy, the highest 
infant mortality rate, and the poorest health status of all the G7 
(Group of Seven) countries. They spend on administration and 
competition not better care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today as I speak there are 40 million Americans 
without health insurance. And medical costs, Mr. Speaker, rank 
as the highest single cause of personal bankruptcy. How could 
anyone aspire to that, Mr. Speaker. Universal medicare is more 
cost effective and more efficient. But more importantly, Mr. 
Speaker, universal medicare that is publicly funded and publicly 
administered reflects the very values of who we are as 
Canadians and the people of this province. Mr. Speaker, 
medicare — it is who we are as a country, a nation, and a 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Tommy Douglas and Woodrow Lloyd, former 
premiers of our great province, saw medicare as a natural and 
inevitable development of our public conscience. According to 
Woodrow Lloyd and I quote: 
 

The extent of our sensitivity to the rights and needs of 

others is a very excellent measurement of the maturity of 
the society in which we live. 
 

These qualities of maturity and sensitivity go hand in hand with 
our continued and impassioned support for medicare. Being an 
advocate of medicare is not only about protecting and 
preserving it, Mr. Speaker, it’s about changing it, strengthening 
it, improving it, evolving it, and making it better. 
 
Tommy often spoke, Mr. Speaker, about the second phase of 
medicare — reorganizing and revamping the entire system. In 
Saskatchewan we’ve begun phase 2. Our critics have used the 
turmoil of change to camouflage their attack on universal 
medicare. They have spread fear and sown suspicion. Some of 
our friends, Mr. Speaker, unwittingly I believe have helped 
them. And others of our friends have disagreed with us about 
the details of phase 2. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we may not always agree on the details, we 
may not always agree on the path we’ve chosen for our health 
reforms, but Saskatchewan people agree on what we want to 
achieve. 
 
We want improved health for Saskatchewan people by 
preventing the causes of illness and injury. We want quality 
health services provided in an appropriate and cost-effective 
way — health services that respond to local needs and a 
sustainable system of publicly funded health care. 
 
Our government, Mr. Speaker, is listening to what 
Saskatchewan people are saying. And this budget is an 
investment in the kind of health system our people want and the 
kind of health system Saskatchewan people deserve. 
 
Waiting times for surgery is an example. We listened to citizens 
across this province tell us in no uncertain terms that waits for 
surgeries, some surgeries, are too long. We commissioned a 
task team on waiting lists for surgeries and the task team 
presented its report on March 17, 1999. And we made a 
commitment that day to take immediate action to implement its 
recommendations. 
 
And in this budget, Mr. Speaker, we have $12 billion dedicated 
to improving the waiting times of our citizens for surgery. 
We’re making changes so that all elective surgeries are done in 
a reasonable time. And there is spending to increase operating 
room hours in Saskatoon and Regina and add new surgical 
equipment. 
 
We’ve also begun working with Regina and Saskatoon to 
improve the classification and scheduling systems for surgery. 
And we’re also working with surrounding districts to ensure 
that we have 24-hour access to post-operative care in home 
districts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the top priorities of this budget is 
Saskatchewan’s front-line health providers. Health care, Mr. 
Speaker, is more than simply bricks and mortar. It’s not even 
about equipment and procedure. It’s about people helping 
people. It’s about health providers working together. These 
people, Mr. Speaker, are the backbone of our very system. 
 
This budget provides a total of $1.3 billion to health districts. 



April 1, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 419 

That’s an increase of $139 million or 12 percent from last 
year’s budget. This increase will help cover increased labour 
costs arising from collective agreements. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the College of Medicine is receiving a total of 
$20.6 million this year for training, retraining, and placement 
programs for Saskatchewan doctors. That’s an increase, Mr. 
Speaker, of $2.9 million. And, Mr. Speaker, we’ve set aside 
$346 million for physician services and this will cover 
increased services and will improve our ability to recruit and 
retain physicians serving Saskatchewan residents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re putting more resources into the training, 
recruitment, and retention of health providers as part of a 
broader strategy to address potential recruitment problems in a 
range of health care positions. Mr. Speaker, this strategy will 
match training seats for nurses, for example, for future 
requirements. We’ll see active recruitment assistance to districts 
for both nurses and other health care positions. And, Mr. 
Speaker, we’re going to engage in research and labour-market 
analysis to look at long-term skill requirements and training 
development to meet those needs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our best estimate is that more than $1.3 billion of 
this budget will go directly to health providers in the form of 
payments, salaries, and benefits. Mr. Speaker, that’s more than 
two-thirds of the entire provincial budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re improving hospital, surgical, diagnostic care 
for all of our citizens. Earlier diagnosis and early intervention 
are key to meeting our mandate of improving the health of each 
of our people. And by enhancing diagnosis and improving 
access to surgery, we’ll be better able to help more citizens 
more quickly and more effectively. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this budget we will be providing operating 
funding for three MRIs (magnetic resonance imaging). There 
will be a new MRI service in Regina for southern Saskatchewan 
and an additional MRI in Saskatoon to improve access for 
northern citizens. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a second bone density program will help in the 
early detection and treatment of osteoporosis. And there’s 
funding for increased CT (computerized tomography) scanning 
testing with new, faster equipment and the addition of a mobile 
CT scanner for southern Saskatchewan. There will be additional 
capacity for cardiac catheterization to treat blocked arteries and 
we’re continuing our efforts to help prevent diabetes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re continuing to support the expanded kidney 
transplant program. Last year Saskatchewan had the highest 
number of kidney transplants per capita in the country and 
we’re building on that. We’re building on the success of the 
established satellite renal dialysis site which will give more 
rural patients an opportunity to be treated close to home. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re continuing to help Saskatchewan families 
deal with the cost of prescription drugs and other medical 
services. A total of $77.8 million has been set aside for the 
Saskatchewan prescription drug plan, and that’s an increase of 
21.5 per cent from last year’s budget. This very significant 
increase ensures families with high drug costs relative to their 
income can get the drugs they need. 

In addition, $5.9 million has been allocated for the family 
health benefits program. More than 22,000 low-income 
families, including more than 42,000 children, are able to get 
dental, drugs, optometric services to this program. And by 
extended health benefits, we can help low-income families 
improve their economic and social conditions. 
 
(1230) 
 
An area of importance to me, Mr. Speaker, is our fight against 
cancer. We’re allocating $25.6 million to support the work of 
Saskatchewan’s cancer agency. That’s an increase of $3.2 
million, or 14.2 per cent over last year’s budget. As well, we’re 
providing an additional $1 million to attract oncologists to the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you know, breast cancer can be a deadly, 
deadly disease. And as part of our war on breast cancer, we will 
have a new breast cancer assessment initiative which will 
complement the Saskatchewan breast cancer screening 
program. In addition, Mr. Speaker, we’re increasing funding 
which will establish a stem cell transplant program for breast 
cancer patients, pending results of clinical trials. And there will 
be enhanced screening for cervical cancer, reaching more 
women in high-risk groups. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we now have chemotherapy services and cancer 
treatment services in 15 health districts. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to say that we will expand the number of outreach 
cancer treatment centres. Services like these, Mr. Speaker, will 
cut travel time for rural residents, and we’re ensuring that 
people can get the service they need as close to home as 
possible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget enhances services to rural 
Saskatchewan through hospitals, community health centres, 
primary health sites, emergency and other services. 
 
The budget addresses the complex and unique health needs of 
Saskatchewan women. Our government recognizes the health 
challenges faced by women. And we’re supporting a number of 
initiatives to help women stay healthy. I’ve already mentioned 
the second bone density program to serve southern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m also pleased to say that we’re expanding our 
fetal alcohol syndrome and fetal alcohol effect programs in 
co-operation with the College of Medicine. Mr. Speaker, we 
will soon have a person in the College of Medicine in the 
Department of Pediatrics who is an expert in the area of fetal 
alcohol syndrome and fetal alcohol effect. 
 
I’m pleased to say, Mr. Speaker, that our commitment to 
addressing this problem is significant. And we will have money 
for the College of Medicine and the Saskatchewan Association 
for the Prevention of Handicaps in order to help address this 
very difficult issue with causes brain damage to children who 
are affected by this horrible, horrible damage. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re continuing to expand specialized services to 
make them more accessible to rural people. I’ve already 
mentioned the expanded satellite dialysis services, CT scans 
capacity, and outreach cancer treatment. 



420 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 1999 

Well, Mr. Speaker, in addition there is special funding in this 
budget to provide 10 new mental health counsellor positions. 
And one of the target groups to benefit from this funding will 
be youth living in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Home care funding is up as well, Mr. Speaker — up $5.2 
million — recognizing increased demand and giving districts 
increased capacity to meet the demand. Since we came to 
government, Mr. Speaker, the home care budget has been 
increased by 131.5 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the neonatal transport service improves our 
capacity to transport critically ill or injured infants to the 
services we need. We have established two pediatric transport 
teams based in Regina and Saskatoon. 
 
And we’re also improving and enhancing health services in 
northern Saskatchewan. New funding of 500,000 will be 
available to improve emergency and air ambulance services, 
mental health, and public health programs. And, Mr. Speaker, 
we’re adding staff who will offer prevention and support and 
mental health programs in the North so northern residents can 
get faster access to the services they need. 
 
The northern Telehealth project will be fully operational this 
year, Mr. Speaker, linking health providers in the North with 
specialists in major urban centres. And, Mr. Speaker, there will 
be progress on construction of new hospitals in Meadow Lake, 
La Ronge, and Stony Rapids to complement the services 
offered through the new hospital in La Ronge. 
 
We will also be providing assistance to health districts to ensure 
that our health system continues to function smoothly as we 
enter the year 2000, and all health districts will benefit from a 
total of $50 million to ensure that their systems are Y2K 
compatible. 
 
Our Y2K plans are intact but as you can see everyday in the 
newspapers, the daily countdown to the new millennium is 
relentless so we have to ensure that our medical facilities and 
information systems are ready. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, I want to take a moment to give an 
overview of the health system in our province. The range of 
health services available to every citizen in Saskatchewan are 
vast. And the funding directly to health care in this budget 
means an increase in and better access to those services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s often very easy for us and for our people to 
take health care for granted. There are issues in the system that 
no one denies. But let’s not forget our many, many 
accomplishments and successes. 
 
Every day in this province, Mr. Speaker, 35,000 people use our 
health system. That’s about the same size as the entire 
population of Prince Albert or Moose Jaw. Every day. It would 
be like every citizen in Moose Jaw going to have some service 
in the health system. Our feedback shows that the vast majority 
of people who actually use the health system are pleased with 
the service they get. 
 
Think about what this system can do for our citizens every year. 
Think about it — 91,000 surgeries; 9,200 nursing home beds; 

three MRI sites — two in Saskatoon and one in Regina; 76,000 
trips by road ambulance; 800 trips by air ambulance; 4.6 million 
visits to a family doctor; 925,000 visits to specialists; 1.45 
million tests performed in the Provincial Lab right here in 
Regina; 400,000 immunizations to children and the citizens of 
our province; 100,000 families helped through the drug plan; 
and 22,000 families including 42,000 children helped through 
family health benefits. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, we have breast screening programs. 
We have prevention initiatives, we have counselling services 
for people who are facing mental health challenges. We have 
prenatal care for women who are pregnant. We have public 
health inspectors to make sure that our water and sewer is safe. 
We have health promotions. We have health research. And we 
have much, much more. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to take a moment to acknowledge the 
important role so many people play in the success of our 
system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, registered nurses, licensed practical nurses, 
doctors, our many myriad of technicians, support staff, cleaning 
people, housekeeping, laundry, dieticians, nursing assistants, 
managers, and boards of health districts — all of these people, 
Mr. Speaker, working together make Saskatchewan’s health 
system a world-class health system. 
 
And I want to acknowledge and I want to take this opportunity 
in the House today to thank them for the many, many services 
that they provide to our citizens. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, medicare is not a museum 
piece. Medicare is not a pedestal. Medicare is a living and 
evolving part of Saskatchewan public policy, Saskatchewan 
culture, and Saskatchewan life. Medical care is about 
strengthening the system, building for the future, adapting to 
changing conditions. The technology and delivery of health care 
will always be changing and moving ahead. The future of 
universal health care, the evolution of health care, depends upon 
our collective ability, Mr. Speaker, to adapt, to find new 
approaches, and to work together. 
 
Accepting and leading change requires us to be firmly rooted in 
our principles. The road to success is dotted with many, many 
tempting parking places and many inviting detours that would 
lead us astray. We cannot afford to pull over to the side of the 
road, Mr. Speaker, and abandon the journey. We cannot afford 
to lose sight of our way on a twisting path to nowhere. 
 
We have to press on, preserving, strengthening, adapting. 
Fulfilling the vision of our pioneers and our pioneer leaders like 
Woodrow Lloyd and Tommy Douglas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many people in this province — and it doesn’t 
matter where I go — many people stop me and ask me how my 
dad is. My dad was the former president of the National 
Farmers Union and the Saskatchewan Farmers’ Union. 
 
Mr. Speaker, recently a friend was cleaning out his 
grandparents’ basement and he sent me an old newspaper 



April 1, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 421 

clipping of a speech that my dad gave in 1963 to the 
Saskatchewan Federation of Labour. 
 
And at that time, Mr. Speaker, my dad recalled that the struggle 
for medicare had been a long struggle. It had been something 
that had been accomplished with the help of many, many 
people. The people in this province fundamentally believed in 
the need to have a universal publicly based health system that 
meant that you didn’t go without care because you couldn’t 
afford to pay for it. 
 
Well my father said that it was a long battle. It was a battle to 
establish medicare. It was a struggle, Mr. Speaker. And it would 
be a struggle to keep it. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I think that my father can take great pride in 
the victory that we’ve achieved together. But he warned us — 
he warned us in 1963 and it’s now 36 years later, not only his 
audience of the day at the time but for everyone who believes in 
medicare — that the battle would not be won forever. 
 
The next struggle, Mr. Speaker, I think the greatest struggle will 
be to preserve medicare, and he warned us to be ready. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I can tell those assembled that I am my 
father’s doctor . . . or daughter. I am my father’s daughter. The 
victory of 1962 was not forever. Mr. Speaker, I remember being 
a 10-year-old child living on the farm near Springwater, 
Saskatchewan. and Woodrow Lloyd was the premier of 
Saskatchewan and he was our representative in the Biggar 
constituency. And my father along with other farmers and 
railroaders and teachers in Saskatoon went up and down the 
streets of Biggar and the farmyards of that area raising money 
to establish the first community clinic, where they were going 
to put a doctor on salary because they had heard that a strike 
was coming. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in 1962 they raised $35,000 to establish that 
clinic. People put their money where their mouth was. That’s 
what people did. People like Marv Ledding a railroader whose 
sons are now doctors in Rosetown and Saskatoon. People like 
Alvin Hewitt. 
 
It doesn’t matter where I go, Mr. Speaker, there are the children 
of those farmers and teachers and railroaders that still believe. 
They believe in a publicly funded, publicly administered health 
care system. They don’t believe in private clinics and private 
health care and they don’t believe that we need to go to a 
two-tier system. So we have to defend it and we will defend it. 
 
The system is not perfect. It will never be perfect. It is evolving, 
Mr. Speaker. But we will defend medicare. We will not let the 
people who were the destroyers of medicare of 1962 ever come 
to power again in the province of Saskatchewan. And I am 
looking extremely forward to meeting these people on the 
campaign trail — which we will in the months ahead — and 
taking them on. Because every time they stand up in this 
legislature, they give misinformation. They fear-monger, Mr. 
Speaker. And every time they stand up, they give numbers that 
they can’t back up. They give facts that they can’t back up 
because they are playing on the fears of people, Mr. Speaker. 
That is not why we’ve been sent here. 
 

We have been sent here to defend medicare, not to permit it to 
remain static. We’ve been sent here to stand still, not to retreat. 
We must continue phase two, Mr. Speaker, by making medicare 
— publicly funded, publicly administered medicare — better. A 
system that is better will be more proactive; it’ll be more 
effective — the better we’re able to turn aside those who would 
undermine medicare and universal access. 
 
(1245) 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget is about investing in our collective 
future. It’s about investing in our health system. It’s about 
investing in and strengthening publicly funded, publicly 
administered medicare. 
 
Yet even in the face of this significant investment in our health 
system, we have to contend with the fear-mongering of the 
Liberals and the Tories. Well, Mr. Speaker, they competed to 
see who could get a better job done of tricking the 
Saskatchewan people by posing as friends of medicare. 
 
The very Liberals, the Liberals who fought tooth and nail to 
deny the people of this province their rightful history in the 
country of Canada by being the first province to introduce 
medicare in 1962. And, Mr. Speaker, the Tories who placed 
medicare on the critical list by undermining the fiscal integrity 
of the health care system in this province by racking up billions 
and billions and billions and billions and billions and billions 
and billions . . . Have I got to 15 billion yet? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Not yet. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — . . . billions and billions and billions of 
dollars in debt. Well, Mr. Speaker, the people of this province 
will not be tricked. They know which party believes in 
medicare and which parties do not. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we have a strong health system and in fact, 
Mr. Speaker, we even have people like Murray Mandryk from 
the Leader-Star indicating, “sure, we have problems in health 
care,” he wrote, “but they may not be worse than anywhere else. 
In fact our problems may not even be as bad.” 
 
All in all he deemed our system to be above average. And from 
Mr. Mandryk, Mr. Speaker, I call that quite a compliment. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I have much more to say on this, but I’m 
going to adjourn my remarks for another time, next Wednesday. 
And I would move that we adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Speaker: — Before proceeding, would the Assembly 
provide leave to the Chair to introduce the guests who are in the 
Speaker’s gallery? 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair appreciates your co-operation and 



422 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 1999 

would like to introduce to you a group of young people, I think 
14 in number, equally from the . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
If hon. members will listen to the end of the sentence, this will 
make a great deal of sense. Fourteen members each, from each 
of the provinces of Newfoundland and Saskatchewan. Perhaps I 
can ask those from Newfoundland to wave so you know who 
our guests from out of province are. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I’m happy to advise the hon. members that 
these young people are members of a YMCA (Young Men’s 
Christian Associates) exchange and the 14 students from 
Newfoundland accompanied by their chaperones, Christopher 
Pickard and Coleen Pickard . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Now the hon. member from Kindersley will know that there’s a 
long-standing rule not to engage visitors to the gallery in 
debate, particularly when the Speaker is trying to introduce 
them. 
 
I will also ask you to acknowledge Christopher Pickard and 
Coleen Pickard, who are chaperones from Newfoundland, as 
well as Corey Tomczak and Jeff Deptuck from Regina, who are 
chaperones from the Saskatchewan delegation. 
 
The Newfoundland delegation is visiting here until April 6, and 
then at that time the Saskatchewan delegation will return to 
Newfoundland from the 7th to the 13th of April for an 
exchange. 
 
While they’re here the Newfoundlanders will be joining their 
Saskatchewan hosts in visits to the IMAX, to the Temple 
Gardens Mineral Spa in Moose Jaw, the RCMP (Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police) Museum, and Camp TA-WA-SI. 
 
And I know as well that I will have an opportunity to meet them 
personally in about 40 minutes. They will leave shortly to take a 
tour of the building, and then I’m going to meet them on the 
floor of the Assembly and we’ll spend a little time talking with 
them about parliamentary democracy and the relationship and 
the common practice of it between the provinces of 
Newfoundland and Saskatchewan. 
 
Would you please show them a warm Saskatchewan welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, with leave to introduce a motion with respect to the 
hours at which the House will convene. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Hours of Sitting 
 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 
the member from Melfort-Tisdale: 
 

That not withstanding Rule 3(4) of the Rules and 
Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
that when this Assembly adjourns on Thursday, April 1, 

1999, it do stand adjourned until Wednesday, April 7, 1999 
at 1:30 p.m., unless the House is reconvened at a earlier 
date by Mr. Speaker at the request of the government. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 
The Speaker: — Before adjourning the House, may the Chair 
take just a moment to wish the best of this weekend to all hon. 
members as we know, in this province and certainly in the 
gallery, in the Chamber as well, we have many who are 
celebrating either Passover or Easter this weekend. And the 
Chair wishes to all of you, a joyous weekend and a meaningful 
time with your families. Please do take advantage of it. 
 
Look forward to seeing you next week, when this House 
reconvenes on Wednesday afternoon at 1:30. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:53 p.m. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 

 


