





























































Hansard: December 16, 1999


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 243 
 December 16, 1999 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
petition I present today is due to the failure of the AIDA 
(Agricultural Income Disaster Assistance) program. The prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to assist Saskatchewan farmers by 
withdrawing from the failing AIDA program and using the 
remaining provincial AIDA funding to rebate the education 
portion of the 1999 property taxes on agricultural lands for 
one year, whereby providing farm families with $133 
million tax reduction in 1999. 
 

The communities involved on the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are 
from Moosomin, Moose Jaw, Chamberlain, Saskatoon — pretty 
well all over the province, Mr. Speaker. I so present. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As well to present 
petitions to the Assembly and, Mr. Speaker, this petition comes 
in regard to automobile insurance Act. And I’ll read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to repeal the provision of the 
personal injuries benefits contained in the automobile 
insurance Act and adopt a return to an add-on insurance 
system that would provide benefits on a no-fault basis to 
all victims without taking away the innocent victim’s right 
to seek compensation from the person responsible for the 
accident, but with appropriate modifications to reduce 
overall personal injury costs. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petitions I present are signed by individuals 
from the communities of Regina, Humboldt, Elfros, Foam 
Lake, Wynyard, and Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
stand today to present petitions on behalf of Saskatchewan 
citizens concerned about the AIDA program: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray, that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to assist Saskatchewan farmers by 
withdrawing from the failing AIDA program and using the 
remaining provincial AIDA funding to rebate the education 
portion of the 1999 property taxes on agricultural lands for 
one year, whereby providing farm families with 133 
million tax reductions in 1999. 

 
And the petitioners are from Chamberlain, Moose Jaw, 
Bladworth, Kenaston, and Regina. 
 

I so move. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I too have a petition today to 
present on behalf of . . . regarding school closures and more 
school closures in the province. The petition reads as follows: 
 

Therefore your petitioners humbly pray that the Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the Minister of 
Education to do everything in his power to maintain the 
quality of education of students attending school in 
Qu’Appelle, and to stop this unwanted or unwarranted 
closure of classes in Qu’Appelle. 
 
As in duty bound your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petitions are from Qu’Appelle area, McLean, etc. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I too have petitions to present to 
you and the Assembly. This petition is on the education tax 
rebate. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to assist Saskatchewan farmers by 
withdrawing from the failing AIDA program and using the 
remaining provincial AIDA funding to rebate the 
educational portion of the 1999 property taxes on 
agriculture lands for one year, whereby providing farm 
families with $133 million tax reduction in 1999. 

 
The petitioners are from Chamberlain, Regina, Saskatoon, 
Moose Jaw, and from other places in the province. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions presented 
at the last sitting have been reviewed and found to be in order, 
and are hereby read and received. 
 

Of citizens petitioning the Assembly to cause the 
provincial government to withdraw from the AIDA 
program; 
 
Of citizens petitioning the Assembly to cause the Minister 
of Education to stop the closure of classes in Qu’Appelle; 
 
Of citizens petitioning the Assembly to dedicate a greater 
portion of fuel tax revenues toward road maintenance and 
construction; and 
 
Of citizens petitioning the Assembly to repeal the personal 
injury benefits contained in the automobile insurance Act. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 14 ask the 
government the following questions: 
 

To the Minister of Finance: (1) has your department 
referred the final report and recommendations of the 
Saskatchewan Personal Income Tax Review Committee to 



244 Saskatchewan Hansard December 16, 1999 

an independent agency for a detailed economic analysis of 
the effects that each of the recommendations will have on 
the finances of the Government of Saskatchewan and 
forecasts of the impact on the Saskatchewan economy as a 
whole; (2) if the answer to question number one is yes, 
which companies have been asked to perform such an 
analysis. 
 

I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on 
day no. 14 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Provincial Secretary: how much is the Government 
of Saskatchewan spending on the program known as the 
three century club, wherein portions of the Trans Canada 
Trail is purchased in the name of certain senior citizens to 
mark the new millennium. 
 

I so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 14 ask the government the following question 
directed to the Minister of Municipal Affairs, Culture and 
Housing: 
 

Why was the city of Moose Jaw denied the opportunity to 
set up its own enhanced 911 system — a system that would 
have cost taxpayers substantially less than what they will 
have to pay to get emergency services routed from Swift 
Current? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Trew: — I thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me a great deal 
of pleasure today to introduce to you and through you to all 
members of the legislature, two people seated in your gallery. 
One is a constituent of mine, Dolly Conway, who is recovering 
quite nicely from a hip operation. Seated beside Dolly . . . 
thanks for the wave Dolly. Seated beside Dolly is everybody’s 
friend, the people’s friend, Joe McKeown, a former alderman in 
the city of Regina. 
 
I ask all members to join me in welcoming Dolly and Joe. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce Peter Stroh who is seated in your gallery. Peter is the 
immediate past president of the Saskatoon Teachers’ 
Association. He’s been eight years on the executive of the 
Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation. He is a teacher at E. D. 
Feehan High School in Saskatoon, and I might add the Liberal 
candidate in the last election for Saskatoon Greystone. Please 
welcome Peter Stroh. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to add 
my welcome to Joe McKeown and Dolly. Joe and I have been 
in many demonstrations and other things on behalf of our 
community together. But sitting in front of Joe in your gallery, 
is a troublemaker with a somewhat a longer history and that’s 

my father, Mr. Hubert Elkin. Yes, Hubert pay attention here — 
I’m going to say some rude things about you! 
 
I’ve often wished I had a few more of his genes because he’s 
still one of the best political thinkers that I’ve encountered. 
About once a year he sits me down . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — You’re right about that. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well you’re going to like what I say 
next. I almost said your name but I won’t. 
 
He sits me down about once a year and lets me know what the 
main political issues are going to be for the year and I haven’t 
found him to be wrong yet. And I might just add that he’s quit 
saying hello to me these days. What he usually says, Mr. 
Speaker, is he says “when are you going to raise the minimum 
wage?” So that’s how my father says hello to me. So 
congratulations and welcome to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today 
actually as the minister responsible for Sask Water and I would 
like to introduce a group of water managers from the province 
of Xinjiang in western China. They have been here for three 
weeks to learn how we manage water in Saskatchewan. In 
addition to numerous presentations on our water management 
approaches, they have toured several facilities including the 
Gardiner dam, Buffalo Pound dam, and the national hydrologic 
research centre in Saskatoon. 
 
I had the opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to have dinner with them 
last week and learn that there are many similarities between 
Saskatchewan and China, including our weather. And in fact, 
Mr. Speaker, last week it wasn’t the weather — it was much 
warmer here in Saskatchewan than it was actually in China last 
week. 
 
These men are seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, as I said. 
And I would like to ask them to rise, if I could, as I introduce 
them individually. And I do apologize in advance for 
mispronunciation of names. If you would rise please, Mr. Ann, 
Mr. Lee, Mr. Jzow, Mr. Chen, Mr. Wong, Mr. Kaiser — and if I 
could ask you to just remain standing please — and also their 
translator, Mr. Ming. With them also is their consultant Andre 
Trudel of Roche Consulting out of Quebec, and from Sask 
Water, Stephanie Choma, the director of communications and 
Wayne Dybvig, vice-president of water resources and 
infrastructure management. I’d welcome you to the legislature 
today and ask all of my colleagues to join in welcoming them 
too. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like 
to welcome the delegation from China to Saskatchewan. It’s 
good to see water managers coming here to observe our 
province. And having lived beside a water management project 
all of my life, Lake Diefenbaker, which was created by 
Gardiner dam, I too recognize the importance of knowing how 
to manage water well and I wish them well in Saskatchewan. 
Had I known they were coming sooner, perhaps I could have 



December 16, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 245 

invited them to my farm so they could have seen how we use 
the . . . manage the water from Lake Diefenbaker. 
 
Welcome to Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker. I would like to introduce to you 
and through you, a man I’m sure who needs no introduction in 
this House, the former minister of Labour and a long-standing 
MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) from what was 
then Moose Jaw South, Mr. Gordon Snyder. Please join me in 
welcoming him. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, the same 
introduction might apply to another guest who is seated behind 
us. 
 
I refer to Walter Smishek who I think is also well known to 
members as a long-time Member of the Legislative Assembly, a 
long-time member of cabinet during the Blakeney era, which 
time he served as minister of Health, I believe at one time, 
minister of Finance, minister of Municipal Affairs, and over the 
years has made a very significant contribution to public life and 
public administration in our province. 
 
And I would ask all members to extend Walter a warm 
welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I just want to add my words of welcome to Mr. Peter 
Stroh, who’s in your gallery this afternoon. I’m very pleased to 
see him here. 
 
Mr. Stroh and I share a lot of interests in common in terms of 
trying to create a safer environment in this province, and he’s 
made a huge contribution to the field of education in our home 
city of Saskatoon. And I have to say he was one heck of a fine 
candidate for the Liberal Party in the last provincial election and 
ran a great local campaign. 
 
So I’m very pleased to have him here this afternoon and I just 
want to add my words of welcome and ask all members to make 
him feel very much at home with us. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, if I might, I just 
want to add to the words that the Minister of Labour said about 
her father, Hub Elkin. 
 
Even though she only gets the opportunity to sit down with him 
once a year and benefit from his wisdom, I get the opportunity 
to sit down more regularly with him because he lives in my 
constituency and serves on my executive. And in that capacity, 
I get lots of opportunity to benefit from Hub’s wisdom. 
 
I might say that Hub Elkin is one of the most forward-looking 
people, and this will appeal to the members opposite. This is a 

person who never looks back, he’s always looking forward, and 
we appreciate his advice. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of 
pleasure to introduce to you and through you to all the members 
of the House, a gentleman sitting in your west gallery, Mr. Art 
Halushka. 
 
Art and his wife Bev farm at Whitebeech, Saskatchewan. And 
Art and I have spent many, many of the hours together and 
travelled many, many miles together during different election 
campaigns. I know Art is in Regina today for a medical reason. 
I believe it’s one of his family members is receiving some 
medical treatment, and he’s taken time out to come down and 
take in the House and the procedures here. 
 
So I ask all the members to offer him a very warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — I’m sorry, hon. members. I was going to 
beg your indulgences in allowing me to also add my words of 
welcome to our Chinese friends and to all the members of the 
gallery, but to some very special folks that took time out today 
to come and visit with the Speaker. 
 
And that’s 12 grade 11 and 12 students from the great 
community of Ituna, and with their teacher Ken Mushka and the 
driver Ken Koback who brought them in the bus in this 
inclement weather. 
 
I want you to please welcome them to the Assembly this 
afternoon and I trust they’ll enjoy the proceedings. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Canada’s Outstanding Young Farmers 
 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you ever so much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, recently two young farm families were given the 
distinction of being named Canada’s Outstanding Young 
Farmers for 1999. One family is from British Columbia, and I 
am proud to say that the other farm family is from 
Saskatchewan, specifically the Saltcoats constituency. 
 
They are Warren and Carla Kaeding of Churchbridge. Warren 
and Carla are third-generation farmers now operating a seed 
plant under the name Wagon Wheel Seed Corporation. From a 
modest beginning the seed plant now employs two full-time, 
three part-time employees, one commissioned salesperson, 
three summer students, Warren’s father Roger and mother 
Phyllis, and of course Warren and Carla. 
 
The farm’s wooden bins have been replaced with steel hopper 
bins, metal equipment sheds. A ramp and a second scale have 
been added, in addition to a large amount of railway ballast to 
enable all-weather traffic. A beautiful yard site to say the least, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 



246 Saskatchewan Hansard December 16, 1999 

The operation includes a custom spraying and trucking 
business, and market seeds into Ontario, Minnesota, North 
Dakota, Manitoba, Alberta, and BC (British Columbia), and 
also here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Annually 3,000 acres are cropped and another 3,000 acres are 
contracted. In addition the conventional oats, wheat, canola, 
flax, and peas, some other seeds grown include caraway, 
coriander, evening primrose, willow herb, and many others — 
just to name a few, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I extend my congratulations to Warren, Carla, and the Kaeding 
family for receiving this honoured recognition and ask all 
members to join me. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Implement Dealership Bill 
 

Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m worn out 
bouncing up and down in anticipation here. 
 
I want to just take a moment to say how proud I was yesterday 
to be a member of this Assembly, and to be associated with all 
the hon. members and all the hon. parties. 
 
I was proud that all of us worked together and worked quickly 
to present, discuss, and pass An Act respecting Agricultural 
Equipment Dealerships, an Act to ensure that farm equipment 
dealers can continue to offer farmers a wide choice of 
machinery, especially those produced right here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I think it fair to say that this Bill arose out of the collective will 
of this Assembly to meet a pressing need, and that all members 
and all parties can claim mutual responsibility for it. 
 
It helps, of course, that we were supported in this Bill by the 
Prairie Implements Manufacturers Association, the Canada 
West Equipment Dealers Association, the Wheat Pool, and 
SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities). 
 
Mr. Speaker, our names are on the record of the Bill — all our 
names. Those of the NDP (New Democratic Party), the Sask 
Party and the Liberals. We are the ones, who proudly said “yes” 
to the Saskatchewan firms and “back off” to the big American 
companies who were trying to take advantage of the current 
farm crisis by throwing their weight around. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my hat goes off to all of us. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Racial and Ethnic Intolerance 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
last week on a CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) 
Radio open line call-in show, a caller referred to the Premier 
and the Minister of Education as, and I quote, “two bohunks”. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was so overcome with anger and sorrow that I 
literally had to stop my vehicle on the highway. Anger because 
this was a graphic demonstration of the racial and ethnic 

intolerance that still exists in our society today. 
 
And anger that this slur was not detected by the delay system 
that the CBC has in place. And further that the host was 
extremely slow in challenging the caller on this slur, and even 
after doing so allowed the caller to continue. 
 
I felt sorrow because I was immediately reminded of the 
discrimination and pain that my father and his family were 
subjected to when they first immigrated to this country. It was a 
time, when my dad was growing up, that other children of 
non-Slavic ancestry thought it was great sport to catch the 
children of Slavic ancestry as they walked to school and 
physically assault them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my dad is Polish. My mother is partly of First 
Nations ancestry, and my wife is of Metis ancestry. I wonder if 
people really understand the pain they cause when they make 
these intolerant and racist slurs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as legislators and leaders in our communities, it is 
incumbent on us to be united and unrelenting in condemning 
this kind of despicable behaviour. I would ask all members in 
this Assembly to join with me in asking the CBC to be more 
diligent in their efforts to combat this intolerant and 
unacceptable behaviour. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Coach of Canada’s Junior Hockey Team 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A few years ago 
the previous member from Swift Current, John Wall, gave a 
member’s statement welcoming the new coach of the Swift 
Current Broncos, Todd McLelland. Todd was coming to the 
Broncos at a particularly crucial time and he brought a valuable 
dignity and professionalism to the franchise. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, MLAs were interested in that statement also 
because Todd’s father, Bill McLelland, was and still is one of 
our sessional security guards. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that you’ll be happy to know that Todd 
McLelland has been named as the assistant coach to Canada’s 
national junior team which is on the way to the World Junior 
Cup tournaments in Sweden. 
 
Team Canada plays its first game on Christmas Day. I know we 
all congratulate Todd McLelland and wish him and all his 
players well in the tournament and, Mr. Speaker, I suspect that 
Bill McLelland and his family will be happy to adjust 
Christmas dinner if necessary to cheer son Todd and Canada’s 
junior hockey team on to victory. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

United Grain Growers’ Expansion at Cupar 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s hard to 
find good news in rural Saskatchewan these days but I have a 
little bit of good news that I’d like to share with all members of 



December 16, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 247 

the Assembly today. 
 
United Grain Growers has started construction on the $3.2 
million facility upgrade in my hometown of Cupar. They will 
be increasing both their handling and storage capabilities and 
also expanding their farm supply facilities. Approximately 
5,000 tonnes of additional storage are being put in place and, as 
a matter of fact, six large steel bins are being put in place today. 
Both the receiving and loading capabilities are being increased 
for fast unloads and fast rail car loadings. 
 
What this means to our community is that we will have a 
modern, efficient, grain handling and farm supply centre in our 
area in the new millennium. This will ensure the viability of our 
town through an expanded tax base and an increase in the 
number of permanent full-time jobs. It’ll also ensure the 
long-term viability of our branch line. 
 
As you can imagine, Mr. Speaker, both the town council and 
the RM (rural municipality) council are very pleased to see this 
construction go ahead. All issues involving local government 
have been resolved. The only outstanding issue regarding this 
project is with the Department of Highways. Early in the new 
year I hope to meet with the Minister of Highways to resolve 
this issue to everyone’s satisfaction. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Danger from Rabid Bats 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, the remedy of 
foolish fears is knowledge. And to alleviate the hysteria of 
Swift Current’s bat man, the little boy who cried bat, here are a 
few simple facts about bats. 
 
One. On a scale of mammals likely to become rabid, bats are far 
down the list after dogs, cats, foxes, skunks, racoons, and even 
pigs. Somewhere before right-wing politicians. 
 
In the last 300 years of North American history, a total of 25 
people have died from rabid bats — none at the Regina 
General. By contrast, Mr. Speaker, every year in India 50,000 
people die from rabid dog bites. 
 
Four. There are eight species of bats in Saskatchewan, four 
common in Regina. The most common, the little brown bat, has 
a mouth so small and delicate that it couldn’t break human skin 
if it tried. It is the perfect instrument though for eating 
mosquitoes, something for which I think we should applaud the 
lowly bat. 
 
Five. One of the largest concentrations of bats in this city is 
right in this building in a place I at least have never visited. 
Look up, look way up. 
 
Six. Finally, Mr. Speaker, bats don’t want to be around us or in 
our Hansards any more than we want to be around . . . we want 
them to be around us. The only difference is bats wouldn’t 
shoot for cheap publicity when our paths do cross. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Christmas Greetings 
 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Every year at this 
time we gather our families and friends near us and with them 
we celebrate the season of Christmas. It is time filled with 
happiness and joy. It is also a time when we reflect on last year 
and look forward to the beginning of a new one. 
 
This new year is especially important to many of us as it only 
signifies the ending of the past year, but marks the beginning of 
a new millennium. It is with loud rejoicing and great celebration 
that we will welcome in the new year. 
 
As we prepare for this grand celebration let us not forget the 
one which occurred 2,000 years ago. The star shone brightly 
over Bethlehem, the angels’ voices filled the heavens with song, 
and the people came from far and near to gather together and 
rejoice. It was on this day that we were blessed with the birth of 
Jesus Christ. God had sent his only son to give us salvation and 
to bring peace and justice to the world. 
 
Not only are we celebrating the beginning of a new millennium, 
we are celebrating 2,000 years of having Christ in our lives. It is 
with great joy that we will come together with our loved ones 
on Christmas Day in remembrance of this blessed event. 
 
During the Christmas season many of us as individuals and 
communities find ourselves reaching out to fellow men and 
women. We tend to give more of ourselves in the hope of 
making someone else’s Christmas a little brighter. On January 
1, 2000 let us resolve to help other individuals to get involved 
in our communities more — just a few minutes of our time and 
a couple of kind words can make all the difference in somebody 
else’s day. Let’s live with Christ in our lives for another 2,000 
years. 
 
On behalf of the Knights of Columbus of Saskatchewan, we 
wish you all the peace and joy and happiness of the Christmas 
season — Martin J. Nienaber, state deputy, Saskatchewan 
Knights of Columbus. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Financial Support for Farmers 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
for the Premier. Mr. Premier, it is now oh-so-painfully obvious 
that you have absolutely no plan to help farm families. 
Yesterday you held another meeting. You admitted you have no 
plan — no plan for immediate assistance; no plan for a 
long-term safety net — no plan whatsoever. But you asked 
farmers to visualize their future. 
 
Mr. Premier, farm families are visualizing their future. They 
visualize bankruptcies, foreclosures, bank payments. They 
visualize and it breaks their hearts. And they visualize an NDP 
government that sits by and does nothing. 
 
Mr. Premier, it’s now clear that no money is coming from 
Ottawa for months and months — if at all. What are you going 
to do to help farm families now? 



248 Saskatchewan Hansard December 16, 1999 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the position of the 
government is one that I still hope the Leader of the Opposition 
shares and that is to say that the people of Saskatchewan must 
remain united at the political level, at the farm producer level, at 
the individual farm level, in order to make sure that the $1.3 
billion for Saskatchewan and Manitoba is attained. 
 
Every one of us understands the pain and the suffering that’s 
undergoing now in rural Saskatchewan and rural Canada. This 
is a crisis not only for Saskatchewan and Manitoba and Alberta 
but for all of the nation. And I’m very heartened by the fact that 
the federal House of Commons Agricultural Committee has 
called for this urgent immediate cash payout. I’m heartened by 
what Dennis Mills is doing in Toronto and the farm aid concert. 
There are many positive indicators that our message is finally 
getting through, and I invite the Leader of the Opposition to 
continue working with us — we’ll work with him — in making 
sure that that message works. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Speaker, that’s not 
good enough. We’re not satisfied to unite with the government 
and do nothing. We want to do something. 
 
Yes, Ottawa has a responsibility, but so do you, Mr. Premier. 
We’re getting phone calls and letters, and so is the Premier. 
Farm families are asking us: what is the provincial government 
doing? And the answer is: absolutely nothing. 
 
Mr. Premier, we do support the call for a billion dollars from 
Ottawa. We recognize that trade is a federal responsibility but 
the federal Liberals have failed. They have turned their backs 
on us — and you know that. It’s time that you step up to the 
plate. 
 
Mr. Premier, what are you going to do to help farm families 
now? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, this question has been 
asked several times and the answer has been provided several 
times. I simply indicate to the House and to you, sir, and the 
Leader of the Opposition, that in what I think has been 
generally acknowledged to be a very innovative and good 
Speech from the Throne. 
 
We set up in page 4 and page 5 of the Speech from the Throne a 
specific course of action ranging all the way from the 
withdrawal of AIDA to the question of input costs, monitoring 
of input costs, farm leasebacks, the question of transference of 
farmland in the future, the Provincial Action Committee on 
Rural Economy, crop insurance, and I could on. This is a plan 
that is set up specifically and the Leader of the Opposition 
knows about it because he was here when the Speech from the 
Throne was debated. 
 
Now that isn’t all that is there. We’re also asking for additional 
ideas and input. But let’s close on this point with respect to this 
question. Let us never ever get trapped, I say to the hon. Leader 

of the Opposition in letting Ottawa or other Canadians believe 
that this crisis is a provincial crisis. This is a national crisis and 
the response, and the response has to be done nationally at the 
international . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker. This is a national crisis but 
the Premier knows that it’s desperate here in Saskatchewan. His 
own figures show that farm incomes in Saskatchewan are 
desperately low. The government just held a two-day farm 
conference — they called it a symposium. The theme was if 
you were the government, what would you do? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party is going to answer that 
question. Your government currently has $350 million set aside 
in a liquor and gaming fund. That money is supposed to be 
there for emergencies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier has said that this is the worst farm 
crisis since the dirty thirties. Yet he sits with over $300 million 
in a reserve fund, and he’s refusing to help farm families. 
 
Today, the Saskatchewan Party is calling on the government to 
use this money to provide $300 million in immediate 
emergency assistance to Saskatchewan farm families. There 
should be an immediate meeting of the farm coalition to discuss 
how this money should be paid out. And we should use this 
funding to put even more pressure on Ottawa to provide a 
billion dollar emergency payment. 
 
Mr. Premier, that’s what we’d do. What will you do? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to make it clear 
to the members opposite that Saskatchewan taxpayers do 
support agriculture in this province. They support farmers to the 
tune of $300 per capita. Each individual in this province 
supports agriculture, Mr. Speaker, to the tune of $300 per 
capita. That’s double Alberta, double Manitoba, and six or 
seven times as much as Tory Ontario. 
 
But I want to say, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to the meetings 
that have been held today and yesterday, the groups represented 
there — that represent the pulse growers, the women’s institute, 
cattle feeders, the bison growers — are very optimistic and 
upbeat about having involvement. 
 
This, the member opposite can’t stand because he wants to play 
politics. That’s what he’s upset about. Nothing more, nothing 
less — because he wants to play politics. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, there’s 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order please. Let’s use this valuable 
time in question period to hear both the questions and the 
answers. I ask all members to please co-operate. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. There’s the 



December 16, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 249 

party saying that we’re playing politics and they’re sitting on 
$350 million of an emergency fund that they won’t spend. 
They’re refusing to help farm families. 
 
Farm families all across this province have drained their bank 
accounts. They’ve drained their life savings. They’ve drained 
their NISA (Net Income Stabilization Account) accounts. 
They’ve maxed out their operating loans and their lines of 
credit. 
 
Yet our own government right here in Saskatchewan is sitting 
on a $350 million emergency fund and they’re refusing to help 
in light of the WTO (World Trade Organization) failure, in light 
of the failure to put a first ministers’ meeting together. 
 
Mr. Premier, you have a choice: you can do nothing or you can 
use the emergency funds to help farm families. 
 
Mr. Premier, Mr. Premier, it’s time that you began to act like a 
premier. Will you help farm families? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
members opposite that it’s interesting — at a crucial point 
where Mr. Harrison is saying the federal government is 
softening on making a payment to farmers — these people 
undermine the process and say the Saskatchewan taxpayer 
should pay. You’re selling out, selling out the taxpayers of this 
province. 
 
I say to the member opposite this: you were responsible for 
giving up the Crow rate. You were. And then you say . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. As close as I was sitting to the 
hon. minister, I was unable to hear his answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I say again that at a 
crucial point where all the indications are that the federal 
government is softening towards paying a payment to 
Saskatchewan grain farmers, this member opposite, the Leader 
of the Opposition is undermining the process, letting the federal 
government off the hook, and to Saskatchewan taxpayers, 
saying, Saskatchewan should pay and the Canadian government 
doesn’t have to. 
 
I say to the member opposite, this is irresponsible. This is the 
second time you’ve sold the farmers and people of the province 
out — you should be ashamed of yourself. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
questions are for the Premier. Mr. Premier, when you speak of 
selling the farmers out of Saskatchewan, tell us a little bit about 
GRIP (gross revenue insurance program), tell us a little bit 
about that. Tell the farm families of this province what you’ve 
done to them over the years here in Saskatchewan. 
 

This government, Mr. Speaker, hasn’t learned a thing. It’s all 
talk and absolutely no action, as usual, from the NDP. 
 
You held yet another farm symposium. The Premier asks the 
farm leaders to give him a road map. The deputy minister of 
Agriculture tells everyone, if you can imagine, to close their 
eyes and visualize the future of agriculture. That’s your 
solution. Close your eyes and hope the problem goes away. 
Well, Mr. Premier, Saskatchewan farmers want you to open 
your eyes for a change. See what’s going on out there in rural 
Saskatchewan and do something about it. 
 
Mr. Premier, the Leader of the Opposition has just asked you to 
use the available funds in the liquor and gaming fund to provide 
immediate help for farm families here in Saskatchewan. Will 
you do that today, sir? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I guess that there’s no 
such principle from the so-called Saskatchewan Party, as 
consistency. No such principle as consistency. Here they were 
in 1995 in the Rosetown Eagle saying the following. This refers 
to the Leader of the Opposition. They can yell all they want but 
they’re going to hear this; they’re going to hear this. Quote: 
 

There are benefits to losing the Crow benefit. 
Kindersley-Lloydminster MP (Member of Parliament) 
Elwin Hermanson said it will encourage development in 
the West. There’ll be no more incentive now to ship grain 
out and to look at diversification, Hermanson said. 
 

The story goes on. And Boyd, referring to the questioner, said, 
it’s something that should have happened 20 years ago. He said, 
it is tough love, Mr. Speaker. This from member who defined 
tough love in a debate a few days ago, in negative terms. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, please. Order, please. We 
listened to the question; I’m sure everybody would appreciate 
listening to the answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — And then, Mr. Speaker, I . . . 
(inaudible) . . . the answer on November 12, 1998 after the 
Minister of Finance tabled a mid-year financial report, CBC 
news radio, November 12, 1998, 12 o’clock: 
 

Reporter: Instead Cline says the money should come from 
the federal government. 
 

Referring to farm aid. The opposition Saskatchewan Party 
agrees. Party leader Elwin Hermanson, quote: 
 

Mr. Hermanson: Because the Saskatchewan treasury 
cannot deal with the magnitude of the crisis in agriculture. 

 
That’s what he said last month. Today he wants us to pick up 
the bill. Shame on him on asking the farmers to pay more. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 



250 Saskatchewan Hansard December 16, 1999 

so-called co-Premier over there wants to talk about the past 
when farmers are losing their farms today in Saskatchewan as a 
result of your policies, sir. The Premier says, let’s just be 
patient in agriculture, let’s wait. Let’s just see what the federal 
government is going to do. 
 
Well the farmers have been waiting for over a year for you sir. 
In fact, they’ve been waiting for seven years after you cancelled 
GRIP for you to finally do something here in Saskatchewan. 
Farm families in this province, Mr. Speaker, are sick of waiting 
and that’s the reason why there are 25 members of the House in 
this province on the Saskatchewan Party side because they’re 
sick of your government and they’re sick of you two over there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party is not going to wait any 
longer. Immediately after Question Period, we’ll be calling for 
an emergency debate demanding the provincial government 
provide $300 million in immediate assistance to help farm 
families in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Premier, will you allow that debate to 
proceed and will you allow that money to flow to farm families 
before Christmas as the all-party resolution called for? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — There they are. There they are. The 
betrayers of rural Saskatchewan and the betrayers of western 
Canada. There he was, as the Reform House Leader, advocating 
the abandonment of the Crow rate; $350 million a year lost 
thanks to the Leader of the Saskatchewan Party. Thanks to the 
so-called critic of Agriculture. They undermined us then — 
$350 million a year — and now they’re asking us to be 
undermined again at a time when the farm coalition is making 
progress. 
 
Evidence is everywhere. They are selling out the people of rural 
Saskatchewan. They are in the hands of the corporate big 
agribusiness of Canada and the world. I say, shame to you, Mr. 
Leader of the Opposition. Shame to the so-called Saskatchewan 
Party. Why don’t you go back and speak to Toronto . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, please. Order, please. I 
appreciate . . . Order, please. Order, please. I appreciate the 
enthusiasm on both sides, but I’m sure you will want to use this 
valuable time to have questions asked and answers given. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, this was 
going to be a special session on agriculture here in this session 
of the legislature — that’s what you said — to deal with the 
farm crisis here in this province. 
 
But have we heard a single — a single — new idea from this 
government? No, we haven’t. We’ve heard you talk about the 
federal government and we’ve had an emergency debate on 
agriculture, all pointed at the federal government. But the farm 
leaders one after another came before the bar in this legislature 
and said, you have a responsibility, sir. 
 

And you have to live up to that responsibility as the Premier of 
this province. And you have said nothing but no to the farm 
leaders all along. And they know very well, Mr. Premier, that 
you have no intention to act. 
 
You point your finger at the federal government; you point your 
finger at the opposition; you point your finger at every single 
person in this province day after day after day and you sit and 
do nothing. Well the farm families of this province say, shame 
on you, sir. Shame on you, sir. You are the Premier of this . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. The member has been quite 
lengthy in the preamble. Would you please go directly to the 
question. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Premier, Mr. Premier, we are calling for an 
emergency debate on this item here this afternoon to allow $300 
million to flow through to farmers before Christmas. Will you 
allow that debate to proceed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
member opposite who asked the question. I want to quote again 
from the newspaper which says “the Crow benefit payout draws 
criticism.” Mr. Speaker, and the member asks a question but 
they yell from their seat and I can’t . . . I can’t answer it. I’m 
sure they will want to hear. 
 
I wonder if the members opposite would quit yelling. I want to 
quote what Mr. Boyd said. He said, “and Boyd said it is 
something that should have happened 20 years ago.” That is the 
removal of 350 million. 
 
And today, when we’re at a crucial point in negotiating with the 
federal government, they choose to cave in, they choose to cave 
in and say the provincial taxpayers should pay the bill. Three 
hundred million dollars is $300 for every taxpayer in this 
province — $300 for every taxpayer in this province. That’s 
what they’re saying should be transferred from the federal 
government to provincial taxpayers. 
 
And I say to the member from Kindersley, who urged the 
dismantling of the Crow benefit of 350 million, to transfer that 
to provincial tax . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, please. Order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is also to the Premier. Mr. Premier, I know you’re too 
arrogant to learn the names of the constituencies of the people 
who sit across from you, but I represent the constituency of 
Watrous. 
 
Mr. Premier, Watrous has always voted NDP, but not any more. 
The people of Watrous couldn’t wait to vote against your 
Agriculture minister. They couldn’t wait to vote against your 
government. And now I see why — you have no plan for 
agriculture. And what’s more, you don’t care. 
 
Mr. Premier, farm families are hurting, my neighbours are 



December 16, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 251 

hurting. And what are you going to do about it? Absolutely 
nothing. 
 
Mr. Premier, will you provide the immediate cash assistance 
that the Saskatchewan Party’s calling for? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, this is what on 
December 7 . . . this is, Mr. Speaker, Hansard of this House, 
December 7, 1999, when the member from Kindersley was 
speaking and being very critical of the Minister of Agriculture 
from Ottawa for using the example of tough love — Mr. 
Vanclief did. 
 
And then the member opposite said I had an occasion to look up 
what “tough love” means, and it means, I’m reading from 
Hansard, quote: 
 

For parents troubled by the behaviour of their children of 
any age. For those with past, current, and anticipated 
problems concerning school, family, alcohol, drugs, or the 
law. 

 
Then he said this: 
 

Tough love was the message that we got . . . (from) our 
agriculture producers here in Saskatchewan, and . . . it was 
extremely disheartening. 
 

That’s what he said. And I agreed with him. And what did he 
say in 1993 about doing away with the Crow rate? It should 
have been done away with 20 years ago. And he said the 
farmers should accept it like a little tough love. It’s okay if it’s 
tough love under his definition, when they take money away 
from the farmers and not okay otherwise. 
 
These people have done more to destroy rural Saskatchewan 
than any other so-called Saskatchewan Party in history. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — And this is only Thursday. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the Premier asked the 
leaders to give him a road map for the future in agriculture. 
Isn’t that just like a man? He has to be lost for eight years 
before he asked for direction. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — The Premier wants everyone to visualize the 
future of farming 10 years from now. That’s a little like asking 
the people of the Titanic what they’re going to do when they get 
to New York. 
 
Mr. Premier, if you don’t do something now, there’s not going 
to be agriculture 10 years from now. Mr. Premier, you know the 
federal government needs to do more but so do you. What are 
you going to do to help farm families now? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the solution being 
advocated by the so-called Saskatchewan Party after having 
done away with the Crow rate of $350 million a year — a year 
— each and every year. Each and every year. And their request 
is that an amount of money, which just one month ago they 
themselves said the provincial government could not afford, 
which just one month ago, they said to the CBC reporters in 
these quotation marks, quote: 
 

Hermanson says the province should keep up the pressure 
on Ottawa, to keep up the pressure, to help the farmers and 
concentrate on giving everyone a tax break . . . 
 

The Speaker: — Order, order, please. Allow the answer to the 
question. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I am going to finish this 
quote. I know, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, please. We continue to use up 
some pretty valuable time in my having to intercede, and I 
would ask all members’ co-operation to please allow the 
question to be asked and the answer to be given. That’s 
respectful of one another. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker. The Leader of the 
so-called Saskatchewan Party a month ago said the following. 
He said . . . this is my answer, this is my answer to the member. 
This is what her leader said. 
 

The Saskatchewan treasury cannot deal . . . the 
Saskatchewan treasury cannot deal with the magnitude of 
the crisis of agriculture. 

 
Hermanson says: 
 

The province should keep up it’s pressure on Ottawa to 
help the farmers (and get this) and concentrate on giving 
everyone in Saskatchewan a tax break in the next budget 
(now a tax increase). 

 
Now they want to give a tax break, and they know that 
Saskatchewan can’t pay for it, and they say it’s Ottawa’s 
responsibility. My question to them is this: why have you 
abandoned the unified Saskatchewan position; why have you 
abandoned the family farms? 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Education. I repeat, the Minister 
of Education. 
 
Mr. Minister, first you abandoned the people that voted for you 
in the last election. Now you’ve joined in and abandoned the 
Saskatchewan farm families. 
 
Mr. Minister, if you won’t take action to lift some of the 
massive property tax burden, will you at least follow through on 
your own commitment to help farm families in crisis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here’s what the Minister promised to do for farm 
families just three short months ago. And I quote:  



252 Saskatchewan Hansard December 16, 1999 

Within two weeks of being elected, a Melenchuk Liberal 
government will pay out the provincial funds that are 
already committed to dealing with the farm crisis and get 
payments in the hand of farmers by October 15. 

 
October 15, Mr. Speaker. Today it’s December 16 and the 
former Liberal leader hasn’t done a single thing to this point. 
 
Mr. Minister, today the Saskatchewan Party called on your 
NDP government to provide $300 million in emergency 
assistance to farm families. Will you keep your word and join 
with us and support us in that call today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I say to the, to you, 
Mr. Speaker, and to the people of the province that we have a 
situation here today which I find absolutely, absolutely 
incredible. 
 
Here we are as farm organizations and individuals and political 
parties at a crucial point where the federal government, in it’s 
budget planning, is this close to making a decision to pay the 
farmers of Saskatchewan in order to make up an equalization 
subsidy as it would relate to trade. They’re this close and we’re 
on the track, I believe, to win as farmers. 
 
And these people, because of political reasons, can not stand 
that. And they undermine the process to the tune of 300 million, 
which will mean an increase in tax for every person of this 
province of $300 for a family of five, a mom and dad, and three 
kids; a tax increase of $1,500. That’s what they’ve given away 
today for political partisan purposes and you’re an 
embarrassment to the people of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. Order. 
Order. Order. 
 
I just want to or would like to remind all members and all our 
visitors that this is an enthusiastic day, and this is not the 
normal course of proceedings. And my thanks for all members, 
for their co-operation. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 11 — The Electronic Information 
and Documents Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, I want to proceed with 
the first reading of The Electronic Information and Documents 
Act, Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 11. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I would 
move a rule 46 emergency debate, on the crisis in agriculture 
that farm families are faced with here in this province. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — You have heard a request for leave to move a 
motion without notice under rule 46. Is leave granted? 
 
An Hon. Member: — I get a chance to explain it, Mr. Speaker; 
you get a chance to explain it, right? 
 
The Speaker: — I apologize. I would ask you to please outline 
the nature of the motion. 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 46 
 

Emergency Debate on Crisis in Agriculture 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s clear 
to farm families here in Saskatchewan that this NDP 
government has not a single, original thought in terms of 
agriculture and the direction of agriculture that agriculture 
should take here in this province. And for that reason, we 
propose an emergency debate on agriculture, to debate the very 
critical problem that the farmers of this province are faced with. 
 
Clearly, there is a need for help from the federal government. 
But the farm groups of this province also said, clearly there’s a 
need from the provincial government to respond as well. And 
that’s why, Mr. Speaker, we are moving the emergency motion, 
seconded by the member from Watrous: 
 

That this Assembly urges the provincial government to use 
its reserves in the liquor and gaming fund to provide an 
immediate trade equalization payment of $300 million to 
Saskatchewan farm families through a payment mechanism 
determined through consultation with the Saskatchewan 
Farm Coalition; and that the provincial government use 
this payment to assist in negotiating a $1 billion trade 
equalization payment from the federal government. 
 

I would move this as an emergency debate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1430) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the government will 
say no but I would like an opportunity to say, for just a brief 
outline, of why we would say no. 
 
The Speaker: — No. Under rule 46, there is not the option. 
There’s merely the option to ask the question if leave is granted 
to move the motion under rule 46 without . . . Leave is granted? 
Is leave granted? 
 
The Government House Leader is asking for leave to respond. 
 
Hon. members, you have heard under rule 46 . . . you have 
heard the request — order, please — you have heard the request 
for leave to move a motion without notice under rule 46. Is 
leave granted? 
 
Leave not granted. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, order, please. Is 
there . . . Order. Is there any other business before orders of the 
day? 



December 16, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 253 

MOTIONS 
 

Special Committee on Children’s Issues 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I would, by leave of 
the Assembly, I would move: 
 

That this Assembly authorizes the special committee 
appointed on December 13, 1999 to address and make 
recommendations on the issue of the abuse and 
exploitation of children through the sex trade and other 
matters. To elect two Co-Chairs rather than the Chair and 
the Vice-Chair to preside over the committee’s 
proceedings. 

 
I would move that, seconded by the member for Humboldt, Mr. 
Speaker, by leave of the Assembly. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, before 
orders of the day, I would ask, by leave of the Assembly, to 
move three motions of condolence which will be done 
separately. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

CONDOLENCES 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Just by way of explanation to the members of the House, today 
is a day of condolence to remember the contributions of three 
members. The member from Qu’Appelle, I believe it is, Mr. 
Douglas McFarlane, Qu’Appelle-Wolseley, the former Liberal 
minister of Agriculture in the Ross Thatcher government. I’ll 
move that momentarily. 
 
Secondly after we have our condolences there, the death of Mr. 
Gordon McNeill, the MLA of Meadow Lake recognizing his 
contribution to the Assembly. And then after that recognizing 
the contribution of a former member, Mr. William (Bill) 
Davies. 
 
I will move the motion with respect to Mr. McFarlane. I’d hope 
that the Leader of the Opposition would agree that the Leader of 
the Liberal Party second it. And then I’ll move the motion with 
respect to Mr. McNeill for you to second, and for you to second 
Mr. Davies, if that’s acceptable. Thank you very much for your 
co-operation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just want say a few brief words before I make 
the motion respecting Mr. Douglas McFarlane. Doug 
McFarlane was in the legislature as Minister of Agriculture in 
1967 when I first entered this House, in concert with a number 
of my colleagues who’d been here earlier than I was even 
already introduced to you today, Mr. Smishek and Mr. Snyder 
among others. 
 
The government of Ross Thatcher was, I think by all 
descriptions, a fair description, a government which was in 
many ways colourful and bombastic and for sure you knew 
where you stood on the positions taken by the Liberal premier 
of the day. 

Many controversial issues were on the table for us to discuss, 
some ranging all the way to national unity, the unfortunate 
incident of the FLQ (Front de Libération du Québec) crisis, to 
domestic issues, and, not surprisingly after a rather boisterous 
question period today, in that period too we had the very 
important issues surrounding agriculture. 
 
And in some ways the issues are reminiscent, in some ways 
they’re very different. Some of the similarities, the perpetual 
cyclical nature of large productions of grains, subsidizations, 
the lowering of grain prices, the increasing of high input costs, 
and the life of the farming community, and the hurt that is 
inflicted to individual farm families, it was in that atmosphere 
that we met in 1967, ’68, ’69. 
 
Mr. Thatcher, with whom we all had our differences, was, in 
my judgment, a very honourable individual. And as I say, you 
knew where you stood and if he made an agreement with you 
out of the House, it stuck. If he didn’t agree, that also stuck, and 
he certainly was very forceful. And one of his forceful positions 
was to find himself many times in opposition with the federal 
Liberal government of the day led as it was by the then Prime 
Minister Pierre Elliott Trudeau. 
 
In the agricultural crisis of that period, the hurt on family farms 
was every bit as great — perhaps not quite as great as it is 
today, the income being at the 1930s level — but it was very 
severe. And the Minister of Agriculture and Canadian Wheat 
Board at the time, a Member of Parliament from Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Otto Lang proposed, amongst other ideas, the notion of 
Operation LIFT (lower inventories for tomorrow). 
 
The idea was to remove from production farmland and that 
there should be payment to farmers for removing the farm 
production. It was a means, it was thought, of getting cash into 
the hands of farmers from the federal treasury, not the 
provincial treasury. It was a way of reducing the supplies in 
order to make sure that the supply and demand would equalize 
itself and prices would go up. 
 
Needless to say this was a very controversial matter. The 
farmers of this province then, and I dare say today, want to do 
what they do best. They want to grow their grains. They want to 
be involved in cattle. They want to be involved in 
diversification. And the notion somehow that they would be 
paid for not supplying food to the people of this nation or not 
paid for supplying food to the people of the world was foreign 
to them. 
 
And Mr. Doug McFarlane was in the unenviable position of 
being Minister of Agriculture in a provincial government where 
the federal government of the same stripe was going in one way 
and his government was going in another way in a highly 
charged, emotional political debate. 
 
I cite that example to remind all of us that in some ways it is 
strange and not so strange to see major issues coming back from 
the time to time, periodically, and with the solutions still 
perhaps in some ways not as close as we’d like to have them. 
 
I cite that example because the debate then was every bit as 
animated as it was today. In fact I would say the debate then 
was even more animated, and I say this of all of us if it’s 



254 Saskatchewan Hansard December 16, 1999 

thought critically, more elevated then because we were not 
benefited with the coverage by television or radio. What we had 
to do was convince our colleagues through the power of oratory 
and good arguments and ideological clash of debates. And 
when the word got out that Doug McFarlane was going to be 
speaking in the House on this issue or Ross Thatcher was going 
to speak in the House, everybody from the opposition came 
right away to hear what was being said. 
 
I remember Doug McFarlane as a true gentleman dedicated to 
interests of rural Saskatchewan. I remember Doug McFarlane as 
a person who handled this dichotomous position that I’ve 
described on Operation LIFT with grace under fire. 
 
I remember the person who had his first commitment to Canada 
and, equally very close, second commitment to Saskatchewan 
and Saskatchewan farmers and who tried to work with the 
opposition and succeeded in many areas, with us at that time in 
opposition, in trying to navigate the difficult circumstances of 
the occasion. 
 
So I say we had our partisan differences but by and large at that 
time we were able to put them aside in many regards to try to 
work to the benefit of the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Doug McFarlane was not bombastic. He was not what one 
might describe as an orator of a riveting and a compelling 
nature, but he was a person who provided reasoned thought. A 
person whose honesty and integrity and passionate commitment 
to farmers came through very, very clearly. And if you 
disagreed even with his position, you knew that he was coming 
from his heart and his mind from the point of view that we had 
to do the very best that we could as a nation to back up our 
family farms and our farm communities. 
 
He was interested in many issues; maintained an interest in 
public life right until the very latter period of his life, as I am 
told, interested in the issues of the province and the country. 
 
And I’ll close by saying as a personal reminiscence, he was the 
kind of a person and minister that you could talk to privately on 
individual concerns, rural concerns, any concern that a minister 
of a Crown might be able to help you out on, Doug McFarlane, 
was there. And if he couldn’t, he would tell you with reason and 
with civility and gentility why he could not so accomplish. 
 
He truly was an adornment to this Legislative Assembly and it 
is to be noted that he has made, in my judgement, an 
outstanding contribution to this Assembly and the people of 
Saskatchewan and Canada. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move, seconded by the 
Leader of the Liberal Party, the Minister of Education, by leave 
of the Assembly, the following motion: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of this Assembly and 
expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 
made to his community, his constituency, and to the 
province. 
 
Douglas Thomas McFarlane who passed on May 6, 1999 

was a Member of this Legislative Assembly from 1956 
until 1971, representing the constituency of 
Qu’Appelle-Wolseley for the Liberal Party. Mr. McFarlane 
was born on January 4, 1918 in Wolseley. He was raised 
on the family farm and received his schooling at 
Summerberry. 
 
In his private life, Mr. McFarlane was a farmer. He was 
introduced to that way of life by helping on his parent’s 
farm from a very early age. Later he established his own 
farm in the Peebles area with his wife, Frances Davidson. 
They were married on April 15, 1945 and had four sons. 
 
Douglas McFarlane was an active participant in the affairs 
of the communities in which he lived. He was a director of 
the Saskatchewan Farmers’ Union, a member of the 
Glenavon Board of Trade, and a chairman of both the local 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool committee and the agricultural 
improvement and conservation committee. His 
involvement with 4-H clubs began as a youth aggregate 
award winner for judging livestock and continued as an 
adult leader. 
 
With the outbreak of the Second World War, Mr. 
McFarlane joined the RCAF. He served in maintenance 
squadrons and achieved the rank of sergeant before his 
discharge in 1945. Later, Mr. McFarlane was a member of 
the Canadian Legion. In 1971, he was appointed to the War 
Veteran’s Appeal Board and served until his retirement in 
1983. He was presented with a Senior Officers’ Retirement 
certificate by the Governor General in recognition of his 
lengthy and dedicated service. 
 
Mr. McFarlane, as I say, was first elected to this Assembly 
in 1956 and successfully retained his seat in the following 
three elections. He was appointed to cabinet on May 22, 
1964 as Minister of Municipal Affairs. The following year, 
he assumed responsibility for Agriculture, a portfolio he 
held for the next six years, of which I’ve given my few 
reminiscences. 
 
In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 
this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy with 
members of the bereaved family. 

 
I so move, seconded by the Minister of Education. 
 
(1445) 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud 
and pleased to stand in the Assembly today to second the 
motion on condolences to Douglas Thomas McFarlane. 
 
As we sit here today in the twenty-fourth legislature, I would 
just like to reflect on a few things. 
 
Over the course of the 95-plus years of the history of this 
province, we have seen millions of people who have lived in the 
province of Saskatchewan but very few have had the 
opportunity to sit in the Legislative Assembly. And even fewer 
have had the opportunity to sit for several sessions through 
several legislatures, and Douglas Thomas McFarlane was one 
of these. 



December 16, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 255 

He grew up in a time when pioneers were breaking the land. He 
grew up in tough times in the 1930s, and he never left his 
community roots, and he never lost his social conscience. This 
was a man who was committed to his communities, to 
furthering the social agenda in the province of Saskatchewan, 
and who was passionate and civil in all his deliberations. 
 
Douglas Thomas McFarlane’s career in serving the people of 
Saskatchewan was inspired by the stories he had heard as a 
young boy from his parents and grandparents about Sir Wilfrid 
Laurier and William Ewart Gladstone. He was especially fond 
of Sir Wilfrid Laurier who, as you know, was the prime 
minister when many of the immigrants from Eastern Europe 
came to Saskatchewan and broke the land and pioneered this 
great province. Grandparents that we all share who brought this 
in. 
 
Mr. McFarlane was born in Wolseley, educated in 
Summerberry, and then moved to Peebles where he was active 
in his community affairs. When the Second World War broke 
out he joined the Armed Forces like many patriotic Canadians 
and became a sergeant in the Royal Canadian Air Force. When 
the war was winding down, he married Frances Davidson of 
North Battleford and became interested in pursuing politics as a 
way to better peoples’ lives. 
 
Mr. McFarlane was nominated as the Liberal candidate and 
elected in Qu’Appelle-Wolseley in 1956, was re-elected in 
1960, 1964, and 1967; retiring from politics in 1971. During his 
time in government, he was the minister of Municipal Affairs in 
1964 and the minister of Agriculture in 1965. 
 
Mr. McFarlane was an active participant in the lives of the 
communities in which he lived. He was a director of the 
Saskatchewan Farmers’ Union, a member of the Glenavon 
Board of Trade and Chairman of both the local Saskatchewan 
Wheat Pool committee and the agricultural improvement and 
conservation committee. His involvement with 4-H clubs began 
as a youth aggregate award winner for judging livestock and he 
continued this as an adult leader. 
 
In 1971, Mr. McFarlane was appointed to the War Veterans 
Appeal Board and moved to Ottawa. When the appeal board 
moved to Charlottetown, Prince Edward Island, he followed 
and made his home there where this became his final home. 
 
Upon his retirement in 1983, he moved to Winnipeg. Mr. 
McFarlane was presented with a Senior Officers’ Retirement 
certificate by Governor General Ed Schreyer in recognition of 
his long and excellent service, a fitting tribute to a man who 
dedicated his life to public service. 
 
I am pleased to second the condolence motion. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
pleasure to stand in this Assembly this afternoon and say a few 
words in recognition of the contribution that a former member 
has offered to this Assembly and to this province, and certainly 
to his family and his community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while I personally didn’t get to know Mr. 

McFarlane, Mr. McFarlane didn’t grow up all that far a distance 
from our community and the farm that I grew up on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in fact when Douglas McFarlane was representing 
this Assembly and was a member for Indian Head-Wolseley, I 
was just a high school student at that time. The member for our 
constituency representing Moosomin at the time was John 
Gardner. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s just the fact of having Mr. 
Gardner living not that far from us gave me a better 
understanding of the legislative process and the Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, I can remember listening to Mr. 
McFarlane as a minister in the cabinet of Mr. Thatcher. And 
certainly, Mr. Speaker, as we remember Mr. McFarlane today 
and pay recognition to his life, we want to remember the 
contribution he made in the area of agriculture specifically. 
 
And certainly it’s quite fitting that we are into a debate on 
agriculture, although I am certain that Mr. McFarlane himself 
and his family would prefer that we didn’t have the type of 
debate that we end up again in today, a debate that I’m sure he 
faced on many occasions as the minister of Agriculture in 
dealing with different situations and crises that faced the 
agricultural community of his day and, unfortunately, seem to 
just move on in cycles in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
We look at the life of Mr. McFarlane and we see his love for the 
agricultural community. I think it certainly is shown in the fact 
that he was a director of the Saskatchewan Farmers’ Union, a 
member of the Glenavon Board of Trade, and the chairman of 
both the local Saskatchewan Wheat Pool committee and the 
agricultural improvement conservation committee. 
 
And his involvement with 4-H clubs — something that I was 
involved with for a number of years in my younger years — 
speaks highly of his commitment not only to his province but 
his community. And when you look at the areas of his 
involvement, Mr. Speaker, I would suggest to you he did it out 
of his love for community, love for young people, because most 
of these committees that he sat on were volunteer organizations. 
And people don’t volunteer to do service and to do work in 
communities unless they have a real heart and a love and 
compassion for those areas and that commitment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s certainly fitting that we stand in this Assembly 
today and recognize the endeavours of a former member. While 
we stand here acknowledging that Mr. McFarlane has now left 
us, we certainly want to pay tribute to him for his commitment 
through the years he served his community and served this 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
And certainly as the member from Moosomin, now representing 
that area that he grew up in, the Peebles and the Summerberry 
area that has been added to the constituency of Moosomin. I 
want to extend to the family on behalf of myself as the member, 
and my colleagues, we extend our deepest sympathy to the 
family of Douglas Thomas McFarlane. And we trust that they 
will indeed find solace in the fact that they know that, and are 
aware of the fact that, their husband, and a father, and a 
grandfather, played a significant role, played a significant role, 
pardon me, in our community, in our province and I’m certain 
in their family. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 



256 Saskatchewan Hansard December 16, 1999 

Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I would move, by leave 
of the Assembly again, seconded by the Minister of Education, 
the Liberal leader, that the resolution just passed . . . I should 
ask for some advice from the Clerk. Do we have one motion for 
all three? Would you recommend that? Then I’ll stand up and 
pay tribute to the other deceased. Thank you Madam Clerk, for 
your advice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will move, seconded by the Deputy Leader of 
the Official Opposition a condolence motion respecting 
Gordon McNeill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Gordon McNeill was a former member of this 
Assembly. And I have to tell you that I, too, served with 
Gordon McNeill. There are many warm remembrances and 
stories, both political and non-political, that come flooding into 
my mind when I think about Gordon McNeill. 
 
But in trying to summarize what to me sticks out as the most 
important characteristic about this absolutely free-spirited, 
engaging, wonderful man, was his community with nature. The 
rhythms of nature. How we as human beings are but an 
important facet, but one facet only, of life out there. 
 
His love of the north country and his love of nature, his passion 
for fishing, living close to the outdoors, hunting, fishing, as I 
say, all of these exemplified a person who was plain speaking, 
understood that all of us live short, temporal periods before our 
time comes. And also spoke to, I think, his tremendous concern 
that — and understanding — that in a country and in a province 
like ours, which is so large territorially, and yet so small and yet 
in some ways geographically and from climate point of view is 
so challenged, I think it gave Gordon more perhaps than a lot of 
us, although . . . (inaudible) . . . those kinds of winners or losers 
of those choices. It certainly instilled, I’ll say it this way, in him 
the belief in co-operation. There’s just no way in this part of the 
world with climate and geography and anything else but that the 
model of co-operation has to work. 
 
Co-operation, and also with that the streak of individuality. I’ve 
often said on past occasions, and I think about this in terms of 
Gordon McNeill, we unlike the Americans, practice the notion 
of community and co-operation in concert with the notion of 
individual freedoms and liberties and entrepreneurial spirit. The 
Americans concentrate on the latter to the exclusion of the 
former. I’m not being critical of their society. But I think the 
fact that we’ve been able to juggle and neatly balance 
sometimes these competing values is a testament to who we are, 
where we are, but really is the explanation for the many great 
institutions and the many great programs that we’ve 
implemented in this province. That was Gordon McNeill. 
 
Gordon McNeill brought that passion and his beliefs of social 
democracy to this Assembly and to this province with unending 
enthusiasm — blunt talk. I remember visiting with him on 
several occasions, in non-political or non-business settings, and 
he was an easy guy to be with, a warm person to be with. 
 
I have one little story that I related to a few of my cabinet and 
caucus colleagues. When my late father-in-law was still alive 
and one of his relatives and myself we were asked by Gordon to 

come up to Loon Lake area to do some fishing. These were in 
the days when we were both in the House together and so my 
father-in-law, his relative, my relative, three of us go into the 
car, drove up to Loon Lake area, two boats. And boy the fishing 
was terrific even for a guy like me. They weren’t quite jumping 
in the boat, Mr. Speaker, but you could catch them very, very 
easily. 
 
And we were very mindful of the limits, I must tell everybody 
here, and the licensing provisions and the like, but toward the 
end of the day my father-in-law, who was on the second 
separate boat, and Gordon and I were in this particular boat, 
was bragging about the catch which he had. And he picked up, 
from the back of the boat on a chain, all of the fish which had 
been caught and been kept cold by the waters of that area, and 
was whooping it up — we were some distance away from him; 
we could hear him and see him — about this catch. “See how 
good it is?” he said. He turned around and all of a sudden, as if 
by some magical, mystical development, the chain just fell off 
and down went the fish and started to float and sinking as they 
desperately start to turn this boat around to try to rescue the 
catch. And we, of course, in the McNeill boat, decide we’re 
going to do the same thing. We have to help out right? 
Neighbours help out neighbours. And for sure, as a son-in-law 
to this particular father-in-law, I had to be there to help out so 
we gunned our boat to race to save the fish. In doing so, we lost 
our catch. 
 
And so now comes a great moral dilemma. Do you help your 
father-in-law out or do you go back and save your own catch? 
So . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . well, no the Minister of 
Economic and Co-operative Development says the father-in-law 
. . . we turned her off. We lost our catch; he lost his catch. It was 
the longest, most difficult ride back home that I’d ever 
experienced in my life with my father-in-law. 
 
But ever since that occasion, Gordon McNeill would pop by and 
present to Mike Boykowich — the father-in-law, Dr. Boykowich, 
now deceased — his catch, from time to time, of pickerel, 
reminisce about nature, life in the North. 
 
(1500) 
 
Any time I’d go up to speak there on behalf of my party or on 
official government business, he was there — even after he was no 
longer an MLA — interested, advocating the beauty of the area, 
advocating the preservation of the environment, making sure there 
was jobs and employment but making sure that we did so in such a 
way that our community and our pristine beauty of Saskatchewan 
was preserved. No pretense, no facades, no position — just an 
ordinary guy who through self-education, through experience, 
who with those rhythms of nature understood the importance of 
getting along with people and all living things and preserving 
them and bringing that perspective to this Legislative Assembly. 
 
Many such people in this House have brought those attributes or 
similar attributes. Gordon was born, along with a twin sister 
Gladys, on August 17, 1922 in Bateman, Saskatchewan, and he 
leaves to mourn him two brothers, John and Bob, and four 
sisters, Doris, Gladys, Mary, and Mavis; one sister-in-law, 
Marion, and many, many nieces and nephews all of whom 
loved him very dearly. 
 



December 16, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 257 

He was predeceased by his charming partner, Nickie, who I 
have fond memories of too; his parents, Walter and Lena; his 
brother, Leonard, and four brothers-in-law, Dave, Jake, Henry, 
and Emerys. 
 
Gordon McNeill grew up in Shamrock in the middle of a family 
of eight. In 1941 he joined the Royal Canadian Air Force taking 
his training in Moose Jaw and served until 1945. He later 
worked for Luis & Son Trucking firm and then the CNR 
(Canadian National Railway) in Saskatoon where he met with 
Nickie Smith whom he later married. They moved to Green 
Lake in 1959 and opened a tourist resort which he later sold. 
 
I didn’t know this until I did some further researching, or if I 
did, I’d forgotten about it if Gordon had told me, but he actually 
managed Lloyd Lake Lodge. And for whatever it’s worth — it’s 
a small world — but the current Premier of the province of 
Alberta, Ralph Klein, has on many occasions told me how 
much he admires Lloyd Lake and the surroundings there, and 
here I am talking about a person who was so instrumental in 
developing that area way back in 1966 and then later on 
managing the Stampede Hotel in Meadow Lake during the 
winter months. 
 
In 1970 he moved to Loon Lake, as I described the incident to 
you, managed the resort there for the Department of Indian 
Affairs until 1975 at which time he was elected an MLA 
representing the New Democratic Party for the Meadow Lake 
constituency on the government side of the House during the 
Blakeney years. 
 
He served for four years and was not re-elected but then 
continued working for Saskatchewan Mining and Development 
in La Ronge. In 1982 he managed the Pelican Narrows Resort, 
travelled to sports shows — by the way, he loved sports and 
athletics — promoting Saskatchewan tourism in winters. 
 
In 1983 he moved back to Loon Lake, worked for a resort there 
while semi-retired and was fortunate enough to have some 
pretty good winter months in Arizona with himself and his 
beloved wife and family. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are tough things to do sometimes. The next 
one’s going to be equally tough for me with Bill Davies, but I 
am reminded — I think it’s in the sentiment of the member 
from Cannington who just spoke before me — reminded about 
how privileged we are to be in this House. Really it’s a very 
small population of MLAs since 1905 and I think of the rich 
variety of background and character and experience and 
intelligence that each one of us brings, I hope. And while we 
clash in debate, at the end of the day there’s got to be something 
which motivates us and unites us — that is our determination to 
make this province and this country just a little bit better a place 
in which to live than when we found it, before having the trust 
of people to serve in this Chamber. 
 
And Gordon McNeill would be the opposite of the background 
of the late Doug McFarlane we talked about, but he would be 
similar because of those instincts and those goals and those 
visions that I’ve talked about. I viewed him as a personal friend 
and I’ve missed him out of politics, and for sure do now with 
his passing. 
 

So, Mr. Speaker, I move now, seconded by the Deputy Leader 
of the Official Opposition, the member from Canora-Pelly, by 
leave of the Assembly: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of this Assembly and 
expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 
made to his community, his constituency, and to the 
province. 
 
Gordon James McNeill, who passed away on July 14, 
1999 was a member of this Legislative Assembly from 
1975 until 1978, representing the constituency of Meadow 
Lake for the New Democratic Party. Mr. McNeill was 
born, as I’ve said, in Bateman, Saskatchewan on August 
17, 1922. He was raised in Shamrock and later married 
Henrietta Elizabeth, or as we called her, Nickie Smith. 
 
Throughout his life Mr. McNeill had a great love for the 
outdoors. This in turn influenced where he chose to live 
and how he made his living. In 1959 Mr. McNeill moved 
to the North and opened a tourist resort at Green Lake. In 
later years he managed the Lloyd Lake Lodge, which I’ve 
alluded to, the Loon Lake resort, and the Pelican Narrows 
resort. During the winter seasons Mr. McNeill kept busy 
managing the Stampede Hotel in Meadow Lake for several 
years, and then later promoting Saskatchewan tourism at 
sport shows. 
 
Mr. McNeill served his fellow citizens in other capacities 
as well. He served his country from 1941 until 1945 in the 
Royal Canadian Air Force. He served his province as a 
civil servant for the Department of Indian Affairs and later 
worked for Saskatchewan Mining and Development 
Corporation. Mr. McNeill began his working life in his 
local community, working with the Luis and Son Trucking 
firm and the Canadian National Railway in Saskatoon. 
 
In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 
this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy with 
members of the bereaved family. 
 

I so move, seconded by the Deputy Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it is indeed an honour to stand on behalf of the official 
opposition, the Saskatchewan Party, and join with the Premier 
in seconding the motion of condolence. 
 
The Premier is so accurate when he talks about the fact that 
over a period of time there have been a number of MLAs who 
have been recognized in this House who have passed on. And 
that’s one thing that we must all recognize: is that some day 
each and every one of us will be recognized by the premier of 
the day. 
 
And when we listen to the accomplishments and the 
contributions of people who have come before me, people who 
I have not met, we have to sit back and recognize that these 
were individuals who gave of their time, gave of their families, 
and tried to make Saskatchewan a better place. And I think 



258 Saskatchewan Hansard December 16, 1999 

that’s what every one of us is here to do as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the official opposition, I want to 
express the sympathies of the official opposition to all members 
of the bereaved family. And I want to indicate as well that my 
colleague from the Shellbrook-Spiritwood constituency, who of 
course is a lot closer to the Meadow Lake constituency than I 
am, will be making further comments on behalf of the official 
opposition. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First of all I, 
like many others, considered him a friend and an adviser and a 
mentor. 
 
Gordon McNeill and I had many, many things in common. 
Before I was elected in 1991, Gordon was of course the last 
New Democrat MLA from the constituency of Meadow Lake. 
Gordon, like myself, had a twin sister. Also, Gordon came from 
a large family, as I do. And Gordon, like myself, loved hunting 
and fishing and of course loved politics. 
 
After he left politics formally in 1978, he continued to remain 
extremely active in our constituency. Gordon helped our 
constituency association right up until his passing in July. At 
virtually every public event in Meadow Lake that the Meadow 
Lake New Democrats held, Gordon actually did our financial 
appeal. It was an automatic given if you will. 
 
I’ve often wondered how much money Gordon raised for our 
Meadow Lake constituency over the years and I’m sure it was, 
in his countless financial appeals, I’m sure it was very much for 
which all of us will be eternally grateful. 
 
I just want to make reference to the most recent financial appeal 
he actually did which was at my nomination this past spring in 
March in Dorintosh in which the Minister of Environment and 
Resource Management was also in attendance and we had a 
wonderful time that evening visiting with Gordon there. 
 
I want to reflect back just a little bit. Gordon as a . . . when he 
was younger, certainly would include myself when I was 
considerably younger, came around travelling as the politicians 
did, it seemed to me more often in visiting every single 
household in the community. I remember him stopping at the 
farm at our place soliciting my and my family’s support. In fact 
that was the first election that I was ever able to vote in, any 
election I was able to vote in, provincial or federal, was an 
election when I got to vote for Gordon. 
 
We always encouraged Gordon and told him that he didn’t have 
to spend a lot of time at our farm site because he had our 
support. But if you knew what Gordon was like he always loved 
to stop and spend time and visit. 
 
I want to speak briefly about Gordon’s relationship with the 
Aboriginal community. Over the years Gordon earned a 
tremendous amount of respect and admiration from the 
Aboriginal community, probably more especially First Nations, 
but the Aboriginal community in general as well. 
 
As the Premier had alluded to, Gordon loved the North and one 
of the things that Gordon did is, also as the Premier said, he ran 
a number of the different stores and resorts. And one of the 

most recent stores and resort that he ran was the one at Makwa. 
And I remember often stopping by to say hi to Gordon. And the 
young children from the reserve were in and around the store all 
the time. And I sometimes wonder how the store ever turned a 
profit because Gordon was always behind the counter handing 
out candies to the children and stuff without any hesitation at 
all. 
 
And I remember often as well going into Loon Lake to the 
different restaurants. You would often see Gordon with a young 
Aboriginal person buying them a meal and just sitting and 
visiting with them. He truly was a remarkable person in that 
regard. 
 
Also I fondly remember Nickie, who . . . we referred to her as 
Nickie anyway, who predeceased Gordon. How they always 
made their house and home so welcome to all of us and I think 
Gordon never really fully recovered from Nickie’s passing. 
They were simply a unit and there was no question of that. 
 
The thing I remember about Nickie, in speaking of Gordon and 
Nickie together, was the treats that she always provided for us 
every time we stopped there, and often we held constituency 
executive meetings where there were 15 or 20 people in 
attendance. Nickie always had the trays of food there and it was 
just so wonderful, and it is unfortunate now as well that we 
have lost a location for executive meetings in Loon Lake. 
 
I also want to speak briefly about his . . . the times, or I should 
say that they’re . . . about the number of times that Gordon — 
and the different places — that Gordon spent travelling around 
in the constituency. I often wondered over even the last few 
years whether Gordon was still contemplating running against 
me. It seemed as if every public event that I was at Gordon was 
there also and he started to make me nervous. Anyway Gordon 
was just that kind of individual. He would attend every single 
event that he could possibly go to largely because he simply 
loved the people. 
 
I want to speak also briefly about Gordon’s support for the 
Royal Canadian Legion. His support was absolutely legendary. 
He rarely missed a meeting. You could often find Gordon in the 
Legion simply visiting and having a drink with friends, and he 
was always one of the key organizers on November 11th, 
Remembrance Day. And I know all of his colleagues and 
friends in the Legion will miss him terribly. 
 
As his successor, as an NDP MLA for the constituency, I think 
Gordon felt it his, not only his right, but his duty to provide 
special direction and advice to me. And I do want to say to his 
family who will read this in the transcripts later that I found that 
advice and direction absolutely invaluable. We didn’t always 
agree but most often we did, and he really provided an 
extremely, I should say, down-to-earth perspective on the issue 
that he might be speaking to me about and for that I will be 
eternally grateful. 
 
(1515) 
 
And I guess I want to say if the overflowing crowd at the 
funeral on the day that they buried Gordon was any indication, 
he truly did have many, many friends. The recreation centre was 
absolutely packed. 



December 16, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 259 

The Premier talked about how Gordon advocated the North and 
the area and I want to share with you a slightly humorous story 
that Gordon often told. And I might well, I might well and 
probably properly use the Premier in this story. It was . . . he 
used to tell the story of how he and one of his colleagues . . . 
and as I say I’ll use the Premier in this case. He took the 
Premier from Regina on a trip up to Loon Lake. 
 
And on their way up they stopped in Saskatoon. And in 
Saskatoon they went into a restaurant and into one of the back 
offices where Gordon said he wanted to show the Premier 
something. 
 
And when they went into the backroom there were three . . . 
there were a number of phones there, but one of them was a 
bright red colour. And the Premier asked Gordon, what is that 
phone there, that bright red phone? And the . . . Gordon, I 
should say, said well, that phone, it’s a special phone. That 
phone you pay $500 a minute for a call there — this is well 
before deregulation, Mr. Speaker — but you pay $500 a minute 
and you can call to God from there. And our Premier at that 
time was pretty impressed with that. He didn’t realize that you 
could call to God directly. 
 
But they continued on their way and stopped in North 
Battleford. And Gordon said to the Premier as well, he says, I 
want to show you again now something similar to that here in 
North Battleford. And they went into an office and there were a 
bank of phones there and again a red coloured phone. And the 
Premier asked Gordon, what is that bright red phone there for? 
And he says, well, that’s the same thing. He says, you can use 
that phone to call to God. But he said, it’s a $100, a $100 to call 
from here. And again the Premier was quite impressed that you 
could actually call to God but still $100 was an awful lot. 
 
And when they got to Loon Lake, Mr. Speaker, Gordon took 
him into his house and again there was a red coloured phone in 
Gordon’s own house. And the Premier said, what is that red 
phone for this time, being a bit wary by now. And Gordon said 
well that’s . . . you can call to God as well from here. But he 
said, he says it only costs you 25 cents here. And the Premier 
said, why is that? He said, well of course, he says, you’re in 
God’s country, he says, it’s a local call up here. 
 
So I think, Mr. Speaker, even where I believe Gordon is now, I 
think he doesn’t even have to take that 25 cents out of his 
pocket. I suspect he can speak to God directly from where he is 
now. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I speak not only on behalf of New Democrats 
that knew Gordon but also on behalf of his many friends and 
neighbours, acquaintances of all political stripes, when I say 
that those of us that were fortunate enough to have had our lives 
touched in some way by Gordon will miss his guidance, his wit, 
and his words of wisdom. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
I did not know Gordon James McNeill very good. I had one 
brief acquaintance with him and that’s when he ran the lodge at 

Green Lake. We were up there fishing and we ran into him. 
And as the members opposite said, that he was a very, very nice 
man. He enjoyed fishing, enjoyed hunting, and he was a great 
lover of the outdoors. 
 
And so, by me going on to telling much about him, I really 
don’t know. All I just want to say is, on behalf of this Assembly 
here, I wish my . . . or say my condolences to his family and 
loved ones. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I knew Mr. 
McNeill probably in a different capacity than most people here. 
In fact, I was in Loon Lake before Mr. McNeill was because I 
was born and raised there. 
 
When he moved there, I was approximately seven or eight years 
old and got to meet him as he came to our family home. As a 
good New Democrat, my father was a good New Democrat as 
my mother was. He was quite a large, tall man when I was 
seven or eight years old. I was quite surprised when I met him 
as an adult that he isn’t all that tall, or wasn’t all that tall. 
 
And I was one of those children that he gave gifts to. In fact I 
remember when he was working with SMDC (Saskatchewan 
Mining Development Corporation), he made sure to bring each 
one of us a pack of playing cards. And I still have those cards. I 
never did use them, but as sort of a keepsake because he was 
the MLA for the area. He was someone of quite great stature to 
a young person. 
 
As well, there was a business relationship between Mr. McNeill 
and myself because for many years I was his paper boy. And as 
a paper boy, you have a unique perspective on a lot of people. 
You see the person how they treat you as an insignificant 
newspaper person and you see how they treat other people 
uptown or on television or in different places. 
 
And one of the nice things about Mr. McNeill and Mrs. McNeill 
was that they treated everybody the same way no matter who 
you were. And from before he became an MLA, when he was a 
MLA, after he was a MLA, he treated you the same. And he 
acted the same way to everybody. And I guess it’s the old 
saying, that he’s comfortable in his skin and he can walk with 
kings or paupers and is comfortable in any crowd. 
 
Which goes to the next point of his dealings with Aboriginal 
and First Nations people. In coming from Loon Lake it seems 
one of the keen skills that Aboriginal people have is they can 
see right through you to the spirit of the person and they know 
whether you’re phoney or not. And he always had a very good 
relationship with everybody as well as Aboriginal and First 
Nations people. 
 
One of Mr. McNeill’s disciples was Doug Anguish who was a 
former MLA and cabinet minister and a Member of Parliament 
here. Doug Anguish started working at the Loon Lake Lodge, 
just as a labourer; had no interest or expertise in politics in any 
way. But, after many years of working with Mr. McNeill, 
suddenly he developed an interest in politics, democratic 
socialism, social democracy, and he was basically recruited and 
encouraged and supported and got going into politics, all 
because of Mr. McNeill. 
 



260 Saskatchewan Hansard December 16, 1999 

So, you can credit Mr. McNeill, or blame Mr. McNeill, 
whichever side of the House you happen to be on. Credit, 
credit. 
 
But as much as I liked Mr. McNeill, my favourite McNeill was 
Nickie McNeill because she always had a twinkle in her eye. 
She was always as kind as Mr. McNeill was. She was even 
kinder, and I think she was actually the one responsible for the 
Christmas gifts every year. As a paper boy, that’s very 
important, so I’d advise all those out there in support of 
newspaper carriers, paper boys and girls everywhere. 
 
I guess the final thing that I wanted to mention is an indicator of 
a person’s character is how they help those who are not in any 
position to be able to help the original person. And Gordon and 
Nickie McNeill were those kind of people. They helped 
countless people, in so many different ways, without any 
expectations for any kind of reward or compensation. 
 
So, from my perspective, as someone born and raised in Loon 
Lake, I would like to join in the condolences here and express 
my sympathies to the McNeill family. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s now my 
duty to rise to speak on behalf of a motion of condolence to the 
family of Mr. William Gwynne Davies. Although, I must say, 
that today in the House we have three people who could do a 
much better job than I — Walter Smishek and Gordon Snyder, 
Hub Elkin — who knew Bill much better than I. But the task is 
such that I should give it a try and I’m going to give it my best 
shot. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had the privilege to serve in this House with Bill 
Davies. His last term here was my first term here — 1967 to 
1971. And Bill and I were seatmates during the latter part of 
that first term. I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, for a brand new 
rookie MLA like myself it was really quite a thrill. It was like 
being called up for the first game in the NHL (National Hockey 
League) and finding out that you’re on the same line with 
Gordie Howe, the same line as Gordie Howe. 
 
It is customary on these occasions to speak about the 
contributions, the accomplishments, and the achievements that 
made up an exemplary life of service, and certainly Bill Davies 
made those contributions, had those accomplishments, and 
enjoyed many of those achievements. 
 
But I’d like to begin, Mr. Speaker, by talking about something 
different — poetry. Because, you see, in addition to all of his 
other roles as an advocate for working men and women, as a 
politician and as a legislator, as a husband and a father, Bill 
Davies was a poet. In fact, he published a book of poetry — I 
have a copy of it here — called The Buffalo Stone; Poems by 
William G. Davies, published in 1997. 
 
And Bill wrote about our beautiful province and its natural 
wonders. In his poem, “Song of Saskatchewan,” he set a scene 
in words. And I want to take the liberty to quote his words, the 
poetry of Bill Davies. “Song of Saskatchewan” went like this, 

quote: 
 

I’ll sing of broad plains and I’ll sing 
of wide skies, 
. . . I’ll sing you a song of Saskatchewan — 
Boundless and free! 
I’ll tell you of hills rolling infinitely, 
Waving wheatland in our prairie sea; 
. . . I’ll sing you in praise of a symbol to me — 
Close to my heart; 
And what could this be, but the people you see 
Who live in Saskatchewan! 
 

In many of his poems, Bill set these kinds of lovely, vivid 
scenes of our beloved — his beloved — province and in 
particular of the hills and valleys around his Moose Jaw home; 
land he loved to feel beneath his feet on the long walks he 
enjoyed so well; the land, although he was of a labouring 
background, that he shared with people on farm families and the 
farming community. Lovely, vivid, poetic scenes. 
 
And yet the poet, Wallace Stevens, said of poetry the following, 
quote: 
 

The subject matter of poetry is . . . the life that is lived in 
the scene that it composes; so reality is not . . . (the) scene 
but the life that is lived in it. 

 
If you stop to think about that, that is probably a very accurate 
description of the essence of poetry. In any event, it’s certainly 
something that describes Bill Davies. He lived a life in the 
Saskatchewan scene, and what a life. 
 
In Bill’s poem “The Buffalo Stone” for which his book of 
poetry is titled, he writes about a huge block of glacial granite. 
In it he wonders, amongst other things, the following, quote: 
 

How immense a history 
It has known; (referring to this granite) 
In a vast and overwhelming, 
Changeful, titanic, and truly stupendous time; 
It has been part of; over such tumultuous 
Periods, events, and movements. 

 
I just want to read that again. He asks himself about an 
inanimate object, the granite: 
 

How immense a history 
It has known; 
In a vast and overwhelming, 
Changeful, titanic, and truly stupendous time; 
It has been part of; over such tumultuous 
Periods, events, and movements. 

 
(1530) 
 
You know that is an exhibition of an approach and philosophy 
to life and a passage which reveals an intellectual’s thinking 
about he or her position in the short scheme of life and the 
position of nature, the planet, the constellation — it is a very, 
very universal contemplative question. 
 
I would say that in many ways that passage could be also a 



December 16, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 261 

passage that talks about the life of Bill Davies. A strong and 
solid presence in a, quote: “changeful, titanic . . . time . . . of 
tumultuous . . . events and movements.” And I’ll elaborate upon 
that in a moment. 
 
As many of you will know — perhaps many of you will not 
know — Bill dedicated his life to many causes but I would 
argue primarily — notably, I’ll put it that way — to ordinary, 
working people and their plight. And he was a reasoned and 
powerful and dedicated and unmoving, almost like that granite, 
voice and fighter for them throughout his life. True to his 
beliefs and principles. 
 
He was a working man himself. A packer in the Swift plant in 
Moose Jaw. In his words, “keeping pace with the chain, the 
same allotted job on each dead beast.” Working from dark to 
dark, not seeing the sun for half a year. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, in this book of poetry, I described about 
Bill Davies’s capacity, God-given gift to describe the beauty of 
our Saskatchewan. But this gift, to talk of the tumultuous 
events, extended to the real issues which were as much a 
passion and a reason for the man’s being as the poetry was in 
describing the beauty of the place. 
 
He wrote one poem called “When I was a Packinghouse 
‘Wage-Slave’.” I wondered whether to read a portion of it 
because, on a moment of this occasion, I thought maybe this 
wasn’t quite the place. But then, no, this was the era in which 
Bill Davies as a fighter for workers’ causes and issues lived. 
 
And I’ll just read you the last paragraph. I’ve alluded to it 
already: “When I was a Packinghouse ‘Wage-Slave’.” He wrote 
this: 
 

So thus it was for me for 20 years 
 
Describing the hardships, and boy, there were hardships. Grim, 
dark places of work. Employer surveillances. No freedoms. But 
returning to his words: 
 

So thus it was with me for 20 years, 
Never to see the sun for half or more 
Of each long annual span; 
And to labour six days of every seven 
Within that wearing, searing time. 
Thus it was for all of us, 
Until we said “an end to all of this,” 
Then took our courage in our hands, 
Found in unity was our strength indeed, 
To break the rope which bound us 
To that sorry life 
And burst from darkness into light. 
And burst from darkness into light. 

 
When I was a Packinghouse “Wage-slave.” 

 
He writes in effect that when you take courage in your own 
hands, when you find unity, you have strength indeed. Strength 
in unity. 
 
Bill Davies fought for that unity his entire life. He fought for 
ordinary working men and women across this province for his 

entire life, even in this book of poetry, 1997, which will live 
these words for a long, long time. 
 
He was a union man, he was a working man, and he was proud 
of it. And when I sat beside him and you could pick up stories 
and experiences about this, I could relate to this because my dad 
was a union man and a working man, and proud of it. Bill 
Davies was a union man, the packing house workers as we used 
to call them in those days or they called themselves that, now 
the United Food and Commercial Workers. 
 
Boy, those were tough days, the organization fights with the big 
packing plants. The political attacks were difficult. The political 
attacks ranged from name-calling to legal challenges to the 
struggle surrounding just that ability to be able to have five 
working days as opposed to six out of seven, of decent 
conditions, to be treated with respect. 
 
He was a union man. He was a packing house worker. They 
were tough. In 1967 to ’71 I was in opposition, but in those 
days we sat, Mr. Speaker, for about six weeks. That was the 
extent of the legislature and then we did MLA work, but we 
also did our farming work, our union work, or in my case, I was 
a young lawyer. And I was . . . and I’m very proud to say, 
associated with what I consider still probably has been one of 
the outstanding trade union labour lawyers this province has 
ever produced and probably in the country, George Taylor. 
 
George Taylor was tough, and dedicated, and principled, and 
always fought for the working person. So one day George gave 
me the case to handle the certification application before 
Labour Relations Board involving the packing house workers 
who were seeking to be certified over a group of workers who 
were, if my memory serves me correctly, cement bricklayers by 
every description of work that I could see. 
 
And I remember whispering to Bill. I said Bill, how do I do 
this? How do I convince the Saskatchewan Labour Relations 
Board that these cement workers fall under the jurisdiction of 
the packing house workers? And Bill leaned over and 
whispered into my ear, Roy, they eat meat don’t they? And we 
went before the Labour Relations Board, Mr. Taylor and I. I 
can’t remember the outcome. 
 
He was a union man. He was a packing house worker, and 
eventually rose to be executive secretary of the Saskatchewan 
Federation of Labour for some 24 years. 
 
By the way, one of our distinguished guests, Walter Smishek, 
same position, executive secretary of the Saskatchewan 
Federation of Labour, a union man, a working man; Gordon 
Snyder, union man, a working man — always faithful and true 
to their principles. 
 
For 24 years Bill Davies was executive secretary to the SFL 
(Saskatchewan Federation of Labour). In addition, he 
represented working people in other ways — on two wartime 
boards as an advocate for working people before countless of 
other bodies, including the Saskatchewan Labour Relations 
Board that I’ve described, for 12 years; working for the 
Canadian Labour Congress in various committees there, 
speaking out in defence of free collective bargaining. 
 



262 Saskatchewan Hansard December 16, 1999 

I want to just stop here, Mr. Speaker. I spoke in words of tribute 
to Mr. McFarlane, a few words about the Thatcher years. And 
these were as I described, tumultuous and exciting years; you 
knew where you stood. 
 
In 1967, after the re-election of the Liberal government, they 
introduced a Bill called Bill 2. Bill 2, in effect, empowered the 
cabinet by order in council — by order in council — to stop any 
labour dispute or strike by simple order in council in a whole 
wide area of trade union relations without even coming back to 
the House, without having to justify the actions and the public 
interest as is from time to time, unfortunately, the necessary 
case. 
 
That was my initiation, part of my initiation. We came out 
swinging against Bill 2 — Bill Davies, Walter Smishek, Gordon 
Snyder led that charge. And Bill was there. And he helped by 
founding the Saskatchewan Occupational Group Council, and I 
could go on. A strong and clear voice. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, there was something else which was very 
important about Bill Davies. In fighting with a strong and clear 
voice, he seldom raised his voice, seldom yelled and raised his 
voice. He always comported himself with dignity and respect, 
earning himself a full measure of the same in return, even from 
those who might have disagreed with his positions. I think 
that’s a lesson for all of us. 
 
He then moved on to the public arena serving the people of 
Moose Jaw as an alderman, and then as an MLA from 1956 to 
1971, serving the people of this province as minister of Public 
Works and minister of Public Health under two premiers — 
Woodrow Lloyd and Tommy Douglas. Bill held the latter 
position of minister of Public Health during the Lloyd years, or 
I’ll call them the Douglas-Lloyd years, at a tumultuous time — 
remember my reference to the granite — tumultuous time in our 
history, the doctor’s strike when medicare was being 
implemented in 1961-62. 
 
Boy, what a tough time it was. I wasn’t in the employ of the 
government; I was just a young student who decided that 
whatever I could do from Saskatoon, I’d come down to Regina 
and help out in this campaign. It turned out that my contribution 
was mainly carrying the briefcase for Al Blakeney or for Walter 
Smishek or for Bill Davies — but there I was. 
 
They used to have press conferences, Mr. Speaker, about 
medicare where there would be over 100 or more journalists 
from the entire world in room 218 twice a day, because of the 
battle in North America on medicare. The threats on the lives of 
people on the government side. The toll that it took on 
Woodrow Lloyd who not nearly gets the degree of credit that he 
should politically in having implemented and seeing the day 
through finally at that occasion. But there they were, and there 
was Bill Davies as minister of Public Health. 
 
And then when it was his turn to serve in opposition, true to his 
principles we had the fight on Bill 2 that I talked about, but 
there’s another battle. The Liberal government of the day 
introduced something called utilization fees, which of course 
the public knew immediately were deterrent fees. The proposal 
was that for every visit to a doctor you’d pay $2.50 out of your 
own pocket, for every day that you were in hospital you’d pay 

$2.50 a day in hospital. This was an attack on the principles of 
universally funded, comprehensive medicare without a doubt. 
And that was also between 1967 and 1971. 
 
And with my friends and colleagues at the back, I remember 
how Bill Davies — being the former minister of Health — all 
of us who were part of that team at the time, Woodrow, that was 
one of the first or second filibusters that I was involved in. It 
was about three weeks, every letter we could get a hold of to 
read — I mean three weeks is nothing compared to some of the 
filibusters we’ve had in recent years in this House — but every 
letter that we could get a hold of we read and prolonged the 
debate on deterrent fees, opposing them. 
 
And do you know something? We did not succeed in that fight 
on that occasion because the government’s majority prevailed. 
We lost that battle; but in 1971, we won the war and 
immediately repealed Bill 2 and immediately repealed the 
deterrent fees of the administration restoring free collective 
bargaining and restoring the principles of medicare to the 
province of Saskatchewan. I’m proud to have been there with 
Bill Davies. I’m proud to have been there as part of that battle 
at that time. 
 
I’ve said this earlier; I’ll repeat it again. It’s been my privilege 
throughout my career in public life to have served with great 
people on all sides of this House — both sides of the House — 
interesting people. But I can say that I’ve met few people in this 
House and outside of it like Bill Davies and his commitment to 
principles and his intellectual gifts. 
 
When Sir Francis Bacon said, quote, “reading maketh a full 
man” he might well have been describing Bill Davies because 
Bill Davies was a voracious reader. He loved literature, 
biographies, history — the making of a full man. And friends 
will tell you when you visited Bill, you could count on leaving 
his place with a book or two. 
 
All of that reading shaped a person whose lack of formal 
advanced education, Mr. Speaker, did not prevent him from 
becoming a true man of letters through his poetry, through his 
words, and his demeanour — a true man of letters. He was 
informed. He was extremely articulate in his measured 
reasonable way, not just on the issues of the day politically but 
on wide-ranging interests such as archaeology, Aboriginal 
history and culture, and the history of this great province. 
 
(1545) 
 
And perhaps most important of all, Mr. Speaker, Bill Davies 
combined his passion for intellectual pursuits with an even 
greater passion for people — again I repeat — especially for the 
working men and women to whom he devoted his entire life. 
 
After leaving this House, Bill Davies kept on giving and kept 
on serving as a member of the Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation Board, on the rural municipal board of reference, 
on the Saskatchewan judicial council, and on many other causes 
and concerns too numerous to mention. 
 
And in gratitude, and appropriately so, the University of 
Saskatchewan bestowed upon Bill Davies an honorary doctorate 
of laws degree; and the nation presented him with our highest 



December 16, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 263 

award, an Order of Canada — well deserved. 
 
And before closing I want to say a word of special thanks to his 
partner Theresa, Mrs. Davies. We all know the toll that public 
life takes on those with whom we are associated. She was a 
companion of strength, of support, solace, just a strong 
individual in her own right — a very lovely person. I think we 
owe her a great deal of gratitude, and the family, for giving us 
Bill. 
 
In a few moments, Mr. Speaker, during the formal reading of 
the motion of condolence, I shall be privileged to read into the 
record the formal details of his commitment to ordinary people. 
But now I would like to close these remarks by again coming 
back to the theme that I began with — poetry — by quoting the 
poet Wallace Stevens who noted the following: “A poem should 
be part of one’s sense of life.” 

 
As a poet, a scholar, a working man, a leader, a legislator, a 
public servant, a colleague, a friend, a husband, and a father, 
Bill Davies truly did have a full and boundless sense of life, and 
as a result lived a life that was truly worthy of his art. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I move by leave of the Assembly, seconded 
by the Deputy Opposition Leader: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of this Assembly and expresses 
its grateful appreciation of the contribution he made to his 
community, his constituency, and to the province. 
 
William Gwynne (Bill) Davies, who passed away on 
November 9, 1999, was a member of this Legislative 
Assembly from 1956 until 1971, representing the 
constituencies of Moose Jaw City and later Moose Jaw 
South. Mr. Davies was born in Indian Head in 1916 and lived 
there until 1923, when his family moved to Regina. He 
received his schooling at local elementary and secondary 
schools in Regina. Mr. Davies was predeceased by his first 
wife, Rose, but is survived by their four children and his 
second wife, Theresa. 
 
Mr. Davies was known for his dedicated and lengthy 
involvement with many labour organizations. He was often 
chosen as the representative of labour on a variety of boards. 
He was a member of two federal wartime boards, the 
provincial Labour Relations Board and the Canadian 
Labour Congress. He was a founding member of the 
Saskatchewan Occupational Group Council. Mr. Davies 
served over 24 years as the executive director of the 
Saskatchewan Federation of Labour, as I’ve already noted. 

 
Mr. Davies’ interests were not limited to the labour field. 
He was on the Saskatchewan Arts Board and on the 
Saskatchewan Educational Council. He supported the 
development of a provincial and local Centre Authority 
and advocated for a similar development in the Moose Jaw 
River valley. 

 
Mr. Davies was chosen to represent his city at both the 
municipal and provincial levels of government. He was 
chosen as an alderman for the city of Moose Jaw in 1949 
and served in that capacity until 1956. In that year he 

became a 15-year tenure member of this Assembly. He 
served in the cabinets of two premiers, holding the 
portfolios of Public Works and Public Health. His tenure as 
minister of Health from 1961 to 1962 coincided with the 
debate and implementation of medicare. 

 
In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 
this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy with 
members of the bereaved family. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I so move. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’m honoured to second the condolence motion for 
William Gwynne Davies. I would like to express, on behalf of 
the official opposition, our sincere sympathies to all members 
of the Davies family. 
 
I want to recognize Mr. Davies’ contributions to Saskatchewan, 
but especially I want to recognize his contributions here in the 
House as a member of this legislature for parts of three decades. 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that that’s an achievement each and every 
one of us would be proud to have. 
 
I am pleased to join the Premier in recognizing the 
accomplishments of this individual. And additional information 
and additional comments from the opposition, Mr. Speaker, will 
be made by my colleague, the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
constituents of Thunder Creek, I wish to add a tribute to the late 
Bill Davies. 
 
My constituency of Thunder Creek surrounds Moose Jaw and 
we have many ties to the city. 
 
I didn’t personally know Mr. Davies but many of the people of 
Moose Jaw and in my own constituency that I speak with did 
know him and many, many more who didn’t have the 
opportunity to meet the man know of his great achievements. 
 
Among other things, Mr. Bill Davies, was known for his 
lengthy involvement with organized labour. Mr. Davies was 
involved with the Saskatchewan Arts Board, Saskatchewan 
Educational Council, and was a member of this Assembly from 
1956 until 1971. During his tenure in this Assembly, he served 
as minister of Public Works and was minister of Public Health 
during the great medicare debate. 
 
These are just some of the ways that Bill Davies left his 
personal mark on the history of our province and indeed our 
country. 
 
Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I add my 
tribute to Bill Davies and my sincere sympathy to his family, to 
those tributes and condolences expressed by members from 
both sides of this Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, I stand here today to pay tribute 



264 Saskatchewan Hansard December 16, 1999 

to a man whose life was quietly dedicated to the people of 
Saskatchewan, William G. Davies. 
 
Mr. Davies served as an alderman in Moose Jaw from 1949 to 
1956; and he was elected as an MLA for the Moose Jaw City 
constituency in 1956. He served as a MLA until 1971. Mr. 
Davies was notably the minister of Health in 1961-62 during 
the turbulent period when the province made history by 
introducing medicare. 
 
Mr. Davies was also interested in the development of the 
provincial and local park system. He was the key figure in 
organizing the Buffalo Pound Provincial Park. And while 
serving on the Wascana Centre Authority he advocated a 
similar development of the Moose Jaw River Valley. 
 
The passing of the Wakamow Valley Authority Act in 1997 
came to be in no small part because of this man’s vision. 
 
Mr. Davies became a member of the Order of Canada in 1975 
and was honoured with a Doctor of Laws Degrees from the 
University of Saskatchewan in 1978. All through his life, Mr. 
Davies represented the working people of Saskatchewan, from a 
union organizer to executive secretary of what is now the 
Saskatchewan Federation of Labour to an MLA in this House, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Davies worked tirelessly for the rights of working people. 
But for all of Bill’s accomplishments and all that he contributed 
to the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Davies was still just an 
ordinary man, a man who accomplished some very 
extraordinary things during his lifetime. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I never had the privilege of meeting Mr. Davies, 
but I’ve spoken to people in Moose Jaw who have had this 
privilege, and the reaction is always the same. The expression 
on their face softens a wee bit and they get a wee bit of a smile, 
and they talk about Bill, the ordinary man. They don’t talk 
about Mr. Davies, the politician, the alderman. They talk about 
Bill, the man. 
 
A man who loved long walks and nature. A man who loved 
even more long talks and long debates, and a man who worked 
hard for what he believed, whether it be little league or 
legislation, Mr. Speaker. A man who earned the respect of 
everyone he dealt with. 
 
Although Mr. Davies was officially born in Indian Head, we in 
Moose Jaw have claimed him as our own. And as a Moose 
Javian I feel that we lent Mr. Davies to the province to work for 
the people of Saskatchewan for a short period of time, but we 
still lay claim to him. 
 
But in reality the people of Moose Jaw should be thankful for 
the time that Mr. Davies gave to us and gave to Saskatchewan, 
and in return and on behalf of the people in the constituency of 
Moose Jaw Wakamow, I’d like to pass along my condolences to 
Theresa and Bill’s family and thank them for loaning us Bill for 
the period of time. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. It is a honour for me to join in this tribute to Bill 
Davies and particularly to follow directly the hon. member from 

Moose Jaw Wakamow who today holds the seat that Bill held 
when he served in this House at the conclusion of his timely 
service to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
I arrived in Moose Jaw in 1973 and so I wasn’t in either the city 
or the province in the time that Bill Davies served the province 
and the city in different capacities. And so I never got to know 
that part of the political passion of the man at the time that he 
served, but I certainly had opportunity to come to know him 
after and to appreciate some of his political commitment and his 
passion. 
 
As has been referred to here by those who’ve spoken and others 
who will, Bill Davies was a man of passion. He loved his 
province. He loved his mother earth. He loved his fellow 
working men and women and he loved this place. And I think 
those who have known Bill Davies would say that not only was 
Bill Davies a gentleman, he was a gentle man. 
 
And in some ways that seems kind of contradictory because he 
was always — as has been described already — one who had a 
heart of gold and a mind of steel and took on, with great 
passion, many missions to be of service to this world and to 
make his world a better place to be. 
 
Bill Davies was a parliamentarian in the finest sense of the 
word. Those of us who come to serve in this House know a very 
rare and unique and special honour that it is one of the greatest 
privileges that a society can offer. A free and democratic 
society that we can come and we can speak in this place freely 
and with passion, and act for those principles which we support 
and which we believe. 
 
Bill Davies was one who believed very, very strongly in this 
institution. After he left his time as a representative for the 
constituency of Moose Jaw South, he never hesitated for a 
moment to continue to visit and we saw him many, many times 
in the galleries here on special occasions at the legislature. Till 
the day he died he continued to take a great interest in the 
affairs of this province and the political goings-on. 
 
(1600) 
 
And although he was never overly burdensome in his offering 
of advice, he was always willing to offer advice in his gentle 
and wise kind of way. He understood that to be a 
parliamentarian is not just a job to be done but he approached it 
the same way he approached every job that he did as a 
professional as one who gave everything he had to do it well. 
Bill Davies was also a very, very loyal friend, and I was 
particularly pleased to see, of his very good friends, Hub Elkin 
and Walter Smishek and Gord Snyder, here in the House here 
today, to be here for the honouring of Bill Davies. 
 
And for those of us who didn’t serve with him, many of us still 
considered him to be a special friend, although I think all of us 
who come here will appreciate that there is a particular quality 
to a friendship that we develop when it is with a colleague in 
the House. And particularly with a bench mate, when we serve 
in the House and comment on the goings-on and the affairs of 
politics that we see them here. 
 
And so it is all of those things: Bill Davies the passionate man, 



December 16, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 265 

the gentleman, the parliamentarian, the loyal friend, that should 
be acknowledged. As a Moose Javian, I would just want to add 
to and concur with my friend, the hon. member from Moose 
Jaw Wakamow, the great service that Bill Davies offered to our 
city. 
 
As has been pointed out, from 1949 till 1956 he served as an 
alderman in the city of Moose Jaw. And then the same year that 
he left his service as an alderman, he took up service in this 
House as a Member of the Legislative Assembly from 1956 to 
1971. 
 
Which means, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that — and this is a very 
rare occurrence — that for 22 straight years, the people of 
Moose Jaw had the benefit of the political passion and the 
vision, and the compassion of Bill Davies in their political 
affairs. 
 
I’d just like to . . . I thought it may be of interest to some of the 
members to just take a quick snapshot look at the political 
career of Bill Davies who was elected in June of 1956 for the 
first time. And members may not be aware, but back in those 
days the city of Moose Jaw had two seats as it does today but 
they were in fact combined seats. And so Moose Jaw was a 
single constituency with two seats. And when members stood 
for election and voters went out to vote, they had two votes. 
And it made for different dynamics than those of us who are 
here now would recognize. 
 
And in that first election Bill Davies joined the House with his 
CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) colleague, 
Dempster Heming, as Bill came second in the polls with 6,756 
votes. And after having served in that period then, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, he stood again in 1960 and for the first time was 
elected with his running mate and long-time friend, Gordon 
Snyder, as both of them stood as the CCF members from Moose 
Jaw. And Bill Davies led the polls in 1960, topped the polls 
with 6,794 votes followed closely by his good friend, Gordon 
Snyder. And both of them came to this Chamber. 
 
And while serving in this Chamber in that period, Bill Davies, 
as much as anyone and much more than most, was a part of 
what I think many of us would consider the single most historic 
moment in time in the entire history of the province of 
Saskatchewan. Because it was when he served, as the Premier 
said, as the minister for Public Health, while he held that 
portfolio, that Saskatchewan brought into reality the greatest 
gift this province has even given the people of Canada, 
medicare. 
 
And I think there will be others who will want to refer to those 
tumultuous years and the great debates that took place in this 
place, and some of the viciousness that was a part of the 
opposition to medicare that challenged the strongest of steel 
wills and required of anyone who was standing firm in the face 
of not only the political opposition on the other side of the 
House . . . 
 
It’s hard for us in the 1990s to imagine, when medicare has 
become such a sacred part not only of our province but of our 
nation, that there was a time in the early ’60s in which in this 
House there was a vitriolic opposition and not only here but the 
participation that others I think may refer to, of the media who 

became involved and other people who spoke out publicly and 
in personally attacking ways. 
 
Bill Davies stood strong because he believed in the principles of 
medicare and he believed in those principles for his brothers 
and sisters of his province and ultimately was one of the authors 
of Saskatchewan’s most wonderful gift to the people of Canada. 
 
And as is sometimes the case, Mr. Deputy Speaker, after having 
fought that valiant battle and having won within these 
Chambers, in fact the public reaction led in fact to the defeat of 
the CCF government four years later in 1964 and the ushering 
in of the Thatcher era that is . . . some reference earlier. 
 
Here, and although there was a sweep in a sense going on in 
opposition, the author — the captain of the ship in a direct sense 
— Mr. Deputy Speaker, survived in the election. And he along 
with again his good friend and running mate Gordon Snyder, 
both led the polls again in the two-seat city of Moose Jaw 
constituency with Bill Davies leading the polls with 7,749 
votes. 
 
And then he served his first term in opposition. Then finally in 
his fourth term, Mr. Speaker, as the Premier has said — as the 
bench mate of the Premier — was elected in 1967 as the first 
member from Moose Jaw South. And that was the time then 
that Gord Snyder became the first member from Moose Jaw 
North, the seat that I’m proud to represent these days. And so 
the first member from Moose Jaw South was Bill Davies in 
1967, and who led the polls there of course with 4,674 votes. 
 
Well that was part of his political record, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
as the hon. member from Moose Jaw Wakamow, so 
appropriately named constituency to honour Bill Davies. As she 
pointed out he was one of the proponents of what continues to 
be a constant and permanent tribute to his political era in the 
city of Moose Jaw, the Wakamow Valley Authority, the 
establishment of the urban park which continues to grow and to 
be a place for families in Moose Jaw and visitors to gather to 
this day. 
 
And in fact we’re very proud in the city of Moose Jaw to say 
that the provincial government building, the building in our city 
out of which government services of our province are offered to 
the people of Saskatchewan bears the name, the W.G. Davies 
Building, and it’s so appropriate that there will be that ongoing 
and permanent tribute to the accomplishments and the 
contribution of Bill Davies in our city and in our province. 
 
As I said earlier, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I came to be a member 
here in the House, that I would see on a regular basis Bill 
Davies here as part of the gatherings on special days like 
Speech from the Throne or budgets, and Bill Davies continued 
always to take a great interest in the goings-on of the political 
affairs of his province. 
 
And during the difficult times when the New Democrat 
government returned to office in 1991 and had to wrestle with 
the horrendously horrific financial affairs that had been 
inherited from the previous Conservative government, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, there were many decisions made that grieved 
terribly, many of us who were part of that. And there was no 
stronger supporter, there was no stronger supporter than Bill 



266 Saskatchewan Hansard December 16, 1999 

Davies, who I’m sure in many ways found himself just feeling 
as though he was torn within, seeing some decisions, to have to 
make decisions to alter some programs that he had been very 
much a part of seeing brought into play here in the province. 
 
And as has been said earlier, Mr. Speaker, Bill Davies was a 
man of passion and it is somewhat characteristic of his family 
that their passions are expressed in artistic ways. And Bill 
Davies, as the Premier referred to several times, authored a 
book of poetry which captured his view of the world, and his 
view of body politic, and commitment to fellow men and 
women, love of his province, in a book entitled The Buffalo 
Stone which appropriately so leads off with a poem entitled 
“We Came to Saskatchewan” and then concludes with a poem 
entitled “The Common Road”. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to conclude my remarks by reading 
into the record the poem, “The Common Road”, the final entry 
in Bill Davies’ book of poetry. This was a very special gift two 
summers ago. Bill came and asked if I would make sure that a 
copy of his book of poetry would be passed on to each of the 
executive members for the constituencies of Moose Jaw North 
and Moose Jaw Wakamow. And so there are some of us in the 
city of Moose Jaw who have in our homes one of the finest 
tributes you could possibly have to Bill Davies, and that’s a 
collection of his words about his life and his view of the world. 
 
And as has been said earlier, Bill Davies, although he made a 
major contribution to this province, never saw himself as a man 
above in any way. Bill Davies saw himself as a common man. 
And it was his humility which was his strength and which drew 
people to him and enabled Bill to be a leader in so many ways. 
 
And so I think he captured that, and I’d like to read into the 
record and think about — as I read this — Bill Davies, because 
I think the poem “The Common Road” is a description of Bill’s 
approach in many ways, his life. And let me quote: 
 

Unknown as the road beyond, 
Slipping into mists and dark 
So close. 
 
Is it like the one we’ve trod? 
But we all deeply understand 
It’s futile to think much about 
What lies ahead. 
 
That way might be as the old familiar 
Paths on which we’ve gone; often 
Stumbling in pain; sometimes in 
Great hurt, in sorrow; 
Or fear, or trial or trouble. 
On others easily and fleetly, 
Joyously, reaching out eagerly, 
Avidly, on smooth, well-set trails, 
In gentle airs and glowing light. 

 
Yes, how well we know that way, 
The course of life pursued upon it; 
As sure to us today as the uncertain 
Road that lies before; 
All we can see is that we may not 
Tarry long, nor stay our journey: 

That however good or bad the road, 
We must take it and keep to it 
For as long as need be, 
Whatever the costs, cares, burdens 
Or the wonder, delights, raptures 
The road may show. 
 
We hope the best will come; 
We brace for anything as we 
Have learned perforce to do, 
To this part of our journey. 
 
So let the future be for now, 
Think of things done, time spent, 
The story we have lived ourselves: 
Not through books about others. 
Really, what a tale it has been, 
How much — and yet maybe how little — 
We have seen, felt, borne, achieved; 
There’s been so many hours spent, 
In so many, many varied ways. 
Then what truly matters, 
What is truly worth telling? 
Well, I suppose if it was 
Important to us 
That’s all that matters. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, Bill Davies was important to us. He 
mattered. 
 
And I want to pass on, on behalf of my own constituents and 
New Democrats from the city of Moose Jaw condolences to 
Theresa and the family and to say thank you to her and the 
family for having shared her husband, Bill, dad, grandpa, with 
their province. He left this province a much better place than he 
found it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1615) 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
privilege to be able to rise and say a few words in memory of 
Bill Davies. I’m going to endeavour to keep it to a few words, 
although this will be a difficult task because Bill Davies had so 
many endearing characteristics that one could talk about and 
played such a significant role in the history of Saskatchewan 
that one could literally go on for a very long time. 
 
I first got to know Bill and Theresa Davies when they became 
my constituents in 1991 when the boundaries of Regina 
Victoria were changed to include Douglas Park area where they 
lived. I can say that it was my very great privilege and honour 
to have been associated with Bill and Theresa. 
 
What can I tell you about Bill Davies? Some of the things have 
already been said. People talked about his career in the labour 
movement, especially the many years that he spent as the 
secretary general of the Saskatchewan Federation of . . . or 
secretary treasurer of the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour. 
 
Let me just underline that prior to present day when now the 
president of the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour is the 
known and the real central person in the Federation of Labour 
and the person that we see as the power in that federation, in 



December 16, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 267 

Bill Davies’ day, it was the secretary treasurer who was the real 
power in the federation. And for this person to have been the 
secretary treasurer for the many years that he was, I think is a 
testament to Bill’s many great qualities. The fact that he was a 
quiet but eloquent voice of reason. He was a solid substantial 
person and, if you like, a solid rock of stability in tumultuous 
times. 
 
There is another aspect to his career that members have talked 
about, some have eluded to, and that was Bill Davies’ role 
during the great medicare debate in Saskatchewan during the 
time of the doctor’s strike when Bill Davies was the minister of 
Health. It’s something we talk about as having happened, and 
it’s something that we refer to and all of us I think remember 
that it was at that time that medicare was in fact born not only 
in Saskatchewan but later as well in Canada. And that those 
were very significant times in our history. 
 
I was very interested to hear the remarks of another former 
Health minister and former premier, Allan Blakeney, at the 
memorial service for Bill Davies with respect to those times. 
And I’ll try to give members a brief synopsis of some of the 
things that Allan Blakeney said to give us an idea of the flavour 
of the times and the environment in which Bill Davies was the 
minister of Health. 
 
This time that Allan Blakeney talked about was the time of the 
doctors’ strike which began on July 1, 1962 in Saskatchewan. 
And he indicated that there was a well-financed, indeed 
handsomely financed campaign against the government. It was 
led by the two Saskatchewan dailies, the Leader-Post and 
StarPhoenix who he said on this issue stopped being 
newspapers and became mere propaganda sheets for the 
combined opposition. I might add that the role of the two papers 
later became the subject of reporting by other journals from 
across the country and across the globe. 
 
There were many inflammatory ads in papers across 
Saskatchewan. There were equally inflammatory public 
speakers, and points out that at a public meeting at a school in 
Saskatoon a well-known clergyman from Saskatchewan 
exclaimed to an aroused crowd: there has been death, there will 
be violence, there could be bloodshed; I wouldn’t be surprised 
if someone put a bullet in me, I’m as likely to get it as 
Woodrow Lloyd. Later he said, if the government does not 
withdraw this Act, the medicare Act, there will be blood 
running in the streets and God help us if it doesn’t. 
 
And as Alan Blakeney indicated, that gives us some idea of the 
flavour of the state of public anxiety. He also gives us some 
other facts to indicate just how much of an issue this was, not 
only in Saskatchewan and in the country, but across the world. 
 
He indicated that the Toronto Star, starting with their story on 
June 30 of that year, their story headed “Fear and hate fill 
Saskatchewan on the eve of doctors strike,” they ran over 175 
items by July 26. That’s 175 items in the Toronto Star in a 
period of slightly less than a month. 
 
In a Montreal Star over 120 items, the New York Times 25 or so 
items, the Melbourne Australian Herald 11 items; the London 
Times 18 items, The Jamaica Daily Gleaner 5 items, and 
British television 38 items. As Blakeney pointed out, 

Saskatchewan has not likely appeared in the media in the next 
35 years as often as it did during those 30 days. 
 
And it was Bill Davies who was the minister of Health at the 
centre of that storm of . . . that was taking place in 
Saskatchewan. It was Bill Davies’ job in the context of a 
doctors’ strike to try to ensure that there were some medical 
services being delivered in Saskatchewan and to try to get 
Saskatchewan through to the end of the doctors’ strike. 
 
And I think that gives members in the public, Mr. Speaker, 
some idea of the environment in which Bill Davies was in fact 
the minister of Health. I can also tell you that as his MLA and 
one who dropped by his place from time to time, Bill Davies 
was indeed well-read and would always offer you a book to 
take home in case you didn’t have something to read. And I 
would add that the library system in Regina probably lost a 
great patron in Bill Davies. 
 
He was very aware, very interested in current affairs. Whether it 
was health, finance, resource policy, Bill Davies always had 
something to say. That was the politician in him, and also the 
teacher in him, Mr. Speaker, the mentor in him that made him 
want to give you the benefit of his knowledge in those areas 
which was very considerable indeed. 
 
He was also a prolific letter writer — in addition to being a poet 
and an author — a letter writer on current affairs, and it was 
rare not to get a letter from Bill on current events. And I might 
add that was done on his very old manual typewriter at home 
with whiteout and cross outs and little words added in ink 
where he might have had letters that didn’t quite imprint in the 
way that they should have. But he was very prolific in that way. 
 
I might add that there is one aspect of current affairs that Bill 
Davies just didn’t like and he absolutely detested, and that was 
any invitation to go to a political dinner where you might serve 
chicken or fowl . . . turkey. 
 
We extended him lots of invitations over the years to come to 
constituency dinners where we might have chicken. And he 
recounted to me something that I think all members of some 
experience will be able to say, and those who are new to this 
legislature will learn over time, that after a lifetime of politics 
you really, I guess in a sense, very literally get fed up with 
chicken dinners. And Bill just wouldn’t come to those chicken 
dinners because he said he had a lifetime of it and just had 
enough chicken to last him for his life. 
 
Bill was also a great walker. He loved the outdoors. It was rare 
not to see him and Theresa wandering and walking through the 
neighbourhoods in good weather and in bad weather. He was a 
very hospitable, very warm, very friendly person. He was 
always inviting me to drop by for a chat and for a drink. And it 
was my very great privilege to have found some time during the 
latter days of the campaign when I was campaigning to end my 
campaigning one night at Bill Davies’s door. To be able to stop 
by for a drink of Scotch, which Bill liked, and for a chat — 
although I must admit that Bill usually did most of the chatting 
in those instances — but to be there and to luxuriate, Mr. 
Speaker, in his presence. 
 
Well, his voice has been stilled, Mr. Speaker, but his memory 



268 Saskatchewan Hansard December 16, 1999 

will live on not only for myself, but I think for all those who 
knew Bill. And for all those who have an appreciation of 
history and what has taken place in this province, I think all of 
them will continue to benefit from the contribution that Bill 
Davies made to our society. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I too want to extend my sincere condolences to 
Theresa and all of the family. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to 
speak just a bit about Bill today because our families were 
personal and political friends since I was a child, and as you 
know that’s a very long time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Although in the legislature we tend to think of the political 
person, I think there’s a lot you can learn about the political 
person by knowing about the private person. And my earliest 
memories of Bill and family were their house in Moose Jaw 
where the backyard overlooked the Wakamow Valley. 
 
His first wife Rose, who was taken by cancer, was part of the 
Sapergia family who had a large ranch near the Montana 
border. And I had the pleasure on more than one occasion of 
being invited to that ranch; and on the long car trip down there, 
Bill would ensure that we spent the whole entire way down to 
the ranch playing word games and they were all designed to 
increase our vocabulary and our quick thinking. And I would 
have to say that he must have been a little bit difficult as parent 
because he didn’t allow for a single uneducational moment. 
 
He was of course a literary person; we know about his book of 
poetry that resounds with Saskatchewan history. But during 
those Moose Jaw days, my father, Bill, and I would take long 
walks and make very big decisions about whether or not a piece 
of wood was diamond willow, whether the bones we were 
looking at were cow or bison, and always on the lookout for 
arrowheads. 
 
But as well, he was the person who taught me how to find that 
big chunk of granite, the buffalo stone where a buffalo had 
rubbed his winter hide off. You know they had to get rid of all 
that loose hair that they accumulated over the winter, and they 
do that by rubbing against a chunk of granite. I could 
demonstrate, but I’ll do that after. He taught me about making 
tobacco, traditional tobacco from the inside bark of the willow, 
but we never smoked any, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I would have to say that one of the recollections that can’t 
be left out is on my father’s birthday every year — which is the 
same as Bill’s birthday . . . they were both born on the same 
day, both of Welsh parents, so they would get together once a 
year to celebrate their birthday — and Bill started this thing 
when I was quite young where we both had to stand on our 
head. It was the yearly birthday competition. And I can’t really 
remember the last time we did that, but I know that Bill was a 
lot older than me when we quit that tradition. 
 
Others have spoken about Bill’s immense political 
contributions, but I remember personally many times reading 
letters to the editor where Bill would be straightening out some 
historical facts, or giving his perspective on an issue based on 
his huge sense of compassion and public responsibility. 
 

And of course there was ongoing political discussions in the 
household that at various times included my father, Hub Elkin, 
Gordon Snyder, Walter Smishek, and many, many others — all 
the great heroes of some of our past politics here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So to me, when I think of Bill I think of a person who had a 
strong commitment to family, a love of the power of words and 
literature, a thorough knowledge of the history and environment 
of the province, a great love of the outdoors, a deep 
commitment to community and to the people of the province. 
 
His only shortcoming was this bit of a tendency to show off his 
physical prowess during the yearly headstand. But I’m sure he 
did it for the best of reasons, Mr. Speaker — to encourage the 
younger generation, namely me, to try harder. And if each of us 
could only have that effect on one young person that Bill had on 
me, I think we would have achieved a lot. 
 
And it didn’t surprise me when he married Theresa because she 
also spends every day in dedication to the community. So I 
think I can safely speak for many and my father when I say that 
Bill was a good friend to all; and I want to add my condolences 
to Bill’s wife, Theresa, and to the whole family and Bill’s 
friends. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1630) 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today 
and I add my words of condolence to those already spoken. Mr. 
Speaker, upon hearing the news of Bill’s passing, I felt I would 
be brave enough to support Theresa and her family, attending 
the memorial service at the Centre of the Arts. However, my 
own sorrow at that time, with the recent loss of my mother, 
Katherine, prevented me from doing that. I knew Theresa would 
understand. 
 
So today, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to tell everyone how one life, 
the life of William G. Davies had a profound influence on mine. 
Today I can smile as I remember the warmth of Bill and 
Theresa’s friendship. Today my heart is filled with gladness as 
we celebrate a wonderful life. 
 
Many of you know and have spoken of Bill as a statesman and 
as a member of the Assembly. I knew him as a Douglas Park 
neighbour, a community leader, a feminist, and a humanitarian 
working through his church to better the lives of those around 
him. 
 
I first met Bill and Theresa when I was working with the 
community association and quickly came to admire their quiet, 
down-to-earth approach to living. Through our discussions, the 
Davies helped me to grow in my awareness of political life. As 
is often the case, the person who inspires others to action rarely 
hears about it or understands how far reaching a few words of 
encouragement can be. 
 
In 1982 Bill Davies and others in my neighbourhood were 
working on a number of civic issues. One in particular was the 
concern for a new bypass or overpass that depended on routing 
traffic through or potentially putting traffic through Douglas 



December 16, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 269 

Park area. It would endanger the lives of students, and it would 
disrupt the beautiful portion of Wascana Centre Authority that’s 
backed . . . that Bill Davies and his wife Theresa’s home backed 
on to. 
 
We enlisted the aid of an intelligent, articulate young lawyer at 
that time named Louise Simard. She helped us through that 
debate. I followed up with many presentations of my own. 
 
From this experience, Mr. Speaker, and from these stirrings of 
political activism, from under the wing of Bill and Theresa, not 
to mention the friends that others have mentioned today, Hub 
Elkin and Walter Smishek, I had a solid start on the road to 
public service. 
 
Bill knew that I was reluctant. He knew from his years in the 
Assembly that the road at times would be rocky. What did he 
do? Toward the end of one lengthy political discussion in his 
home he gave me a soft, smooth stone that fit into the clutch of 
my hand. This gift, he said, would never let me forget that their 
support would always be there for me when I needed it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I still have that stone. I clutch it to my heart often. 
It gives me comfort during those times when this life of service 
can weigh heavily on the shoulders or it can, at times, make you 
feel lonely. 
 
A few years later, I received another stone present, another gift 
from the heart of a great man, a writer. It was his book, The 
Buffalo Stone, that my colleagues have read from today. And to 
me it’s interesting that there are different passages in the 
different poems that strike at our hearts and take a chord where 
we feel the visual presence of Bill in the words that he’s 
portrayed. 
 
For me, I love the idea of “The Purple Saskatoon” because in 
the summer I like to wander, as I know Bill and Theresa did, 
through pathways and to be able to pick saskatoons. And 
another one, “Hold Fast The Net”. But the words that speak to 
me, Mr. Speaker, are the words that Bill has given in a common 
prayer, have touched my heart the most. And I quote: 
 

Creator Being! Will you not act? 
Descend in mighty, crashing stroke, 
On everlasting wrong, on wicked sway; 
Sweep them from the earthly board? 
 
To give your wretched, broken legion 
A chance to rise, to grow, build well 
A radiant, truly splendid blest society — 
Fit for universal, holy, loving life. 
 
If you must not, do give us then 
A mind and purpose, a oneness and a will 
To raise a vast and thunderous cleansing wave, 
To shape a world as it could be. 
 

These words, Mr. Speaker, will live on and inspire forever. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not by big events in themselves — a cup of coffee, 
a word of encouragement — two stone gifts that remind me 
others have fought for social justice and because of them others 
are inspired to do so into the future. Not big events, but part of 

the reason I stand before you now as the New Democrat 
member from Wascana Plains. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege and honour to remember today 
and to honour the memory of William G. Davies and to make 
certain his legacy carries on, to do justice and love kindness and 
walk humbly with your God. Sincere words of sympathy to 
Theresa and all of the family. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to get up 
just very briefly to pay tribute and join others in paying tribute 
to Bill Davies. 
 
When I was the minister of Health, of course I’d heard of Mr. 
Davies, but I’d never had the pleasure of actually meeting him. 
But one day when I was in some difficulty, he phoned me up 
and he said, you know you’re having difficulty with this 
particular issue but I had a similar issue when I was minister of 
Health, and I’d like to talk to you about it. 
 
The Minister of Labour referred to the fact that Mr. Davies was 
a person that read a lot, and he liked to get the correct 
information and he liked to form his opinions on the basis of 
fact. And at that particular moment there was some crisis of the 
day in health care and some people were quite hysterical about 
it, and he wanted to tell me what the facts actually were. 
 
So I went and met with him and in fact had lunch with him, and 
I think even a drink with him, Mr. Speaker, which was very 
pleasant, and he gave me some very good information because 
that’s what he was like. He was very helpful. 
 
And I want to say that anyone who has been the minister of 
Health, as I have and others have, knows that it’s actually a 
very, very difficult job. And sometimes you feel like you’re in 
hot water and sometimes you feel like it’s the daily feeding 
frenzy. And I don’t think it matters if it’s someone on this . . . 
from this party or another party that’s in government, you’re 
always subject to a lot of heat from the opposition and 
sometimes from the media. 
 
But I can’t imagine what it would be like, being the minister of 
Health at the time of the doctors’ strike in 1962 when medicare 
was brought forward in this province over, as others have said, 
a lot of opposition and against some very, very powerful 
adversaries. And I know from my own reading of the history of 
that time that some people in our party, Mr. Davies’ party at 
that time, abandoned the situation because it was very difficult 
and they couldn’t take the heat. 
 
But Mr. Davies certainly did not. He was a very courageous 
individual to take all the pressure he took at that time and I 
think it’s indicative of the kind of person he was. 
 
Well I . . . As a result of what Mr. Davies told me, I actually did 
some research at the Legislative Library and I found that what 
he had to say to me was true. And one of the things he said was 
that when they introduced medicare in the early 1960s, the 
prediction was that all the doctors would leave. And at that 
particular moment when I was Minister of Health the prediction 
also was that all of the doctors were going to leave. But he 



270 Saskatchewan Hansard December 16, 1999 

pointed out that if you went back to the 1950s, there were 600 
doctors and today there were about double that number. And in 
fact after medicare was introduced the number of doctors in 
Saskatchewan gradually increased. 
 
I used to think as a lawyer, no doubt because they got all their 
bills paid and what a pleasure that would be. And sometimes 
when I was practising law, my clients would come in and say, 
we’re going to do to you what we did to the doctors. And I said, 
please do. I’d love to send the bill to the government and have it 
paid. But nobody ever took me up on that. 
 
Well, I’m digressing. I really wanted to make the point that Mr. 
Davies was very astute and very knowledgeable and he wanted 
you to know the facts because he was, as I said, a person who 
formed his own opinions on the basis of fact and information 
and not political rhetoric, misinformation, and sometimes 
inspired public hysteria. 
 
So it was certainly helpful to me and it also gave me the 
opportunity because Mr. Davies would phone me from time to 
time and correspond because, as it was noted, he was a great 
correspondent, that it gave me the opportunity to meet both Mr. 
Davies and Mrs. Davies. 
 
And I’d like to say, Mr. Speaker, that my overarching 
impression of Mr. Davies, as anyone who met him will know, is 
that he was an extremely gracious and kind gentleman, and it 
was just a pleasure to get to know him and Mrs. Davies, who 
was a very charming and gracious and accomplished person in 
her own right. And I’d like to express my condolences to Mrs. 
Davies and the family and to say that I’m very thankful — as 
many others are — for Mr. Davies’ very distinguished record of 
public service. 
 
And I’d like to end my remarks, Mr. Speaker, as others have, by 
reading some poetry of Mr. Davies. And my colleague from 
Moose Jaw North read the last poem in Mr. Davies book, but 
I’d like to read the first poem because I think it typifies what 
Saskatchewan is really all about. And the first poem is called: 
 

We Came To Saskatchewan 
 
We came from many, many lands, 
we spoke so many tongues 
and worked with many, many hands, 
took new, wild air, into our lungs. 
 
We heaved together — needs we must — 
to build the barest home, plant the smallest field, 
heart-centred in these hurtling hours was trust, 
to make a life that would the utmost yield. 
 
And now, as we look back to great old days, 
much has been truly won for which we strove, 
right reason, surely, to give thanks and praise; 
recalling, in some pain, those who we love. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Trew: — I thank you, Mr. Speaker. At a time like this I 
never know whether to say it’s a pleasure to add my voice to the 
many words of remembrance of Bill Davies. I would rather it 

were some years in the future when I was adding my voice to 
those many remembrances but such is not the way it was meant 
to be. 
 
We’ve heard a number of members telling us, sharing with us, 
what Bill Davies meant to each one of us as an individual. And 
it’s an amazing thing to listen and hear what a gentleman of 
Bill’s stature was capable of and how he’s being remembered as 
a gentle and kind person, but a person clearly capable of saying, 
here’s where the line is, and making it stick. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you may . . . members may be wondering, well 
what possible connection would I have. And I just wanted to 
share that my grandmother, Beatrice Trew, had sat on the 
medicare commission that looked at public health schemes right 
across the world and that they looked at and picked out — 
cherry-picked — the very best of all of the public health 
schemes in the world, brought that back to the government of 
the day, and the government accepted most of the 
recommendations. And the result was our medicare scheme that 
was set up right here. 
 
So I know that Bill Davies and my grandmother would have 
had many occasions to share thoughts and ideas and talk about 
the importance of public health care to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And I’m just so incredibly proud of Bill Davies; I’m proud of 
everyone of that era for what they did at a very, very, very 
tough time, Mr. Speaker. And I know that indeed it’s been 
mentioned by one of my colleagues that there were in fact death 
threats at that time which makes it all the more remarkable 
because not only is it members but it’s members’ families too. 
 
And we just . . . all the people in Saskatchewan, and certainly 
all people in Canada, owe a tremendous debt of gratitude to Bill 
Davies and to many of his colleagues of that day. 
 
(1645) 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I just want to add those remembrances and 
wish Theresa and the family Godspeed and nothing but the best 
to them in the future. And bless them for sharing Bill Davies 
with us. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like 
to move, seconded by the Deputy Leader of the Official 
Opposition, and by leave of the Assembly: 
 

That the resolutions just passed, together with a transcript 
of oral tributes to the memory of the deceased, be 
communicated to the bereaved families on behalf of this 
Assembly by Mr. Speaker. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:46 p.m. 
 



 

 


