





























































Hansard: May 04, 1999


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1009 
 May 4, 1999 
 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again this afternoon 
I present more petitions from citizens of the northwest 
requesting that the dangerous and congested entrance to the city 
of North Battleford be improved with the intersection of 
Highways 40 and 16. 
 
Your petitioners this afternoon come from North Battleford, 
Gallavan, Glaslyn, Meota, Battleford, and Maymont. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present a petition 
today on behalf of concerned Saskatchewan residents about our 
highway system. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call on federal and provincial 
governments to dedicate a significantly greater portion of 
fuel tax revenues toward road maintenance and 
construction so Saskatchewan residents may have a safe 
highway system that meets their needs. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the signatures on these petitions are from Nipawin, 
Carrot River, Mendham, Burstall, Biggar, and other small 
communities throughout the province. Thank you. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I bring 
forward petitions today in regards to Swift Current regional 
hospital. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call upon the NDP 
government to provide funding in this budget to have the 
Swift Current regional hospital equipped and staffed as a 
specialty care hospital and to immediately provide funding 
for the purchase and operation of both imaging equipment 
and renal dialysis centre. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will every pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I have hundreds of signatures here again today 
mainly from Swift Current; but also from Maple Creek, 
Stewart Valley, Shaunavon, Senate, Gull Lake, Val Marie, 
Gouldtown. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to rise 
again today in this House to present a petition on behalf of the 
people of this province. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call on federal and provincial 

governments to dedicate a greater portion of fuel tax 
revenues toward road maintenance and construction so that 
Saskatchewan residents may have a safe highway system 
that meets their needs and that they deserve. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition has been signed by the good folks in 
the Maidstone and Paynton areas. 
 
And I so present. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
today to present petitions on behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan who are demanding a review of parental rights. 
The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide a review process with respect to family 
intervention to ensure the rights of responsible families are 
not being violated. 
 

The signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from Debden, 
from Luseland, and Saskatoon, Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much Mr. Speaker. It’s 
my privilege again to rise on behalf of citizens concerned about 
some of the most vulnerable in our society. And I’ll read the 
prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide essential funding and ensure the delivery of 
scientifically proven, diagnostic assessment and 
programming for children with learning disabilities in 
order that they have an access to an education that meets 
their needs and allows them to reach their full potential. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The people who have signed this petition today, Mr. Speaker, 
are from Debden, Saskatchewan and the fine city of Prince 
Albert. 
 
And I present on their behalf with pleasure. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the petitions presented at the last 
sitting have been reviewed and found to be in order pursuant to 
rule 12(7) and they are hereby received. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
Standing Committee on Communication 

 
Deputy Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, the chair of the Standing 
Committee on Communication presents the third report of the 
said committee which is hereby tabled. 
 



1010 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1999 

 

Ms. Murray: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, seconded by 
the member from Cannington: 
 

That the third report of the Standing Committee on 
Communication be now concurred in. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Special Committee on Regulations 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 
pleased to move, seconded by the member from Estevan: 
 

That the first report of the Special Committee on 
Regulations be now concurred in. 

 
Before officially moving that, I just want to take a moment, Mr. 
Speaker, just to acknowledge the work of the committee, and 
specifically to extend a special thank you to Mr. Garnet 
Holtzmann, who came on as . . . filled an interim role as the 
Law Clerk in the Assembly. 
 
And certainly, Mr. Holtzmann, our committee want to extend a 
special thank you for the expertise and the way he served the 
committee immediately upon resuming his position in his office 
of having to dig into a number of regulations and bylaws that 
had been on the books for a number of years. And, Mr. Speaker, 
we want, as a committee, to just say publicly how much we 
appreciated the work, the effort, and the expertise with which he 
performed his duties. Also a special thank you to all of the 
members on the committee for their involvement and 
commitment to serving on this committee. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, we just want to acknowledge and let the 
Assembly know how much we appreciated the ability to host a 
number of delegates from Australia, the Regulations Committee 
of the Parliament of Victoria, from June 13 to 16, in 1998. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for most members in this Assembly, a number of 
jurisdictions outside of this country certainly have a different 
way and form of running their regulations committee and it was 
very informative for the committee in Saskatchewan to sit down 
with members of another jurisdiction and go through the format 
and discuss how their jurisdiction deals with regulations, and 
we certainly appreciated that. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
member from Estevan: 
 

That the first report of the Special Committee on 
Regulations be now concurred in. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 39 ask the government the following question: 
 

How much did it cost to produce the annual report for 
SaskPower for the past five years; and to supply a 
breakdown of any outside consultants or suppliers who 
were commissioned in the production of this document? 

I also wish to give notice of motion, Mr. Speaker, on four 
individual Bills, if I may read them all at the same time. 
 
I give notice that I shall on day 36 move first reading of a Bill, 
The Romanow Road Act No. 19, an Act to rename provincial 
Highway No. 22; 
 
I give notice I shall on day 36 move first reading of a Bill, The 
Romanow Road Act, No. 20, an Act to rename provincial 
Highway No. 56; 
 
I give notice that I shall on day 36 move first reading of a Bill, 
The Romanow Road Act No. 21, an Act to rename provincial 
Highway No. 52; 
 
And I give notice that I shall on day 36 move first reading of a 
Bill, The Romanow Road Act No. 22, an Act to rename 
provincial Highway No. 310. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a great privilege for me 
to introduce 32 bright and active students from grade 8 in 
Rosetown who are our guests in the west gallery today. 
Rosetown has had a long tradition of bringing grade 8 students 
to watch the carryings-on here and to be impressed by the good 
behaviour of the members. And I want to say that I have run out 
of grade 8 students in my own family; but the ones who are 
with us are as sharp and beautiful as all the ones I have 
presented, and I’m delighted that there are 32 of them here with 
us today. 
 
They are accompanied by their teachers Miles Bennet, Arlene 
Lunde, and Richard Berezowski, and by chaperones Bob 
Clothier and Linda Kilford. Welcome — and I ask all members 
to join me in giving a warm welcome to these Rosetown 
students. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
introduce to you and through you to the Assembly, 13 very 
brilliant grade 11 and 12 students sitting in your east gallery 
from St. Isidore School and from the community of St. 
Isidore-de-Bellevue. The students from Bellevue are 
accompanied by their very capable teacher Mr. Terry Gaudet 
and I look forward to meeting with all of you a little bit later on 
for some discussion and a visit. And I ask the Assembly to issue 
a warm welcome to the students from St. Isidore-de-Bellevue. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Renaud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you to the Assembly, I would like to introduce, in your gallery, 
Mr. Speaker, 16 grade 6 students from Shoal Lake School. 
 
The teachers that accompany the students, Mr. Speaker, are Ivy 
McKee and Darren McKee. Chaperones are Dora Young, 
Amelia Stone, Walter Bear. And Elton Whitecap is also with 
them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I want to tell you a little bit about Shoal Lake. It’s a First 
Nations community just off of Highway No. 55, east of Carrot 



May 4, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 1011 

 

River. 
 
And I know the students, and probably the teachers too, are 
looking forward to their brand new school which is underway. 
And we’re all looking forward to that too. Maybe someday we 
can even improve Highway No. 55 that gets to your 
community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they have the greatest graduation at Shoal Lake. 
When they graduate the grade 12 students, they also graduate 
the kindergarten students into grade 1. And it’s just a wonderful 
experience and a great party. 
 
Welcome to Regina. Come back again. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to ask 
leave for further notice of motions of first readings of Bills. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that 
I shall on day 36 move first reading of a Bill, The Romanow 
Road Act, an Act to rename provincial Highway No. 4; 
 
I give notice that I shall on day 36 move first reading of a Bill, 
The Romanow Road Act, an Act to rename provincial Highway 
No. 13; 
 
I give notice that I shall on day 36 move first reading of a Bill, 
The Romanow Road Act, an Act to rename provincial Highway 
No. 37; 
 
I give notice that I shall on day 36 move first reading of a Bill, 
The Romanow Road Act, an Act to rename provincial Highway 
No. 36; 
 
I give notice that I shall on day 36 move first reading of a Bill, 
The Romanow Road Act, an Act to rename provincial Highway 
No. 18; 
 
I give notice that I shall on day 36 move first reading of a Bill, 
The Romanow Road Act, an Act to rename provincial Highway 
No. 19; 
 
I give notice that I shall on day 36 move first reading of a Bill, 
The Romanow Road Act, an Act to rename provincial Highway 
No. 2. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, an introduction of guests. I’d 
like to join my colleague from Carrot River to welcome the 
students from Shoal Lake. It’s always good to see all people, 
especially Aboriginal folks come to visit the Assembly, and as 
an Aboriginal member of this Assembly . . . 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I also request leave to revert to 
notice of motion of first readings. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, thank you to the House. I give 
notice of first reading. 
 
I shall on day 36 move first reading of a Bill, The Romanow 
Road Act, No. 7, an Act to rename provincial Highway No. 4. 

 
And also I shall on day 36 move first reading of a Bill, The 
Romanow Road Act, No. 8, An Act to rename provincial 
Highway No. 40. 
 
Thank you. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Scott: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Returning to 
introduction of guests, I would like to introduce to you and 
through you to members of the Assembly, a gentleman in the 
west gallery, George Woolridge, a young man in the Indian 
Head-Milestone constituency who is very interested in rural 
transportation issues, and politics in general. I would ask all 
members to join me in welcoming him here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Yes, Mr. Speaker. With leave to return to 
notice of motions and questions please. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day 36 move first reading of a Bill, The Romanow 
Road Act (No. 3), An Act to rename provincial Highway No. 
19. 
 
I give notice as well that I shall on day 36 move first reading of 
a Bill, The Romanow Road Act (No. 4), An Act to rename 
provincial Highway No. 44 which is half gravel. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day 36 move first 
reading of a Bill, The Romanow Road Act (No. 5), An Act to 
rename provincial Highway No. 42. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day 36 move first 
reading of a Bill, The Romanow Road Act (No. 6), An Act to 
rename provincial Highway No. 15. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 39 ask the government the following question: 
 

How many full-time, part-time, and casual registered 
nurses were employed in each of the health districts on 
April 15, 1999; by district, how many full-time registered 



1012 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1999 

 

nurses had been hired between April 1, 1999 and April 15, 
1999; and by district, how many registered nurses had quit 
between April 1, 1999 and April 15, 1999; and by district, 
how many registered nurses that were employed full time 
had requested to be casual employees between April 1, 
1999 and April 15, 1999. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Expansion at L & M Wood Products 
 
Mr. Johnson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I want 
to join my colleague from Saskatchewan Rivers on telling the 
Assembly about a forest economic development in the 
Shellbrook-Spiritwood constituency. 
 
Yesterday I toured L & M Wood Products with the Minister of 
Economic Development. L & M Wood Products is in the 
middle of a program to expand and rebuild their facility. The 
expansion to the saw mill will allow them to handle an increase 
in the amount of wood they’re harvesting from 60,000 cubic 
metres to 120,000 cubic metres. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the rebuilding of the pressure treatment unit will 
allow for an 80 per cent increase in treated products being 
produced. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the expenditure by L & M of $2 million will 
create over a hundred direct and indirect jobs in the province of 
Saskatchewan. With this capital investment, Mr. Speaker, L & 
M Wood Products is saying that they are here for the long term. 
 
The Minister of Economic Development said this project is an 
expression of confidence in Saskatchewan’s economy by 
communities and industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say that this is good news for Glaslyn and area. 
My congratulations to L & M Wood Products. I thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Canada World Youth Program 
 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I recently 
received a letter from a young constituent of mine, Mr. Paul 
Gareau, from the community of St. Isidore-de-Bellevue. Mr. 
Gareau has just returned home after a six-month participation in 
the Canada World Youth program. Canada World Youth was 
created in 1971 and has developed strong ties in more than 42 
countries in Africa, Asia, Latin America, the Caribbean, and in 
eastern and central Europe. 
 
The main objective of that program, Mr. Speaker, is to give 
young people and community members the opportunity to share 
an educational experience that will increase their awareness of 
local and global developments. It is hoped that the program will 
be a starting point for a life of active community involvement. 
 
And part of the exchange time is spent in Canada, the other 
portion is spent in the exchange country. Paul Gareau and an 

African youth spent three months with a family in St. Georges 
de Beauce, Quebec. They spent their time working with 
mentally handicapped people and helping a family rebuild a 
garage destroyed during the ice storm there. 
 
In December, Paul travelled to Lokossa, West Africa. And in 
Paul’s words, Mr. Speaker, the whole adventure was a super 
experience. He says, I came back having more confidence in 
myself, appreciating my family and community more, and with 
a whole new outlook on the global world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a positive story about the youth of today 
and it is a fine tribute to what our youth are doing in their 
community and in the larger global world. 
 
Congratulations to Paul Gareau. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Innovation Place in Saskatoon 
 

Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week my 
colleague from Saskatoon Southeast mentioned the importance 
to Saskatoon of Innovation Place while announcing new 
agricultural research taking place there. And yesterday the 
Minister for Economic and Co-operative Development 
officially opened the new Concourse Building at Innovation 
Place, cutting the ribbon with a laser beam. 
 
This 800 square foot building was constructed to meet the 
demand from existing tenants for expanded space and new 
businesses coming to Saskatoon. Currently the building houses 
12 information technology firms employing 200 people. 
 
One benefit hard to quantify but already noticed is a synergy of 
ideas and discoveries that transcends individual disciplines. 
Like minds in similar projects spark off each other, and 
innovation happens at Innovation Place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I congratulate the current managers of Innovation 
Place and commend Allan Blakeney for his vision and principle 
in risking public investment to establish a fundamental new and 
now fully successful provincial resource at Innovation Place in 
Saskatoon. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Murder Mystery Dinner Theatre in Kenaston 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Sunday my 
wife Bev and I retreated to a murder mystery in the community 
of Kenaston. No, the community didn’t lynch their MP 
(Member of Parliament); however, it was close, as Booby 
escaped with severe wounds. 
 
With nearly 250 people in attendance, a fantastic show, a 
scrumptious meal, and an evening full of surprises and 
friendship delighted us all. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Kenaston players put on a fantastic play and 
provided many hilarious moments as the mystery unfolded. Bev 
and I would like to thank the people of Kenaston and area for 
their hospitality with a special thanks to the actors, the workers, 



May 4, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 1013 

 

the coordinators, and everyone involved in making the dinner 
theatre a huge success. 
 
The money raised will be put to good use, Mr. Speaker. And my 
hat is off to the community of Kenaston for a job well done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Awards Banquet for Students Against 
Drinking and Driving 

 
Ms. Murray: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Saturday the 
Deputy Premier and I attended one of the most positive and 
upbeat events that we’ve been to in some time. 
 
Riffel High School hosted the 11th annual Students Against 
Drinking and Driving awards banquet and dance. 
 
The school was filled with music, laughter, leadership, and 
enough energy and enthusiasm to keep everyone going into the 
wee small hours of the morning. The message, Mr. Speaker, 
was very clear and repeated often, “Friends don’t let friends 
drink and drive.” 
 
Many awards were presented for leadership and team building, 
for memorial scholarships, and inductions into the SADD 
(Students Against Drinking and Driving) hall of fame. 
 
I want to congratulate everyone involved in organizing this 
truly wonderful event. With a special thanks to Jennifer Banga 
and Shauntel McCall. SGI (Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance) should also be recognized for their work in team 
building, and the Royal Bank for their leadership awards. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if as we believe the future of this province is 
young people, then judging by what we experienced last 
Saturday, the future for Saskatchewan is very bright indeed. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Government Health Care Record 
 

Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, if we 
need any more evidence that the government which gave us 
medicare has abandoned it, look no further than the latest 
pamphlet by the member from Regina Centre, entitled simply A 
Record of Success. 
 
The document which went out to homes this week reviews the 
government record through the first three pages. But where is 
health care? The only mention of it is buried on the last page 
where the NDP (New Democratic Party) promises to use $75 
million in additional health dollars to shorten waiting lists, 
improve cancer care, and create a better working environment 
for health care professionals. 
 
Why is this NDP government hiding any mention of health care 
until the last page? Well the obvious answer is, they don’t want 
to remind people of how bad they fouled up the system they set 
out to reform almost eight years ago. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they say actions speak louder than words, and 

while the Health minister does double backflips on almost every 
question put to her, the rest of the NDP caucus know the real 
score. They know not to put anything about their health care 
record on the front page, and if they have to mention it at all, 
make sure it’s buried in the back where hopefully nobody can 
find it. That’s because the NDP record in health care speaks for 
itself and demands to be hidden before any election is called. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Prince Albert YWCA Women of Distinction Awards 
 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The YWCA in 
Prince Albert operates a residence for women and children. 
They also develop and deliver programs that provide 
opportunities for women and their families to invest in their 
own future. 
 
Last night the YWCA sponsored the 10th annual fundraiser 
recognizing women from Prince Albert at their Women of 
Distinction banquet. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to make special mention of the winners, of 
the award winners. In the arts and culture category, the award 
winner was Cecile Miller. Carol Beck won in the health, sports 
and fitness category. The business and professional category 
award went to Barbara Elaine Hazelwood Gustafson. 
 
The community enhancement category, the winner was Elsie 
Devries. And the young woman of distinction in science and 
technology and receiver of the winner . . . and winning the 
Saskatchewan Power Roberta Bondar Scholarship was Carla 
Angelski. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate all the recipients and the 
board members. The keynote speaker spoke about success. She 
spoke about her own success and having achieved the 
distinction of being the first leader of a political party in 
Saskatchewan, the member from Greystone. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Polonia Dance Ensemble in Concert 
 

Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It was my 
pleasure to attend the annual Polonia in Concert performance 
this past Saturday evening. It was the 11th annual presentation 
by the Polonia Dance Ensemble of Regina, demonstrating the 
rich cultural heritage of Polish Canadians. The show consisted 
of junior and senior dancers and guest performers, the Balaton 
Hungarian Dancers of Regina. 
 
Polonia Dance Ensemble and its related organizations, the 
Polish Canadian Cultural Club and St. Anthony’s Parish have a 
well deserved reputation and tradition of community activity 
and involvement in the city of Regina. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Polish.) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



1014 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1999 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Political Advertising 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, my question is for the Premier. A week ago the 
Saskatchewan Party began running television ads, positive ads 
about the Saskatchewan Party plan. Obviously our ads are still 
being aired and must be working because yesterday the NDP 
responded. The NDP is now running American-style attack ads 
designed to smear our leader, Elwin Hermanson. It’s a clear 
admission the NDP can’t talk about their own record. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party has chosen the high road, 
the NDP has chosen the ditch. That’s not too surprising. No one 
wants to drive on an NDP road, not even the NDP. 
 
Mr. Premier, how worried are you? Are things looking so bad 
for the NDP that you have to run American-style attack ads? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I say to the member 
opposite that there’s an old adage, the truth hurts. And I want to 
say to the member opposite that what people across the 
province are saying in the past week when they watch the ads 
very carefully of your leader Mr. Hermanson leaning against the 
tractor or with the tractor, and they compared it with 1982 of 
the then leader Mr. Devine leaning against his combine, and the 
overexpenditure that was taking place and promised at that 
time. The public has been saying for a week it just doesn’t add 
up. That’s what they’re saying. 
 
And the people of the province also look at the members of 
your party, many of them who ran for the Conservative party 
and many who went to the convention and saw the same old, 
tired Tory faces supporting your party, they believed this is the 
Tory Party. And you’ll have to excuse the public and ourselves 
for confusing the issue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. You 
know, Mr. Speaker, you can almost understand the Premier’s 
dilemma. He probably walked into an ad agency and they told 
him, you’ve been Premier for eight years. You should talk 
about your record. Can we talk about taxes? No, can’t talk 
about taxes. Can you talk about job creation? No, can’t talk 
about job creation. Can you talk about health care? Gosh no, 
don’t talk about health care. How about agriculture? No, don’t 
say anything about agriculture. Well then why don’t we slam 
Elwin Hermanson? And the Premier said, that’s a great idea. 
 
Mr. Premier, is that what happened? Are you so ashamed of 
your own record that you have to run these American-style 
attack ads? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
member opposite that reducing the sales tax from 9 per cent to 6 
— we talk a lot about taxes. But I want to say to the member 
opposite it’s pretty clear who is running from their record in this 
exchange. It’s pretty clear who’s running from their record. A 
record of $15 billion in debt, a record . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Now hon. members will 

recognize the Chair is having some difficulty being able to hear 
the answer being provided because of comments . . . order . . . 
because of comments coming from both sides of the House . . . 
Order! The Chair asks for co-operation from members on all 
sides of the House. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I say again it’s pretty 
clear who’s running from their record — the people who 
change their name in the dead of night in order to avoid their 
record. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I want to quote from an individual who I 
have a lot of respect for — my father, who’s 82 years old. And 
he says very clearly to me, he says: look, if it has a stripe down 
its back and it walks like one and smells like one, then whether 
it’s called a skunk or not, it’s still a skunk. 
 
And you can change your name, you can run from your record, 
but I want to say to you, you’re Tories. Everyone in the 
province knows it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
week the Premier invited us to keep running our ads. I hope you 
do the same thing, Mr. Premier. 
 
Because you’re not just attacking Elwin Hermanson. You’re 
also attacking 10,000 people who have now joined the 
Saskatchewan Party and tens of thousands more who plan to 
vote for the Saskatchewan Party, women and men from all parts 
of the province, all political backgrounds including the NDP. 
People like Fred Thompson, Mr. Premier. Remember him? 
 
So you just keep running your little ads, hope that people forget 
about your record — high taxes, zero job growth, lousy health 
care, crumbling roads. But I think voters will choose our 
message of hope over your message of gloom and doom. 
 
Mr. Premier, will you admit that your own polling shows that 
you can’t run on your own record? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
members opposite that we are extremely proud of the last eight 
years and the record of this government — extremely proud. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, we are so proud, we 
are so proud that we’re not going to change the name of our 
party. Announce that today — we’re not changing the name. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — And, Mr. Speaker, why the 
members opposite, why the members opposite are being 
accused of running from their record and tying themselves to 
the Tory Party comes here from “The Saskatchewan Party 
Names Interim Leader.” This is from a Leader-Post story which 
says “meanwhile” and I quote: “Krawetz says he welcomes 
endorsement of people like former premier Grant Devine and 



May 4, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 1015 

 

former cabinet minister Grant Schmidt.” 
 
Now I know you don’t want to associate with the Tories of the 
past, but, sir, realize you are Tories. You are Tories. You have 
the record of the Tories and you’re going to have to defend it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Cost of Closure of Plains Health Centre 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just before I 
walked in, I received a phone call from an NDP supporter in 
Regina who phoned about the ads and said his party, the NDP, 
was stuck in the past, afraid of the present, and no plans for the 
future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the 
Minister of Finance. Mr. Minister, in 1996 you told 
Saskatchewan people the Plains hospital closure was on budget 
and on time. On budget and on time — you seemed to say it at 
least 50 times. And now it turns out that when you made those 
statements you already knew the Plains closure was over budget 
and the costs were growing. 
 
Now the costs have grown by about $45 million over budget 
because of your mismanagement. Mr. Minister, why did you 
say the Plains closure was on budget when you knew full well 
that it wasn’t true? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Well I can indicate to the member, as was indicated to Mr. 
Weidlich yesterday, the former Minister of Health was advised 
by the Department of Health that the project was on time and on 
budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again to the 
Minister of Finance, who seemed to be very emphatic and very 
nervous about the questions because he repeated it about 50 
times — on budget and on time. 
 
Mr. Minister, the NDP has changed the Health ministers several 
times since that minister made his famous statement. But one 
thing remains the same: they’re all committed to blowing 
millions of dollars over the Plains closure and they’re all 
committed to hiding those cost overruns. 
 
A few weeks ago the Saskatchewan Party tried to launch a 
special auditor’s investigation into the cost overruns at the 
Plains. We wanted to see if anything could be done before the 
NDP wasted even more money on this project. And of course, 
the NDP government refused. They didn’t want anyone actually 
reviewing their health care spending just before an election. 
 
Madam Minister, you now know the NDP has been misleading 
Saskatchewan people about the cost of this project since 1996. 
Isn’t it time for an independent investigation by the Provincial 
Auditor into the Plains closure? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, what the member may not 
realize is that Project ’98 was the consolidation of services at 
the Plains into the Pasqua and the Regina General. And it has 
been indicated that the original project was to cost about $83 
million, and as a result of inflation, building code, and site 
requirements, move costs, and so on, the site . . . the 
consolidation cost $95 million. 
 
In addition — in addition, Mr. Speaker — the Regina Health 
District added services that were not contained at the Plains. Let 
me give you examples. There is now a MRI (magnetic 
resonance imaging ) that is located at the Regina General. 
Regina didn’t have a MRI; it is now there. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, there is a new mental health facility 
and, as we know, this is Mental Health Week and people have 
access to nice facilities in the southern part of Saskatchewan. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, there are enhancements to this project 
and we think we now have a state-of-the-art facility in Regina 
for southern Saskatchewan and there are added services. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam 
Minister, your Project ’98 is a typical example of NDP 
mismanagement and poor planning. In fact you’ve ended up 
with a number of unauthorized expenditures there. It’s time that 
changes were made. 
 
Since the Premier is not prepared to make the necessary 
changes in the Department of Health, it’s time to remove Garf 
Stevenson as the head of the Regina District Health Board — 
your appointee to that board — for his illegal 
over-expenditures. When will you do that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, what I want to say 
to the public is that we now have increased the number of 
ambulatory care spaces from 20 to 50. This means more 
outpatient and day surgery and minor emergency and 
pre-admission areas. 
 
In addition, we have space for a new spiral CT (computerized 
tomography) scan and we have accommodations for new 
technology. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, we have the beginnings of a women’s 
health centre which is extremely important, given our 
government’s new initiatives in women’s health. And as 
everyone knows, we need to have initiatives in women's health. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, we have one of the nicest facilities in 
this country for people who suffer from mental health problems. 
And we think that is also important, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As I’ve said before, and I’ll say it again, Regina has one of the 
state-of-the-art facilities with some of the most up-to-date 
equipment and we think that’s important for quality health care 
for southern Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



1016 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1999 

 

Lake Diefenbaker Potato Corporation 
 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the minister responsible for Sask Water. 
 
Mr. Minister, yesterday we found out about another blown NDP 
deal; another business disaster that will cost Saskatchewan 
taxpayers millions. 
 
Yesterday in question period the Saskatchewan Party asked you 
about the bankruptcy of Lake Diefenbaker Potato Corporation. 
Of course you told us yesterday there wasn’t a big problem. 
You said we shouldn’t judge too quickly. 
 
Then you spoke to the media and confirmed two things. You 
said Lake Diefenbaker Potato Corporation owed the 
government $8 million. And you said there is absolutely no 
guarantee the NDP will recover any of it. 
 
Mr. Minister, why would the NDP loan $8 million of taxpayers’ 
money to a company you knew was in serious financial 
difficulty? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you. First of all, Mr. Speaker, I’d 
say to the member opposite if he is suggesting that 
diversification in agriculture is not a good thing, I would ask 
what he would suggest we should do. 
 
In the 1980s, Mr. Speaker, that government invested some $65 
million in infrastructure by way of irrigation equipment. Prior 
to that, there was an additional, approximately 55 or 60 million, 
for a total of about a hundred and twenty million dollars by way 
of irrigation infrastructure. The price of wheat is down, the 
price of canola is down. It only makes sense that we look at 
developing some other industry. 
 
And we’re still very, very interested in working with the Farm 
Credit Corporation, with the growers out in that area, and with 
the Royal Bank to try and work our way through the future in 
potatoes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Minister, diversification is great. We like it. But handing 
taxpayers’ dollars out like drunken sailors is not great and 
you’re getting famous for it. 
 
Mr. Minister, the long and short of this latest NDP disaster is 
that you’ve blown $8 million more taxpayers’ money. The brain 
trust at Sask Water spent $5.8 million to build two potato 
storage facilities. Then you sold the buildings to Lake 
Diefenbaker Potato Corporation for a $3 million junk bond and 
a $2.8 million mortgage that you aren’t even the preferred 
creditor on. Now the company is in receivership. 
 
Mr. Minister, that means that taxpayers will be out $8 million. 
The Royal Bank will get paid. Farm Credit will get paid. But 
the Saskatchewan taxpayers are not going to get paid. 
 
Mr. Minister, what is your government doing to salvage at least 

some of the $8 million taxpayers have lost on your latest 
business venture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, thank you again, Mr. 
Speaker. It is certainly, I would suggest, inappropriate for that 
member to be suggesting about who should be spending like 
drunken sailors if you look at their record, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to quote, I want to quote from one of the partners, the 
Farm Credit Corporation, that is, a spokesperson on behalf of 
the Farm Credit Corporation, Terry Kremeniuk, who says this, 
Mr. Speaker. He says, that if potato prices had been a lot 
different the situation could have been a lot different for us and 
for them. That’s from the Farm Credit Corporation — one of 
the partners. 
 
The Royal Bank, as well as a partner, believes — like we do — 
that we should be working with growers in the area because we 
all believe, Mr. Speaker, that there is a future in the potato 
industry, especially with the infrastructure that exists out there. 
 

Budget for Highway Maintenance 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Liberals 
have brought up the deplorable working conditions of nurses 
time and time again. And we’re going to bring it up again this 
time. Except this time it’s a home care nurse and her deplorable 
working conditions are the pothole-ridden roads of this 
province. So the Health minister can relax, this one is for the 
Highways minister. 
 
Every day, Carole Smulan of Lemberg travels between 
Lemberg, Melville, and Grayson. And in her words, deals with 
the frustration of the deterioration of the roads, wear and tear, 
abuse, and constant challenge of veering around all the 
erosions, gutters, obstacles, and craters in our highway. 
 
On Thursday last, Carole Smulan was driving on Highway 22 
when she swerved to avoid a pothole. She missed one pothole 
on one side, but on the other side, hit a big chunk of pavement, 
heard a bang, and her tire was flat. Later she found her tire rim 
was damaged beyond repair. She has to wait until a new rim 
arrives from the States. Her work is delayed, her patients suffer 
because of the pothole-ridden roads. 
 
The NDP skimmed 135 million from gas tax and use it to pay 
for hacks and flacks. Mr. Speaker, Carole and Brian Smulan are 
very angry and are asking, where is your road tax going? 
Madam Minister, why aren’t you putting all the tax back into 
the roads? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
member opposite that there was a time in the province of 
Saskatchewan when near a hundred per cent of the road tax 
went to highways. And that was a period before 1982 when the 
money you collected for taxes could go to roads, and the money 
you collected for income tax could go to programs. 
 
But as you know, as you know, over $750 million out of this 
budget goes to interest costs. So out of the taxes, a large 
percentage has to go to pay interest. And I want to tell the 



May 4, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 1017 

 

member opposite that when you talk about roads in Canada, I 
have here a report from The Globe and Mail which says: “17 
billion fix sought for crumbling highways” in Canada. And it 
says, aging roads are falling apart and the problem is worst in 
Alberta and Ontario, says Scotty Warren. 
 
And I want to say to you, sir, that you should give Mr. Chrétien 
a call. Because this is the only country in the western world, the 
western world, where the federal government refuses to pick up 
their share of responsibility for inter-provincial highways. And, 
if you’re serious, today you’d leave this room — the Assembly 
— you’d get on your phone to your leader in Ottawa and get 
some money for the highways here in the province. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, there has already been a 
commitment made by the federal government to address that 
issue. 
 
What people can’t understand in this province, is why the NDP 
government, who are responsible for the taxpayers of this 
province have all kinds of money to globe trot, then invest in 
Chile, Guyana and all over the place, nothing to spend here. 
 
They collect $370 million in gas taxes and only put 235 back 
into highways. That’s a rip-off. But when that 235 million 
doesn’t make a difference, that’s a pathetic disgrace. And that’s 
what’s happening. Nothing is being fixed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP, if they don’t get serious, the NDP don’t 
soon start maintaining and repairing the highways, many roads 
will have to be rebuilt entirely. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Liberal Party in its Priorities ’99 plan has 
committed to spending all of the gas tax on the roads of this 
province — every penny. I’d like to ask the minister, does she 
agree with the Liberal plan to spend every single penny 
collected from the road taxes on roads? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — The member is brighter than he 
pretends to be. He knows full well that the interest on debt has 
to be paid out of the taxes. You know that. And so a percentage 
of the sales tax, the gas tax, the income tax is absolutely 
necessary to pay for that party’s debt that’s changed its name 
from the Tory Party to the Saskatchewan Party. You know that. 
 
But let me tell you one other thing, sir. You know that back in 
the 1970s your federal minister of Transportation, Otto Lang, 
— you remember what farmers said, the only two four-lettered 
name in Canada, Otto Lang — decided to shut down the rail 
system in this country. 
 
And I want to tell you that today you stand there 
sanctimoniously after the Liberal Party dismantled the rail 
system in this province, withdrew the western transportation 
funds and the Crow rate, and you have the audacity to say two 
things. Where’s the money for roads? And to the Wheat Pool, 
keep the elevators open on those branch lines that we 
abandoned. 
 
Can you imagine anything so ridiculous as you standing here 
criticizing us for what your federal government did to Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

University Tuition Fees 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Okay, well then I’ll address it to the Premier. 
 
When your party was first elected in 1944 under Tommy 
Douglas you were elected on a platform of abolishing university 
tuition fees. That’s what you promised. You repeated that 
promise in several subsequent platforms. 
 
Is that still the policy of your party? Is that still the promise? If 
so, why have tuition fees skyrocketed under your leadership. 
Why have tuition fees doubled since 1991 and they’re set to 
treble in the professional colleges? 
 
Please don’t tell us it’s because of Ottawa. The other nine 
provinces have the same federal government as we have and 
somehow they managed to keep their university buildings from 
crumbling and being condemned. Mr. Speaker, the future of 
Saskatchewan is a priority. We will provide — the Liberal Party 
— $1,000 for every first and second year student 
post-secondary . . . (inaudible) . . . what will you do— what will 
you do to make university education accessible and affordable? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, my first words to the 
hon. member from North Battleford are to say welcome back to 
question period. And I hope that all is well in your progress 
now because we missed your voice. And I’m sure that’s a 
feeling shared across the House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the answer is very simple and it’s been said over 
and over again and it happens to be the absolute truth. When in 
1995 the federal government cut back $6 billion on block 
transfers, two major programs were affected: health care 
funding, and post-secondary education. We back-filled every 
penny that Ottawa took away from us in health care. And we 
back-filled 97 cents — almost a full dollar — for every penny 
they took away from post-secondary education. 
 
This year we had an increase in operating budget to the 
university system. This year we’ve committed money to the 
kinesiology building, Thorvaldson Building, and are continuing 
adding to the funding of university. We believe that the future is 
in learning — life-long learning. Or as Marshall McLuhan 
described it, “learning for a living.” And as our economy grows, 
and as we strengthen, and as we improve the financial picture, 
there will be more for the university. 
 
Second point I want to make before I take the Chair, don’t 
forget the $750 million lost like that interest payments thanks to 
the Sask-a-Tory party; every day. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, a few years ago we were laying 
off nurses and forcing new graduates to leave this country to 
find employment. Now of course we find we have a nursing 
shortage. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the same thing is about to happen with our 
teaching profession. The College of Education is graduating at 
least 35 per cent fewer graduates today than a few years ago. 
The number is dropping just at a time when the teaching 
profession is entering a time of high retirement and many 
teachers will be leaving the profession. 



1018 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1999 

 

Mr. Speaker, why can’t this government get it right? Why is the 
government so short-sighted? Why can’t programs be related to 
work requirements? Why are the needs of our young people so 
low on the NDP’s list of priorities? Where will the future 
leaders of our province come from if education and training is 
not a top priority of this province and this government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, it is a top priority. This 
budget that the Minister of Finance introduced has an 
expenditure of $1.1 billion for education, second only to health 
care of $1.92 billion. 
 
You talk about your particular platform. You take a look at your 
particular platform and you will be spending, by my quick 
calculation, something in the order of $356 million, new 
spending offset by, according to your own platform, offset, by 
your own platform, an estimated $70 million savings. 
 
This platform doesn’t make any sense. You don’t say one word 
about eliminating the debt or reducing it. You don’t say one 
word about tax reduction. Even the Saskatchewan Tory Party 
over . . . the Sask-a-Tory party over there has put together a 
budget which tells you at least that we’re going to be $1.8 
billion in debt over four years. But at least they tell it like it is. 
 
You simply can’t spend everywhere, everywhere, everywhere 
without telling us where you’re going to cut. And without 
getting your federal cousins, the people who are supporting you, 
the federal Liberals, getting into the game. Tell them to get in 
the game, to join us to put the priority in education. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 244  The Children’s Law Amendment Act, 1999 
 

Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move first reading 
of Bill No. 244, The Children’s Law Amendment Act, 1999. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 44  The Midwifery Act 
 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me a 
great deal of pleasure to rise today to move second reading of 
The Midwifery Act, 1999. 
 
In many countries across the globe, midwives have a long and 
proud heritage. Women have come to value their experience, 
their warmth and compassion, and the individual . . . that 
midwives can provide. 
 
In these countries midwives play a vital role not only in the 
birthing room, but also throughout a woman’s pregnancy and in 
her first days with her new baby. In our society, midwifery has 

only begun to mature as a health profession. This is true in 
many provinces including Saskatchewan. 
 
This greater maturity and status does not come without strings. 
It carries a responsibility, a responsibility to regulate the 
profession and to ensure a consistent high standard of quality 
and safety for the women of this province. 
 
With this legislation we’re meeting the responsibility, Mr. 
Speaker, and we’re doing so in partnership with midwives and 
other health care providers. In 1994 this government appointed 
the Midwifery Advisory Committee. Its role was to assess the 
need for midwifery services in our province. The committee 
found that most women are very satisfied with the maternity 
services currently available, but some would like to have a 
midwifery as an additional option. We will open the way for 
that option and we will do so in a manner that ensures the 
highest standards of service. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1997 this government announced our intention 
to legalize and regulate midwifery as a health profession. We 
knew that this would be a complex task. We knew there were 
plenty of questions to be answered. We have seen from the 
experience of other provinces such as British Columbia and 
Ontario. 
 
To ensure that we could benefit from the views and the 
expertise of our partners in the health system, our government 
established the Midwifery Implementation Working Group. The 
group includes midwives, consumers, health providers, and 
health district representatives. It’s worked extensively to create 
this Act as well as the necessary bylaws to go with it. 
 
The Act is very similar to statutes in other provinces. It is also 
consistent with newer legislation governing other health 
professions in our province. At the same time, it has many 
unique features. 
 
For example, it recognizes that the profession is just starting out 
in terms of its members and resources. It establishes a college to 
oversee and regulate the profession and it recognizes that the 
college will need some help in its formative years to carry out 
its mandate. 
 
A transitional council comprised of midwives and other key 
partners in the health system will be established to manage the 
college. Saskatchewan Health will also provide initial support 
to the college. When the college’s membership grows to the 
point where it can support itself, members will elect a 
permanent council to phase out and replace the transitional 
body. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Midwifery Act also includes a registration 
process which takes into account the varying qualifications of 
midwives. We recognize that early on the majority of midwives 
who apply to practice in this province will have received their 
training through a number of different avenues. 
 
(1430) 
 
We need an assessment process to ensure that these midwives 
have adequate skills to safely practice in our province. 
 



May 4, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 1019 

 

To assess their skills, the college will use a standard list of 
competencies similar to what’s used in other jurisdictions. This 
process is a temporary measure. As midwifery education 
programs continue to develop and mature at Canadian 
universities, the college will know that graduates of these 
programs have a consistent level of skill and training. 
 
While The Midwifery Act does respond to these unique 
circumstances, it is in many ways similar to other, more recent, 
professional statutes in our province. For example, there are a 
number of measures to ensure public accountability. And while 
the college will have the power to make bylaws to govern 
midwives, bylaws that may impact the public will require the 
minister’s approval. 
 
The transitional council, and later the permanent council, will 
include representatives of the public. The college will also 
submit an annual report on its activities to the Minister of 
Health. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as with any health profession, it’s also important 
to have a mechanism to handle public complaints and this 
process must be open and transparent. People need to feel 
confident that complaints about professional misconduct or 
incompetence are dealt with in a fair manner. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Act establishes a mediation process as an 
option to handle these kinds of complaints. It also allows for 
discipline hearings and ensures that these hearings will be held 
in public. Complainants will be able to attend those hearings 
and receive a report on the outcome. Similar to other 
professional bodies, the college may apply a variety of 
penalties, including remedial training, suspensions, expulsion, 
or fines of up to $5,000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Midwifery Act will reserve the title 
“midwife” for members of the college. The Midwifery 
Implementation Working Group is developing the necessary 
regulations pertaining to what midwives can do such as 
performing diagnostic tests or prescribing certain drugs. The 
Act and key bylaws have provided to our partners in the health 
system including the Midwives Association of Saskatchewan, 
Friends of the Midwives, the college of physicians and 
surgeons, the Saskatchewan Medical Association, the 
Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ Association, the 
Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, and health districts through the 
Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations. 
 
In general, Mr. Speaker, all are supportive of the Act. They will 
have an opportunity for further comment on the bylaws and 
regulations before this Act is proclaimed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government has listened very carefully to 
what women in this province have said. And what they’ve told 
us is that they want an option of using midwives. We’ve 
listened to our partners in health care who have many sound 
ideas on how to make this option a real reality. And we’ve done 
so in a way that ensures public safety, ensures those who wish 
to practice as midwives are properly trained, licensed, and 
regulated. 
 
In doing so, we will ensure that midwives in our province take 
their place as respected health professionals in our province 

who provide a safe, high-quality maternity option. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I beg to inform the Assembly that His Honour, the 
Lieutenant Governor, having been informed of the subject 
matter of the Bill, recommends it to the consideration of the 
Assembly. And I therefore move that Bill No. 44, The 
Midwifery Act, be now read a second time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I’m delighted to hear the minister 
speak of this Bill. My colleagues and I are very supportive of 
this Bill and the opportunity that women will have to have a 
choice. They can have the midwives around them during the 
pregnancy, which is a very important step towards making sure 
that pregnancy is looked at as the wonderful experience that it 
can be and not a disease as it was for years. 
 
So I am delighted to talk to not only to the minister but to some 
of the members that have been sitting on this committee and 
discuss the concerns that they had and some of the obstacles 
they had as they were working on this Bill. 
 
We are a little dismayed that the government has decided that 
they will not be covering the costs of midwifery. For some of 
the people that will be able to . . . will want to use it may be not 
be able to keep these . . . use the services because of the cost, 
much like the chelation from last year where the government 
recognized it but did not cover the costs of it. 
 
But I’m sure these are issues that can be dealt with later on. I 
have some questions on some sections of the Act and I will be 
discussing that in Committee of the Whole. I just would like the 
members opposite and the women . . . families that brought 
forward this Bill to know that the official opposition is 
supporting this Bill, and we will ask the questions when it 
comes up in Committee of the Whole. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I realize it’s 
somewhat unusual for a private member on the government side 
to stand up on second reading of a Bill. But I do want to say 
that this particular Act has been one of particular concern for 
me for many years, and I am so very pleased that the 
government has now decided after a fairly extensive 
consultation with potential service providers, the advocates for 
midwifery, and also with the SRNA (Saskatchewan Registered 
Nurses’ Association) and the SMA (Saskatchewan Medical 
Association) to proceed with the midwifery Bill. 
 
For anyone who has been fortunate enough, as I have, to 
witness the miracle of home births at first-hand, I can tell you 
that watching a midwife and a new mother interacting and 
bringing a new human being into this world at home is a truly 
momentous and inspiring — awe-inspiring— experience. 
 
And I am very hopeful that as the province gains more 
experience with the services of midwives, that more and more 
women will be able to avail themselves of these services and 
that we will see it become a regular part of our medical services 
in this province. 
 



1020 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1999 

 

I do want to congratulate all the many women and a few men 
who have been working to bring midwifery services to this 
province and I thank them for their patience and their diligence. 
And I look forward to seeing bigger and better services from the 
midwives of Saskatchewan. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 41 — The Municipal Revenue 
Sharing Amendment Act, 1999 

 
The Deputy Chair: — Before I call clause 1, I’ll invite the 
minister to introduce her officials. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. On my 
right is Doug Morcom, who is the director of grants 
administration, and behind Doug is Grete Nybraten, who is the 
policy manager, both from the Department of Municipal 
Affairs, Culture and Housing, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thanks, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Welcome, 
Madam Minister, and your officials this afternoon. 
 
Madam Minister, I believe the infrastructure fund that you’ve 
set up for this year, the additional monies you put into 
Municipal Government is a 50/50 split here. And I’m just 
wondering, Madam Minister, do you have any idea how many 
municipalities out there will be in a position to even apply for 
money from this program being . . . taking into consideration 
that many of those municipalities are going to have to raise their 
mill rates just to hold the status quo on their infrastructure and 
road building? Do you have a feel for how many are going to be 
putting in for this money? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, the application forms 
are not completed yet, but we have had consultations with both 
the . . . with the municipal organizations, and obviously the 
money doesn’t have to be put . . . or the subject of the 
application doesn’t have to be some new project in addition to 
what they might have already planned. 
 
So it certainly shouldn’t result in any tax increases. In fact, the 
opposite should be true as they have this additional assistance 
from the province to complete or to add to their . . . to projects 
they might have already planned. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, I think you kind of touched on my next question, but 
what hoops does a municipality have to go through to apply for 
this? You have said the forms are not ready yet, but what do 
they have to go through to qualify to have a project put under 
this program? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, the member opposite 

will be aware of the two phases of the Canada/Saskatchewan 
infrastructure works program that has just wound up. And in 
that, we learned a great deal about how to adjudicate application 
forms and how to make that process run smoothly. 
 
And while the federal government is not a participant in this 
particular program, we’ll use this same approach where there 
will be a panel for the rural projects, a panel for the urban 
projects, and they’ll be representation from the municipal 
associations on that and they will set criteria and adjudicate the 
applications. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, you put $10 million into this program for this year. I 
believe the breakdown is seven and a half urban, two rural, and 
a half northern. 
 
Can you maybe tell me, Madam Minister, how you came up 
with those numbers; how you decide whether urban gets X 
number of dollars, rural, and so on? Is it population, or what do 
you go by to break that money down? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — It is roughly population. If you take 
the . . . not population by municipality, but if you add up the 
population in the urban municipalities, meaning cities, towns, 
villages, you will get approximately 75 per cent of the 
population. The northern population is approximately pro-rated 
to their share of the pool, and likewise with rural municipalities. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I guess that 
concerns me somewhat, Madam Minister. Because if we stick 
to that theory in how we fund municipalities out there, you 
know as well as I do that the infrastructure in rural 
Saskatchewan, if you added it all up, is probably far greater and 
more costly than urban infrastructure is, just because of the vast 
majority of roads out there to keep up. 
 
And I’m afraid if we strictly go by population, and you know 
what is happening out there as well as I do, that our population 
is moving from rural to urban, we’re going to end up with 
probably 10, 15 per cent of the funding in years to come for 
rural and about 80 to 85 probably per cent of the funding will 
go to urban Saskatchewan. 
 
And I’m not trying to take away, Madam Minister, the needs of 
urban Saskatchewan. They have many needs there too. But I’m 
worried, if we stay with that trend all the way through, what’s 
going to happen out there to rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Do you think, Madam Minister, that down the road we’re going 
to have to find some other way of splitting up this money that 
takes into consideration the vast number of road networks out 
there in rural Saskatchewan to look after? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Well, Mr. Chairman, as I mentioned 
in my previous answer about the shares, that it’s roughly based 
on population. But there are other factors to be taken into 
consideration. Like for instance last year we gave rural 
municipalities a $3 million boost in the size of their 
revenue-sharing pool where the urban municipalities didn’t get 
any corresponding increase. 
 
So we took that into account when we made this year’s 



May 4, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 1021 

 

allocation. That in total this $2 million addition would represent 
a $5 million increase over the last two years to rural 
municipalities. So it is not quite as uneven as it might seem 
when you just look at it in isolation. 
 
And then of course, so much of the Highways budget is spent in 
. . . not in rural municipalities but in rural Saskatchewan. And 
there are, depending where they’re situated, a number of rural 
municipalities that are bisected or, you know, traversed by 
provincial highways that are kept up at provincial expense. 
Some are not so fortunately located and have no provincial 
highways within their borders — for them, it’s difficult. But it’s 
not a lot of money, but I think — and they have acknowledged 
that they’d like to have more — but it’s a good first step. 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, I guess — and it’s probably not a fair question, but do 
you expect the $10 million to all be used up this year? And I 
guess my other question then would be, if it is not all used up, 
because this is the first year of the program, will the excess, if 
there’s $2 million left over, will that be thrown in the pot for 
next year and be able for municipalities to reapply next year 
with next year’s allotment, plus the money left over from this 
year? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Well, what we have said, or what the 
Finance minister said in the budget, was that this is not a 
one-time allotment — the $10 million — for this budget year 
only. That it’s a permanent infrastructure program to be 
contributed to on an annual basis. And while we haven’t made 
any undertakings to that, I guess the hope is that at some point 
in the future that contribution could even be increased. 
 
So it’s not as if it’s a one-time thing. You know, it’s got to be 
accessed right now or it’s gone. And I do, in answer to the other 
part of your question, I certainly do expect it to be fully 
subscribed. And roads and transportation are not the only 
projects that are eligible, but we assume they’ll be the major 
ones. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Madam Minister, is there a maximum on 
any project that any municipality, whether it’s urban or rural, 
can apply for? Is there a set number that’s the maximum you 
can put in for? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — I’m told that SARM (Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities) has requested that for 
rural-based projects there be a maximum of $50,000 per project. 
And the urban municipalities have not asked for a maximum on 
the size of their projects. But we would want to . . . Once we 
receive all the applications, I’m sure the panel that reviews 
them in the essence of fairness will want to make sure that one 
large, for instance, in an urban setting, one large bridge project 
could eat up the whole pool. And I’m sure that the panel that is 
making the approvals wouldn’t let that happen. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, you said that the application forms are really not ready 
yet. I’m wondering if they are, they’ll probably . . . I imagine 
they’re going to be ready very quickly here. But how long is 
this going to take to process because we’re already getting into 

spring on into summer, and I think that’s where my concern 
came in with the $10 million being used up, because a number 
of these jobs will have to be tendered and go through the hoops. 
By that time, we may be too late to complete some of these 
projects this year. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, the first step of course 
is to pass the Bill which is before us and that’s what we’re 
considering now. Then there’s the regulations will have to be 
approved, the subsequent regulations, that give us the authority 
to have the money and make the structure and so forth. 
 
I’m told that the applications will be, along with the regulations 
and so on, will be mailed out either the end of this week or early 
next week with the request that applications be returned by May 
28; and its expected that all the approvals will be in place by the 
middle of June. So that should leave enough time for an 
appropriate tendering process and to get the work complete. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, thank you, Madam Minister, and if it 
hinges on getting more money from municipalities on passing 
this Bill, I’ll quit asking questions right now. Let’s get this Bill 
on the road and let’s get that money out. 
 
Thank you to you and your officials, Madam Minister. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — I’d like to thank the members opposite 
for their questions. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 42 — The New Generation Co-operatives Act 
 

The Deputy Chair: — I invite the Minister of Justice to 
introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you. I’m very pleased to have with 
me this afternoon Brent Prenevost from legislative services in 
Saskatchewan Justice; Monte Curle, the deputy director and 
deputy registrar of the corporations branch, Saskatchewan 
Justice; Mitchell Demyen, right behind me, manager in 
Saskatchewan Agriculture and Food; and then to my left, Dion 
McGrath, policy analyst with Saskatchewan Economic and 
Co-operative Development. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. To the minister and 
his officials — welcome. I’m looking forward to raising a few 
questions in regards to the two Bills before us. And, Mr. 
Minister, I believe Bill No. 43 basically is just addressing some 
of the bilingual aspects of Bill 42, so in that regards, the 
questions I’ll be raising are basically related to both Bills so that 
we won’t be raising questions separately in regards to the two 
Bills. 
 
I note from your second reading speech, you mention about . . . 
And I’m going to quote from your speech: 
 



1022 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1999 

 

Simply put this legislation represents another way 
Saskatchewan producers can co-operate under changing 
economic conditions to create businesses that benefit their 
communities. It is designed to provide the capacity for new 
co-operatives to emerge in agriculture-related activities 
including short-line railways. 

 
Mr. Minister, I think in Saskatchewan we’re quite well aware of 
the co-operative movement. We’re very well aware of how 
co-ops have . . . co-operative ventures have worked through the 
past number of years as we’ve had co-op stores, and retail 
outlets, and fuel distributors, and fertilizer — many enterprises. 
Sask Wheat Pool basically is a co-operative. 
 
In fact even on a smaller scale, while they’re not necessarily 
called co-operatives, the Weyburn Inland Terminal too in all 
respects was sort of co-operative in venture . . . or venture of a 
group of local farmers who were looking at a different means or 
a new method of trying to move product to market and trying to 
put a few more dollars in their pockets. 
 
As I look at the present Bill before us and certainly it has a 
number of clauses. And I haven’t — to be honest with you — I 
haven’t had the time to go through all of them specifically. 
Considering all the legislation that we’ve seen in the Assembly 
to date, nothing even compares. I think we could put about 25 
Bills together and still not have the same amount of paper tied 
up in this specific piece of legislation. 
 
But I’m taking it, from this Bill No. 42, The Act respecting 
New Generation Co-operatives that the Bill has . . . Some of the 
intent is to make co-ops more competitive in not only in the 
Canadian scene but certainly in US (United States) markets 
making rural businesses more organized and competitive. We 
see that Saskatchewan has lost business since Manitoba and 
North Dakota introduced co-op legislation. And I believe this 
also addresses some of the tax implications for people when 
they set up businesses. 
 
So I guess the first question I would have, Mr. Minister: am I on 
the right track when I talk about the tax incentives and the need 
to become more competitive? And as well, Mr. Minister, in 
designing this piece of legislation we have in front of us today, 
who would you have consulted with over the period of time in 
putting together this piece of legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think that the summary that the member 
has given is a good summary of the intent of the legislation and 
the purpose of the legislation, which is to enhance the 
development of the co-operative movement and allow it to work 
in a new age and a new time. The specific key policy features in 
this are the fact that the new generation co-op model or plan 
allows for access to non-member capital while retaining the 
membership control. And that’s a key feature when you get into 
very large projects where your members don’t have enough 
capital to do all of that. 
 
There are other features that relate to non-par-value preferred 
shares which have some floating value in a market. Also the 
fact that some of your non-members can be board members, 
only up to 20 per cent. Also there’s ability to dissent in the 
operation and also we’re expanding some of the opportunities 
for flexibility when co-ops are wound up. 

It think you’ve correctly identified that this is very consistent 
with federal legislation and Manitoba co-op legislation, and 
we’ve learned things from what they’ve done and are improving 
and expanding it. It’s also a first step as we look at co-operative 
legislation in Saskatchewan over the next few years. 
 
You asked who had been consulted and there are quite a 
number of people have been listed, but I will list a specific list 
that will help you get a flavour of the people who’ve been 
involved. 
 
The Centre for the Study of Co-operatives at the University of 
Saskatchewan; Federated Co-ops . . . Co-operatives Ltd.; Credit 
Union Central and their members; Saskatchewan Wheat Pool; 
Federation of Production Co-operatives; The Co-operators; 
Co-operative Trust, Dairyworld Foods, which is Dairy 
Producers Co-operative, and the Community Health Co-op 
Federation. Those are the specific groups that we’ve talked to 
within the co-operative sector. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, when this 
Bill comes into effect and becomes law and is actually allowed 
to begin to function, where do you see it being utilized firstly? 
Are you perceiving that we’re going to see initiatives taken in 
the agricultural sector; what types of sectors you identified. 
Short line rail is one area that it may have a role to play. 
 
And I’m wondering what fields of this nature that your 
department is anticipating this piece of legislation would be a 
benefit to, in groups whether it’s producers or individuals or 
even companies, corporations, getting together to enhance 
business opportunities in this province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you for that question. There have 
been specific groups that have been interested in this legislation 
and primarily in the agricultural sector. So this legislation 
actually is directed to the agricultural sector, and in that we 
have included the short-line railway option. The various 
agricultural parts that have been interested have been the bison 
industry, the durum people, the wild boar, herbs and spices, 
even some in the chicken and poultry, that area as well. Those 
are the ones that have specifically asked at this stage. 
 
But what we do know is if we give the tools, then our 
Saskatchewan people are innovative and imaginative and they 
will use the tools to develop new businesses as well. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, you 
mentioned bison. I’m not sure if there are other organizations 
like the elk industry or the fallow deer, some of those industries, 
if you’ve had any inquiries from those associations in regards to 
this specific legislation to get information to see whether or not 
it might be something that would be a benefit to their 
associations. 
 
(1500) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — We’ve had some very preliminary 
inquiries from those industries, but practically it’s open to all 
agricultural industries and related industries. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Where do you perceive or see the biggest profit 
margin coming as far as co-operatives being set up in the 



May 4, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 1023 

 

province under this piece of legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The answer to that question is that our 
producers in Saskatchewan will gain a greater percentage of the 
profit from what they produce if they also can have an interest 
in the processing part of it. And so the real advantage of this 
legislation is: allow for our producers to participate in new 
generation co-ops that then process what they have actually 
produced or their neighbours have produced and allow them to 
participate both in the production profit as well as the 
processing profit. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, you’re probably aware, maybe your 
office is aware as well, we talk about agriculture and value 
added. In the southeastern part of the province and North 
Dakota, there’s been a lot of discussion over the last almost two 
years regarding a pasta plant. Now I’m not certain to date if a 
decision has been finalized on that, but I know that in the past 
while anyway, at least since last fall or summer, they basically 
— the group that were discussing this — had ruled out setting 
up the plant in Saskatchewan, looking more at Manitoba and 
North Dakota. 
 
I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, if that type of initiative is 
something that would fall into — or if indeed if they haven’t 
moved ahead with plans for a pasta plant — if indeed it might 
be the type of enterprise that would qualify; that this piece of 
legislation might give the investors a real option to take another 
look and revisit Saskatchewan as a possible location for this 
plant? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you. I have two very good answers 
to your question. One of them is that the prairie pasta producers 
consulted with our government officials as we prepared this 
legislation, so they’re very interested in the legislation and they 
are supportive of the legislation. We take that to mean that they 
may also be interested in actually using the legislation to further 
their business in this Manitoba-Saskatchewan-North Dakota 
triangle area. And it would be clearly our hope that they would 
decide to use this legislation and set up their business in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, since this is somewhat of an 
economic development type of tool, I think I’m going to use 
that terminology, what factors are you looking at in regards to, 
say, revisiting what the current . . . this legislation once it’s 
passed, whether or not it’s meeting its objectives and review of 
the legislation to see whether or not it should be enhanced or 
reviewed or maybe some changes made to the legislation down 
the road. Have you got a process in place to re-evaluate it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — We will be evaluating the legislation on 
an ongoing basis. Because this particular legislation is the first 
step in evaluating and renewing the co-op Act and co-op 
legislation generally. 
 
So practically the response of the co-operative sector to this 
particular legislation and also the new groups as they use the 
legislation will be taken into account. And if there are changes 
that need to be made or adjustments that need to be made, well 
we’ll be making those as soon as we hear about them. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, are there 

any cost benefits in regards to the piece of legislation? Are there 
any financial costs to the department in bringing forward this 
legislation, or down the road? Or is it just . . . the legislation 
itself just gives authority for groups and individuals to form 
co-operatives — there will be no economic costs to the 
department or to government as a result of this piece of 
legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I’d have to say that there are no additional 
costs. The corporations will be registered through the 
corporations branch, which already exists. The Economic and 
Co-operative Development department will have one more tool 
in their quiver, I guess, or in their tool bag. When they go to 
businesses to say to them, set up business in Saskatchewan, 
they can use this. 
 
So practically it’s something that provides opportunity, but it 
isn’t going to cost the government or taxpayer a lot of money. 
We hope that actually it will benefit taxpayers by bringing new 
businesses here. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, I think most people in this province 
hope that it may be just one of the tools that down the road we 
certainly can look at individuals looking at Saskatchewan as a 
place to invest or to move to or to become a part of. Certainly I 
think . . . personally I believe that this province does have a lot 
to offer. A lot of good reasons why this is a good place to live 
despite all the rhetoric and the problems. We have problems 
like everyone else, but it still has . . . there are many good 
reasons why we should look at opportunities. 
 
Unfortunately large corporations haven’t looked very 
favourably in reality at settling in Saskatchewan, and most of 
the businesses we do have, have actually come about as a result 
of somewhat co-op-like ventures. And so we’re certainly 
hoping that this may be the case with this legislation as well. 
 
In regards to the legislation, I note that when a co-op sets up a 
board of directors, does this Bill . . . are you providing for 
adequate insurance for directors if for example . . . and just a 
case in point, just the recent situation at Lucky Lake and the 
potato co-operative there and the bankruptcy. Now we haven’t 
heard of anyone suing, but it would seem to me when you set 
up a directorship, you decide to set up a corporation, for 
example, someone decides to put a co-operative together and 
buy up a short-line rail system and you have a number of people 
investing in that system. If something goes wrong and it doesn’t 
pan out, bankruptcy is declared. Are there provisions in the 
legislation to protect the directors of that co-operative when it is 
put together? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — In this particular legislation we’ve 
incorporated the standard director’s liability provisions that are 
in the corporations Act and The Non-profit Corporations Act, 
1995, and so it’s the same standard right across the board. No 
special protection for these people but, practically, a reasonable 
and prudent director shouldn’t have to worry. 
 
Mr. Toth: — So can you just give us an example, Mr. Minister, 
of what mechanisms have been put into place to adequately 
protect the liability of directors? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Perhaps you’re interested in looking at 



1024 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1999 

 

page 70 of the legislation just where you can see that section 
180, liability of directors — and there are quite a few provisions 
there but it also has the indemnification section which is section 
181. And practically, what these sections do, as I said before, 
they provide for the standard protection of directors who are 
involved in corporations like this. Most often directors who are 
part of a corporation or business venture also would then 
purchase director’s liability insurance which would make a full 
protective package with the provisions in the legislation. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I guess 
when it comes to setting up boards of directors, whether it’s just 
a church board or a local co-op board or whatever, we all . . . 
each group and organization would hope they would have the 
most qualified persons available around that would be willing to 
put their names forward to act on a board and get involved with 
a co-operative. 
 
And I guess one of the concerns certainly would be an issue that 
may come forward as a result of the liability that may hinge on 
a board of directors. And corporate governance models ensure 
that the board of directors know exactly what the roles and 
regulations are and how they must be adhered to. I take it, from 
sections 181 and 182, you feel that you have enough of a 
framework set up in this Bill that would certainly give directors 
of any co-operative that is set up under the legislation, that they 
would have adequate protection to put their names forward to 
act as a director and to give leadership to that specific 
organization. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Toth: — And one final question before we go. Clause by 
clause actually could take quite a while. I think we could be 
here for a little while, so I won’t ask a lot more questions. I’m 
assuming the Chair’s going to call for maybe part by part rather 
than clause by clause. 
 
It’s indicated the Bill allows for new co-ops to emerge in 
agriculture-related activities as well as short-line railways. What 
is this based upon, since over the past few years many railways 
have been abandoned to elevator closures? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I’m not sure what the question was. 
Perhaps you could repeat it because we’re not sure what you’re 
asking. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. What we’re looking at 
here . . . You mentioned about short-line railways, and I guess 
one of the concerns we have when you talk about short-line 
railways, in many cases, what we’re finding, groups over the 
past number of years — and we have one running south of 
Moose Jaw; I believe there’s one running in the Swift Current 
area — some organizations have come forward, have put 
short-line railways in place, and those have actually worked out 
fairly well because they were able to get their short-line rail in 
place before companies had actually closed down elevators. 
 
One of the concerns we have is the fact that many companies 
are moving very quickly right now to remove the physical plant 
from off a rail line. And I guess the concern is, this legislation 
may come forward, the opportunity to form a short line, but it 
may be too late because the elevators are already removed. 

Nobody’s going to, I think, form a short line if an elevator’s 
already removed. 
 
So I think those are . . . that’s the question we’re trying to get 
to, and whether or not there’s been some discussion with groups 
who are certainly looking at this Bill as a means to set up a 
short-line rail. And the fact is will they be able to get their 
short-line rail co-operative set up in time and have access to the 
elevators that are currently on the line? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you for that clarification. I think 
the question is, is what is the time line and how quickly can this 
be done. 
 
Our plan is to pass the legislation now. They’re working on the 
regulations, hope to have them in place by September, some 
time in September. We already have some short-line groups that 
are around the province who are aware of this legislation and 
are looking at it, and they would hope to use that that quickly. 
 
(1515) 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 356 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, to you 
and your officials we just want to say thank you for taking the 
time to come and address this lengthy piece of legislation. We 
certainly hope that it meets some of the goals and objectives 
that you perceive in bringing forward the legislation in dealing 
with inquiries by individuals regarding economic development 
of this province. 
 

Bill No. 43 — The New Generation Co-operatives 
Consequential Amendment Act, 1999/Loi de 1999 apportant 

des modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée 
The New Generation Co-operatives Act 

 
Clauses 1 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Before I make that 
motion I would like to make a special point of thanking the 
officials that I have here, along with a team of other officials 
within the various departments, who have worked on this 
project. 
 
They have done an excellent job of pulling together the kinds of 
legislative examples and precedents to prepare legislation for 
Saskatchewan which we think will provide a new economic 
development tool. We very much appreciate the hard work that 
they have done and we’d like to thank them. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 41 — The Municipal Revenue Sharing 
Amendment Act, 1999 

 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill 



May 4, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 1025 

 

be now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 42 — The New Generation Co-operatives Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 43 — The New Generation Co-operatives 
Consequential Amendment Act, 1999/Loi de 1999 apportant 

des modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée 
The New Generation Co-operatives Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Justice 
Vote 3 

 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, and to your 
officials, welcome. 
 
Mr. Minister, a question that I’m sure possibly your office and 
no doubt every MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) 
office in this province receives time and time again has to do 
with maintenance. And I have some information in front of me 
that has arrived, I’m not sure, April of ’98 from the province of 
BC (British Columbia). I believe they were bringing forward 
some new amendments in regards to maintenance, support, and 
some of the benefits. 
 
But the question that I want to ask today has to do with 
especially fathers having access to their child. Now the reason 
I’m raising this is not just because it happens to be one of the 
issues that comes before me time and time again. But one of the 
major concerns of recent note that has been brought to my 
attention comes from a young couple that have remarried, and 
they have past spousal partners. 
 
In the one case, the wife hasn’t received a cent from her ex. In 
the other case, the young gentleman, he’s been paying faithfully 
but what he finds is two things. Number one — while he’s been 
paying he’s had a job change, he’s gone to try and get a 
reduction in his maintenance agreement that would be a little 
closer to what he’s receiving as far as wages, and what really 
irks him is the fact that he just is denied access time and time 
and time again. And this is a question that has been going on for 
an awful long time. 
 
And I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, what your department has 

been doing to address the inequities when it comes to 
maintenance, maintenance enforcement, making sure that 
especially when we have partners, one lives in one province like 
we have in the specific case I’m talking about, but I’m sure 
you’re aware of many cases where spousal partners, when 
they’re divorced, one may settle or move to another province 
and you’re dealing with different jurisdictions, what is the 
department doing to address the inequities out there and to 
make sure that people are treated a lot more fairly under 
maintenance agreements? 
 
(1530) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well thank you for that important 
question because I know there are many people who become 
frustrated as they try to sort some of these things out. 
 
One thing that I would say though is that in Canada we have the 
Divorce Act of Canada and most marriages that end, end up 
with an order or a judgment under the Divorce Act, and that is 
enforceable right across the country without a lot of difficulty. 
 
We also have child support guidelines that are part of a national 
initiative so that the guidelines around child support are on a 
national basis, but each province has input into that. 
 
We in Saskatchewan have, over the last couple of years, been 
working in a parallel fashion with the federal government on 
the issues of custody and access because we know that there are 
the kind of concerns that you register on behalf of either a 
constituent or somebody that you know. 
 
And part of what we did in Saskatchewan was a study, and we 
have a report from that, which we had last fall, and we’re 
continuing with that. 
 
We’re also waiting for the federal Minister of Justice to respond 
to the House of Commons Justice Committee report which was 
filed last, I think, December around some of the issues related 
to the changes to the Divorce Act and changes around custody 
access issues. 
 
And we understand that the federal minister’s report will be 
coming this month and we’re looking forward to the kinds of 
suggestions they have so that we can continue to be part of the 
dialogue so that we can raise exactly the kinds of issues that 
you’ve raised here. 
 
So there are quite a number of things that are happening right 
now but there are I think better ways that we can deal with 
some of these problems and we’re trying to do that. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well, Mr. Minister, what you have said is all fine 
and dandy, but I find that people on an ongoing basis continue 
to feel and find frustration in regards to the whole maintenance 
enforcement program. 
 
For example, in a specific case that was brought to my 
attention, we have maintenance threatening one individual with 
either losing his licence, or having his licence confiscated. I 
believe Manitoba hasn’t but I’m not positive, I know some 
jurisdictions have talked about it. Certainly in British Columbia 
we’ve talked about it and I believe actually here in 



1026 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1999 

 

Saskatchewan we had some discussion on that last year — 
either garnisheeing wages, garnisheeing pension income, or if 
there’s nothing there then taking away your driver’s licence. 
 
And the unfortunate part there is when you remove a driver’s 
licence, if the person happens to be a trucker like the one case, 
then you take away their ability to drive any income and how 
do you . . . and then the harassment coming from the 
maintenance office to continue to provide your maintenance 
payments to your spouse and look after your children. 
 
And then on the other hand we find when an individual goes to 
maintenance to ask for the maintenance agreement for the funds 
that are supposed to be coming to them such as the one situation 
I have, maintenance just seems to throw its hands up in the air. 
So I don’t know why on one hand they can seem to like rule 
and threaten and then on the other hand not do anything. And 
then a spouse is left there trying to raise children and not 
receiving any income and basically the income . . . they fall on 
social assistance rather than being able to at least derive some 
income from their ex-spouse and those are some of the concerns 
that need to be raised. 
 
Now you talk, Mr. Minister, about waiting for the federal 
government to release its report that it had done. I guess in 
regards to some of the comments I’ve just made, did your 
department . . . did you make a presentation to this federal 
committee in regards to the amendments that they are looking 
to make regarding maintenance and divorce? And also, Mr. 
Minister, I guess I would hope that you really spoke out quite 
strongly on some of the issues that need to be addressed. 
 
So, number one, did you make a presentation of the basis of 
what was . . . your presentation made? As well, Mr. Minister, 
have you looked very closely at the British Columbia Act and 
this information that I have from the Minister of Attorney 
General reports and publications, information and assistance for 
parents — BC’s new child support clerks. I’m wondering if you 
could comment on those questions I’ve just asked, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Okay, you’ve raised a lot of issues. I think 
what I would say is we’d have to be very careful to identify 
issues around maintenance enforcement and then maintenance 
variation. I mean how you change the maintenance order, and as 
the orders for maintenance are primarily made through court 
orders, it’s the courts that can vary or change the orders. 
 
But as it relates to our maintenance enforcement office, and I 
gave some of this information last night and I’m not sure if you 
received some of it, but in the last year, April 1, 1998 to March 
31, 1999, the maintenance enforcement office processed 
payments of $27,950,000 on behalf of Saskatchewan people. 
They also are now at a point where 80 per cent of the orders are 
being enforced and paid. That’s as opposed to 20 per cent when 
we started this program. 
 
You make comments about some of the changes that are being 
made in British Columbia. We’ve looked at those changes and 
basically they are catching up with us in every area except for 
one, and that one area relates to tracing money into and through 
corporations as you try to enforce a maintenance order. And 
we’re actually looking at the provision that they’re suggesting 

as something that we may want to add in our system. 
 
So I guess what I would say is that we have a very effective 
maintenance enforcement system and we use that once the 
orders are made. When you want to deal with the variations of 
the orders or changes to orders, then that should be done 
through the courts and it’s in that area where the federal laws 
are important because most of those orders are made under the 
Divorce Act. 
 
And we are continuing to participate in all the joint 
federal/provincial/territorial meetings that discuss changes to 
legislation. It’s a topic at our Justice ministers’ meetings and I 
have been a participant in making sure that we try to address 
some of these concerns for people. Because practically when 
people feel frustrated by the Justice system as it relates to their 
family law issues, it also affects their whole perception of how 
the law works. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair. Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Minister, I think you rightly did point to the fact and I believe 
we’ve chatted before on some of the issues, different issues, 
that have come forward in regards to having maintenance 
agreements somewhat changed. I believe a person would have 
to go back to the court where the maintenance was awarded in 
the first place. 
 
And I’m not sure if they would have to appear before the same 
judge or if that judge would make a change, but one of the 
frustrations . . . and I’ll just read a little bit of a letter I’ve just 
received. 
 

Now that the husband that I have now has been dragged 
through court numerous times to get child support out of 
him, told by the judge to get a job or go to jail. I believe 
that my ex-husband should be taken to court also and told 
to get a job. 

 
Sometimes I think some of the frustrations that people face, Mr. 
Minister, is when they get to court they’re belittled for being in 
the court and either threatened or chided. And it’s a major 
concern, Mr. Minister, that people feel that the court is there to 
act on their behalf and at least protect their rights. And a feeling 
of frustration that some judges may not be somewhat sensitive 
or even listening to the reasons why they’re back in the court, 
Mr. Minister. 
 
So I think that’s an area that we need to address as well because 
some of the complaints we get from individuals may be directed 
at a specific person on the bench. And while we say judges are 
independent that’s true we believe they are, but there’s no doubt 
that each and every one of us has opinions on different matters. 
And while that shouldn’t interfere I would have to say that it’s 
pretty difficult sometimes to not let your opinions not interfere. 
 
So how do we talk to, or get, people to understand and get the 
system to work for them so that the concerns they have and the 
frustrations they raise will eventually — and I would hate to use 
the word eventually because it sounds like it’s way down the 
road — but those concerns would be addressed and that they 
would feel that they’re now being treated with fairness, that 
they’re being listened to, that there is at least a body that is 
somewhat sympathetic and is beginning to understand the 



May 4, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 1027 

 

situation they’re facing. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — You’ve identified an issue that we in 
Saskatchewan Justice, and I think other parts of the country, 
have been attempting to address. And basically it relates to the 
issue of what education people have about how the courts work, 
how they can make the changes that they need to make and do 
various things. We have an education program within the court 
structure that attempts to teach people about what they can 
expect when they’re in court, what kinds of things that they 
need to do. And this works in conjunction with the lawyers who 
are involved in cases as well. Because often, as we know with 
any activity we take in life, it’s the expectations versus what 
actually happens that becomes the big issue. 
 
And I guess what I would say is you asked some questions 
around judges and how you deal with that. One of the things 
that we do have in our common law system is a system of 
appeals and also the use of precedent, and especially in the 
family law area, courts do listen to each other. They do end up 
with appeals where Courts of Appeal make policy choices 
around specific fact patterns which then provide information to 
other courts. 
 
And we have over the years developed some fairly clear policy 
in most of the very contentious areas. But the difficulty is that 
no matter how imaginative a lawyer is, or how imaginative a 
judge is, there’s always some new situation that a client’s in 
that once again requires a judicious review and a decision. And 
that’s why we have the independent judiciary that we do have. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, and Mr. Minister, you talked about an 
appeal mechanism, and just most recently we’ve had Mrs. 
Milgaard talking about appeal mechanism too. And I’ve had the 
privilege of standing in this Assembly and debating a number of 
issues in the area of the Justice department and justice with 
former colleagues of yours who held the role of ministers of 
Justice. 
 
When it comes to appeals, I realize we do have an appeal 
process within the judicial system. The unfortunate part is, Mr. 
Minister, I think one of the problems with that is, is that appeal 
process is strictly made up of people from the legal profession. 
And I don’t see a real means where the common person is really 
represented there. 
 
And I have to agree with Mrs. Milgaard, that maybe an appeal 
mechanism totally removed from and outside of that — could 
be a body that could have some opportunity to at least sit down 
with — might be an avenue, whereby people would feel that 
their concern is being listened to a little more sympathetically. 
 
I find it very difficult to think and very hard to think that when 
you’ve just . . . having people within an organization acting as 
their own board, that you’re going to get a sympathetic ear. We 
have that problem with regards to Workers’ Comp and some of 
these other issues. 
 
And I know we’ll probably never reach that point where you 
have an appeal process outside of the legal community that has 
individuals who don’t have a legal background being a part of 
that appeal mechanism that might give more of a feeling of 
independence to an appeal mechanism. But that’s something 

that I feel is down the road. We maybe should look at so that 
the public in general can feel that they’re going to a committee 
that really is independent — it’s not tied to and not protecting 
the body or the judiciary that it is part of. 
 
But in regards to maintenance, I’m not exactly sure myself how 
we address all the concerns and questions here. And it’s one of 
the suggestions that we’ve raised and talked with former 
ministers in the past, is a body before we reach the courts, some 
kind of a mediator — a mediation process and I believe the 
former minister, Mr. Mitchell, at one time talked about having 
some kind of mediation in place. Then if the parties just find 
that mediation doesn’t work and they want to push it into the 
courts, well that’s fine. That’s a choice they make. 
 
But it would seem to me that in some ways, despite all the legal 
opinions in the room we have today . . . I think we can always 
find a way to argue as to why you should go to court; it’s a 
costly procedure. But I think if we can help people avert the 
court system, it might create more amicable relationships. 
 
And having said that, Mr. Minister, just some personal thoughts 
here and I hope that we can arrive at a workable solution that 
addresses the concerns that continually fall on your desk and 
my desk as a result of people facing the problems associated 
with maintenance enforcement. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I especially appreciated your last 
comments about having some other process, because I’m very 
proud to say that we in Saskatchewan have one of the best 
mediation processes within our court structure. 
 
(1545) 
 
And right now . . . it originally started as a project in Regina 
and Swift Current, it expanded to Saskatoon, and as of 
yesterday it had expanded to Prince Albert as we move to a 
province-wide mediation process that is exactly what you were 
talking about, where a lawsuit is started, there is an attempt to 
go and talk about it with a mediator before it proceeds through 
the court to address some of the concerns that you have. 
 
And so I appreciate the opportunity to let you know that as of 
yesterday that we now have that process available in Prince 
Albert. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 
Minister, I have a couple of questions for you in an area related 
to your department and that is dealing with C-68, the Firearms 
Act. I’m wondering what is happening with the court case and 
exactly where it is in procedures at the present time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I can give you an up-to-the-minute report. 
Basically the parties to the particular reference to the Supreme 
Court of Canada have filed their briefs. The interveners have 
not yet filed their briefs. They should be filed this month. We 
were thinking that there was a possibility that we’d get a court 
date in June, but now it looks more likely that it will be 
September because the interveners’ briefs have not yet been 
filed. But that’s the current status of that. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I believe you 
said last fall or early winter that the province of Saskatchewan 



1028 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1999 

 

would not be carrying on any charges against anyone under 
C-68, the registration portions. Has anyone in Saskatchewan 
been charged under that Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — As far as we know, no. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. If there were 
charges that were laid under that Act, would they be dealt with 
through your department or would they be perhaps dealt with at 
the federal level going through Court of Queen’s Bench and 
federal prosecutors? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — In most circumstances they would be 
handled by the federal prosecutors. We can imagine a situation 
where there might be a Bill C-68 charge that was lumped 
together with a number of other charges that would be part of a 
provincial prosecution, and that would be the only time that we 
would be involved. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I don’t know 
if you’re aware of this court case, Ray Korpus, which was just 
in the news here a couple of weeks ago, maybe a month or so 
ago. Did that in any way, shape, or form relate to any charges 
under C-68? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think the answer is no, that it didn’t 
relate to Bill C-68. And I can’t make any further comment 
because we think it’s still within the 30-day appeal period. So 
it’s possible that there could be an appeal in that matter. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I would 
certainly encourage you to carry on with the court case in 
opposing C-68. I think the people of Saskatchewan are counting 
on it, and in fact demanding that their provincial government 
carry on with this particular legal action in opposition to C-68. 
 
C-68 does not represent the wishes or desires of the people of 
Saskatchewan, nor does it serve the need that supposedly the 
federal government was trying to implement in bringing that 
forward; that there are much better ways and means to deal with 
this. And we have certainly seen that the cost structures that the 
federal government was talking about nowhere near match 
reality, and that the costs are significantly greater for no 
benefits, Mr. Minister. 
 
So I would encourage you and the government to carry on with 
that fight. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you for that encouragement and 
support. And we will continue to keep you informed of the 
progress as we know of it. Thank you very much. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister. 
And welcome to all your officials, some of whom are 
acquaintances, and perhaps may assist in addressing some of 
the questions that I have. 
 
I want to start mine off by referring to a situation that people in 
rural areas are very concerned about, and if this question has 
been dealt with previously, forgive me. But it deals with our 
policing services in rural areas, which appear to be on the 
chopping blocks for many of our smaller detachments. 
 

And I’m wondering if this . . . what kind of an impact, and if we 
can deal with some specific areas where there will be some 
significant cutbacks. In particular, maybe just globally, do you 
have a number or a figure on the number of members of the 
RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) that are short? Not 
short in stature — that’s not the way I meant to say it — not 
under 5 foot. But the numbers that are not up to what the 
provincial requirements have been, to what extent are they less 
than what we would normally expect or should have to meet all 
the policing commitments and responsibilities for our rural 
areas? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you for that question. This whole 
area is an area of concern for me. You asked specifically what 
the number is that is a shortage in the RCMP positions, and our 
best estimate is around 70. 
 
As you know, last week the Minister of Justice in British 
Columbia registered his concern publicly about the fact that 
there were 400 . . . a shortage of 400 in British Columbia. Both 
the minister in British Columbia and I, and I know some of the 
other ministers across the country, have registered a concern 
with the federal Solicitor General around the fact that they’ve 
closed down the depot and the training, because it’s very 
difficult to hire the people that you need when you don’t have 
the people being trained. And so we’re continuing to work with 
the federal minister to see if we can get more attention paid to 
the fact of the training and then supplying the people. 
 
Now one of the concerns you’ve raised is about the province in 
general, and I think for sure as it relates to the southwest corner 
of the province, because there’s been some concern there. I 
know that my officials were again down meeting with the 
people in Eastend and Climax and some of the other 
communities last week. And there’s no intention of pulling 
police officers out of that area. Because practically it’s a very 
vast area and not a lot of people live there, but it’s an important 
area that we need to police, and it’s not our intention to pull out 
of that area or any other area of the province. 
 
One of the things that I would also say is that we have been able 
to develop some very positive new relationships with some of 
our communities in the North, the New North communities. 
And the RCMP are part of the process as we go and talk with 
the community leaders about how the RCMP can provide 
policing which meets the needs of those communities, which is 
somewhat different than perhaps those parts of southern 
Saskatchewan where the policing is provided. 
 
So I guess what I would say is that the RCMP are committed to 
a community policing policy and they are working with us, with 
the local communities as we try to discern what is the next 
generation of policing in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m going to make an 
assumption that the reductions are as a result of probably what’s 
affecting a lot of areas — dollars and cents. Am I correct in 
making that assumption? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Yes. I think there’s been a federal 
government reduction or hold on the amount of money 
available for the RCMP, and that’s the difficulty. 
 



May 4, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 1029 

 

Mr. Osika: — Thank you for that again. Is there a 
determination by your department, Mr. Minister, as to what 
level should our police force be at province-wide to meet the 
needs of the whole province — smaller communities and some 
of those urban centres that we police? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — As I said before, we have about 70 
vacancies in the RCMP policing in the province, and we’re very 
concerned about that. As I said, we’re going to work with the 
federal government to see if they can’t redirect their focus 
around the fact that there aren’t enough officers trained to 
supply all of these places across the country. 
 
Our provincial budget for the RCMP has increased the last two 
years. In ’97-98 it went up 1.4 million, and in ’98-99 it went up 
another 1.2 million. But we’re having some difficulties as we 
try to work with the, I guess, hold that the federal Treasury 
Board has placed on the Solicitor General and the RCMP. 
 
Mr. Osika: — I guess when this whole issue of concern about 
some areas of the province having less than adequate police 
services brought to mind that somewhere along the way, 
whether it’s federal government or provincial, are forgetting the 
original purpose of having sent out the North West Mounted 
Police to the western areas to protect the settlers. And I don’t 
think anything has changed. 
 
I think, as a matter of fact, what we should be striving for is 
adequate policing, perhaps more policing than less. The 
constituency that I represent, some of the small communities 
have a grave concern that the cutbacks result in delayed police 
reaction or responses to situations that are serious in a lot of 
cases. So that is a concern. 
 
And I wonder, Mr. Minister, when you are dealing or meeting 
with the people from Ottawa, the federal government, I know 
that it was the issue of Bill C-68 was raised earlier and — 
although I’m not convinced that people disagree totally with 
everything that’s in that Bill — I know that there’s strong 
opposition to the registration aspect of firearms for the Prairies. 
And I support very much and agree that this province should do 
everything possible to try and ensure that we are not burdened 
with a costly exercise that may not meet the objectives that 
perhaps were intended. 
 
I guess what I’m saying is during your discussions with the 
federal people, does that come up? The topic of the costs that 
will be involved in a national registry which could be better put 
to use for additional police officers, additional mounted 
policemen and police services particularly in the Prairie 
provinces, particularly in Saskatchewan and in those smaller 
communities? 
 
I’ve been there, Mr. Minister, as you know, and I know how 
essential it is for the smaller communities to be able to rely 
upon responses from a police officer within a reasonable period 
of time and not having to go through a third party; to be able to 
talk to a member from their local area who might be familiar 
with or acquainted with the situation, the territory, and the 
terrain. 
 
It distresses me to hear that our detachments will be closed 
down and members not be expected to live within those very 

communities that they’re required to police as well. And I’m 
not sure whether that’s being addressed during any negotiations 
as well. I think it’s important for people to see their people who 
are offering police services within their communities, to 
become part of the local hockey teams or the baseball teams and 
the coaches for young people that are growing up, and in the 
schools. So hopefully those are the types of issues that are being 
addressed and discussed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — You’ve raised quite a number of issues 
and I’ll try to address some of them as well as I can. 
 
You raised an issue around the cost of dealing with the gun 
registration. We have been very diligent and vigilant in talking 
with the RCMP and with the federal government to make sure 
that we’re not paying for the part that relates to the Bill C-68, 
registration. And how they’ve done that, in response, is to have 
the people who are involved in that, who the RCMP actually are 
the contractor working with the federal government on the 
particular registration part — all of those people report to the 
northwest region rather than to F division, or the Saskatchewan 
troop, so that they can keep the budgets separate. 
 
(1600) 
 
And we keep asking them about that. Because I agree with you, 
that the last thing we want is for this huge, expensive 
registration system to suck all the money out of policing so that 
communities, whether they’re large or small . . . And we have 
to acknowledge the RCMP work in serious crime — drugs and 
national criminal issues, as well as the local, community issues 
— we don’t want the money taken away from there and 
concentrated on something we don’t think will work. So that’s 
one particular issue. 
 
Another concern that we have and what’s happened is the 
PricewaterhouseCoopers, a national accounting firm, is actually 
doing an audit or review of the RCMP and their expenditures; 
and we have asked to participate in that and we are being given 
a role in that along with some of the other provinces so that we 
can ask questions around provincial policing issues as they 
relate to the federal policing. 
 
And so as that review continues I think you can expect to see 
both public reports . . . or if you would ask us we can share 
information with you, because exactly some of the questions 
and issues that you’ve raised are the ones that we’re raising in 
light of a national policing policy. Is there one? What does it 
mean? How does that affect what happens in provincial policing 
and then also in the local community policing? 
 
So all of those things are a concern and we’re attempting to 
address those. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And I’m sure that that 
will be comforting to people to know that these very serious 
problems that are facing the province are being addressed. 
 
This question may or may not be fair. In the event that the 
situation continues to deteriorate as far as the availability and 
perhaps cost, would your government consider a provincial 
policing contract with a provincial police force other than the 
Mounted Police? 



1030 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1999 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — At this time it’s not our plan to do that 
because we have, with all of the frustrations that we have 
sometimes with the administration of the RCMP, we have a 
very good relationship with them. 
 
Regina, we say, is the “Home of the RCMP.” And it is. So 
we’re very supportive of the RCMP and their role in provincial 
policing, but we’re continuing to participate with them to make 
it a better police service for local communities province-wide 
and as a national police force. 
 
So I guess I would have to say is no, we’re very supportive of 
the RCMP and we don’t plan to change that perspective. 
 
Mr. Osika: — I’m very happy to hear that. And given that this 
is the 125th anniversary of the trek west, which will be 
re-enacted in the coming months, I’m pleased to hear that there 
is no immediate plans or at least any consideration for changing 
the “redcoats on the prairies” saga, as it hopefully will continue. 
 
I thank you for those responses as far as our policing services 
are concerned. I’d just like to shift gears a little bit and now 
move on to something in the area of our courts, particularly 
with respect to courthouses. 
 
Mr. Minister, since the closure of some courthouses, 
particularly the one in Kerrobert and the one in Melville, has 
there been any follow-up as to the effects of those closures? I 
still have some concerns that I’d like to share with you, and I 
was just wondering if you had done any follow-ups subsequent 
to the closure — the impact; the effects on judiciary, on the 
legal community — as far as how cases are now being handled, 
particularly in my community, or even in Kerrobert? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well, I think it’s an ongoing process that 
we’re involved in and we continue to monitor the caseloads in 
various parts of the province. And that will continue. 
 
We know that, for example, in Melville there’s been some 
difficulty with some of the space that we’ve been able to use 
and we need to find better space so that it’s accessible to 
everybody, and some of those things. So as we work through 
these things, different problems arise in different parts of the 
province. 
 
We know for example that the workload in the courts in the 
northern part of the province is increasing, whereas in other 
places it’s fairly static or going down, and so we end up having 
to ask questions around resources of where we’re actually 
placing all of our personnel. But that changes from year to year. 
So we continue to monitor it and make decisions based on these 
statistics. 
 
Mr. Osika: — I believe, you may recall some of the concerns 
that I expressed around the facilities that are being used to hold 
trials in Melville up to this point, and they continue to exist and 
prevail. As an analogy, I would hope that we’re not waiting for 
something serious to happen before we put up a stop sign type 
of thing. 
 
My concern has always been the security of the facilities in 
Melville — the protection, privacy . . . for the protection and 
privacy for the judiciary as well as the legal attorneys that need 

to speak with their clients, need to speak with witnesses. That’s 
a serious issue, and I keep hearing that there needs to be 
something more adequate than what’s in place right now, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
I was wondering if that was in the works in the immediate 
future. Again, it seems like we keep putting things off and then 
we say, golly, we should have done it earlier before this thing 
happened or that thing happened; we might have prevented it. I 
just wondered if there was anything in the immediate future. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well all I can say about Melville is that 
we’re continuing to work with local people in the city of 
Melville and other places to see if there is a space that’s more 
suitable. One of the concerns that happens is that when you do 
find a space, and we only use it for two days a week, for 
example, there may be somebody else who will come in and use 
it for five days a week and then we have to find another space. 
And so that’s always a concern right across the province as we 
retain day space. 
 
But I do know that in Melville, there is a continued discussion 
around space. And I think that if you have some suggestions or 
ideas, you can either bring them to me or I can have some of the 
officials contact you directly about further suggestions. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Well thank you, I appreciate that. Would you 
consider reverting back to the way we were before and having 
our Court of Queen’s Bench returned to the provincial 
courthouse that was in fact remodelled and renovated to 
accommodate the court services. Perhaps that might be in the 
future a consideration. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well unfortunately, or I think perhaps 
fortunately, Melville and area is quite a law-abiding area. And 
so the demand for the courts, especially the criminal courts, is 
not such that we would consider that this year. But like I said, 
we’re continuing to evaluate this and there may be changes, and 
I guess that we always have to see what possibilities there are. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you. Perhaps by doing that it might ease 
the pressure on some of the other surrounding areas — that’s 
what I had in mind. I’m always willing to help and offer some 
advice in that respect. 
 
Could I now ask . . . go on to another issue. And again, I 
apologize if this question was asked before — I should be 
aware of it — but how many, could you tell me, Mr. Minister, 
how many lawyers are available through the legal aid system 
for individuals that cannot afford to get their own? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Approximately 60 lawyers. 
 
Mr. Osika: — And roughly, would you have any idea, what 
their caseload per lawyer would be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — We actually went through this discussion 
last night, so I have the numbers right in my head; I can tell 
you. It’s just over 300 cases per lawyer if you divide the total 
number of cases for a year by 60. There’s just around 21,000 
. . . 20 to 20,000 cases a year for the total legal aid system, and 
then there are 60 lawyers. 
 



May 4, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 1031 

 

Mr. Osika: — Okay, thank you for that, and I can review the 
records of what happened before. 
 
Okay, going on to something else, then. Can we talk a little bit 
about what’s happening in the field of corrections. Are there 
any intentions or any plans to increase correctional facilities, 
remodel, in the very near future? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — This year there was . . . we reopened the 
White Gull Camp, which is north and east of Prince Albert, and 
that provided some added space. There are some renovations 
and work in the process for the Regina Correctional Centre, but 
that’s basically to replace space as opposed to expanding space. 
Clearly, we don’t want to expand correctional space unless we 
absolutely have to. 
 
Mr. Osika: — And I agree that, hopefully we shouldn’t have 
to. The current accommodations, are they in fact adequate 
enough at a level which is tolerable, which is acceptable? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think over a year they are. There are 
some peaks of population throughout the year that put some 
pressure on the system, but we have various ways of trying to 
manage that. And sometimes it depends too, I think, on the 
numbers in remand. But basically we do have enough space on 
a normal year basis. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Just to clarify a question that from time to time 
is asked and is asked of me by folks that aren’t familiar with 
programs and the system within these centres. Are the inmates 
. . . are people who are in these institutions given an option to 
work or not to work during their stay? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The inmates themselves have a choice to 
participate in some of the work programs or the educational 
programs. And I think many people do take advantage of that, 
but they’re not forced to do it. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Are there any incentives offered to those who 
choose to remain the status quo, but may in fact if they had 
some incentive to work, that their sentences would be shorter 
perhaps or their stay would be shorter? Is there anything like 
that in place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — That’s exactly the program that’s there. 
So if you participate in the program, it’s part of the analysis of 
whether or not you would get a remission at the end of your 
sentence. And so that’s very clear incentive to participate. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Okay. Thank you for that. As far as going from 
the correctional centres now to youth facilities, do we have 
adequate facilities for young people that are in trouble and 
require supervision in our institutions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well this is an area where Social Services 
is in charge of the youth facilities and so we don’t have all of 
the statistics and information there. Our role in the youth justice 
area is the courts, the youth courts. But we know that there are 
some pressures on that. But I don’t have all of the details in that 
area at all. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Okay. Thank you. I’m sorry to encroach on the 
other department. However, it would seem to me that for young 

people and programs that there would be some exchange of 
ideas or some discussion between Justice and Social Services. 
 
So getting away from the facility aspect, are there new 
programs being developed between your department and Social 
Services for the benefit of young people that may be committed 
to these institutions? And could you perhaps just give us a 
thumbnail sketch of what they might be. 
 
(1615) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — That’s a very good question. Part of what 
the youth criminal justice Act, the new federal legislation, has 
started further discussion in exactly this area around alternative 
measures. What we do have for young people and also adults, 
because we know eventually that some of them may end up in 
some of the adult corrections, is a fair discussion between the 
two systems as to how some of these programs should go 
ahead. 
 
I can speak briefly about some of the youth facilities that are 
alternative-measures based. And some of them are similar to 
our Regina alternative measures program which is run through 
Saskatchewan Justice which includes some of the face-to face 
meeting between the victim and offender with various workers, 
or some of the family group conferencing type of things that the 
police get involved with. 
 
There are quite a number of interesting things happening right 
across the province, and the attempt is to see how all these 
things will all fit into the new federal legislation. That’s an 
ongoing discussion and it’s something that’s important, and I 
think it’s something that we absolutely need to do as a 
community, as a society. 
 
Mr. Osika: — I thank you for that also. I know that we 
oftentimes talk about the need for more facilities. And as we’ve 
said in this House many times, it’s bricks and mortar whether it 
deals with health or deals with some of these other issues. The 
more important is to concentrate, I believe, in my humble 
opinion, on meaningful programs that at the end of the day will 
result in people becoming productive and contributing citizens. 
I guess that was the reason for my question as far as programs. 
 
Are there programs that are perhaps more strict or more serious 
for the more serious youth offenders, and of what nature? Is 
there a disciplined environment, a separate one that would point 
them towards something similar to what’s happening in other 
places — the need to accept responsibility, and at the end of the 
day see the benefits and the fruits of their labour as an incentive 
to become creative during their stay rather than just to be 
monitored and given free rein type of thing. I just wondered if 
Justice and Social Services had been talking about any stricter 
programs, if you wish, that are presently in place. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Most of the discussions about new 
programs will unfold as we start looking at the youth criminal 
justice Act and its effect on the whole system. And that’s why 
we’re continuing in our discussions with other provinces and 
with the federal government around that. 
 
I think that some of the kinds of institutions that you are talking 
about are part of the array of options that are being discussed 



1032 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1999 

 

right across the country. Here in Saskatchewan, I think some of 
the specific questions that you have would be better served by 
going and speaking directly to the people who are involved in 
the youth corrections in Department of Social Services, and I 
just don’t have all that information with me. 
 
Mr. Osika: — I thank you for that again. Just to go back, there 
was one question we were talking about — access to legal aid 
services. There must be a criteria, or what position would a 
person have to be in in order to qualify for assistance? 
 
From time to time I hear from people that are saying, hey look, 
I just really can’t afford it and yet I’ve been rejected or turned 
down. I wonder . . . and if this has been asked before, please 
enlighten me again. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I don’t have the exact information, but 
basically it’s provided for people who have income at a social 
assistance level, and basically the criteria . . . there’s three tests 
for determining eligibility for legal aid services. 
 
The first one is financial. Either you’re receiving income from 
social assistance or your personal financial resources are at 
social assistance levels or the costs of obtaining the services of 
a private lawyer would reduce the financial resources to social 
assistance levels. So there is some possibility of somebody who 
is a low-income earner, that they would contribute something 
and then be able to qualify for legal aid. 
 
And the second question is, what range of services are 
provided. Your law problem would have to be either a family 
law problem or federal criminal matter, adult and youth, all 
indictable matters or some reconviction matters, only when 
there’s a likelihood of jail. So those are the kinds of cases. 
 
If you take the third question, is sort of a professional 
assessment of the merit of the case. Some or all of the following 
issues are considered. 
 
Is the case one that a reasonable person of modest means would 
commence or defend? Are the legal costs of commencing or 
defending an action reasonable compared with the relief that’s 
being asked for? What’s the seriousness of the legal or 
economic outcome of this case? Is there a possible defence to 
the charge? Like if there’s no defence, that’ll be a factor. Has 
the client been co-operative such as keeping appointments, 
keeping in touch? In other words are they really serious about 
defending their case, especially in a criminal case. And are they 
willing to work with the lawyers and other people giving advice 
in a reasonable way? 
 
So those are the factors that are used. So you sort of have three 
different areas that you have to look at and assess before 
somebody would be qualified for legal aid. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Is that done by way of an application by an 
individual? That’s my first question. And then the second 
would be, to whom would that application go? Would it go to a 
tribunal? Would it go to an individual? And what is the normal 
time period of processing such a request? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Normally you would go to a legal aid 
office and fill out the form right there. Sometimes there’s 

another appointment where you actually have an interview. If 
you are turned down, there is a process for an appeal ultimately 
to the head of the Saskatchewan Legal Aid Commission. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you again. Are there specific law firms or 
attorneys that are appointed to offer these legal aid services? 
I’m thinking about ensuring that there are accesses to this type 
of service throughout the province and not just in the larger 
urban centres. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Basically the way the legal aid system 
works in Saskatchewan is that we have a staff lawyer system; 
95 per cent of all cases are covered by the staff lawyers. 
 
There’s a 5 per cent caseload that’s farmed out to the private bar 
and these are farmed out all over the province. Lawyers who are 
in private practice have to apply or let people know that they’re 
willing to take these cases. The rates are not like large 
payments, and so that practically there are lists in every area of 
the province, of people who will take the cases. But sometimes 
they’ll say, well I’ll take one or two at a time because they 
don’t pay as well as some other cases. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Okay, thank you. Mr. Minister, there’s a 
question that also preys on people’s mind as a result of ongoing 
investigations and trials that have been going on in recent 
months with respect to former members of this House. And the 
question is always raised, well what is this costing us as 
taxpayers or what has it cost to this point in time? Do you have 
any handle on that figure? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The information provided to me by the 
department is that between July 1991 and February 1999, the 
estimated costs incurred: the RCMP, 630,000; public 
prosecutions, 588,700; court services, 105,100; the total of 
$1.32 million. 
 
Mr. Osika: — That’s a lot of money that unfortunately had to 
be spent, but I guess that’s the way of life. Do you anticipate 
any additional costs in this ongoing issue? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — There’s no possibility that I can talk about 
cases that are either before the court or future prosecutions. 
 
Mr. Osika: — I thank you, Mr. Minister. And I just want to 
conclude by saying that I do take comfort and I’m sure that the 
people that have been listening and perhaps hearing us talk 
about our policing services in rural Saskatchewan will take 
some comfort that you are very diligently monitoring the needs 
for policing services in rural Saskatchewan. Having been there, 
I know and I feel sorry for those people who see their 
detachments becoming smaller. And the accessibility to their 
policemen — their police people, men and women — is less 
and less accessible, less and less accessibility. 
 
So I hope and I encourage you and I appreciate your 
commitment to continue to work with, discuss with the federal 
government what our real priorities should be on the Prairies 
and particularly here in Saskatchewan. That we do not need to 
have honest citizens registering firearms but we do need money 
to spend on additional police forces, police people in our rural 
areas. They need protection and assistance and comfort as much 
as people anywhere else and in urban centres. And the redcoats 



May 4, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 1033 

 

have always supplied that to all people that came out here, all 
the settlers that came out to the West. 
 
And I just want to end by saying that I’m very proud to have 
been part of that great organization, and it disturbs me to see it 
sort of dwindle from the Prairies. I don’t want to see those 
redcoats disappear, and I’m sure the people of this province 
don’t either. 
 
So thank you, and thank you to your staff. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Just a few more 
questions in regarding the fraud charges that have been laid on 
past members in the Conservative Party. And I was wondering 
if there was any more ongoing fraud cases that you haven’t 
dealt with as yet. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — As I said before, there can’t be any 
comment about either present cases or future cases. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Can you then tell us, is your department 
doing any monitoring of the PC (Progressive Conservative) 
metro fund with the two and a half million dollars that was set 
aside to ensure that the Tory Party, the Sask Tory Party, doesn’t 
have access to it at this election? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The policy of the department is not to 
comment on any investigations or any other matters, and that’s 
the position that we would take here. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Minister, I wasn’t asking about any 
investigations. I’m asking you if you have a system in place 
where you’re monitoring what’s happening to these funds to 
ensure that the Saskatchewan Party, the Saskatchewan Tory 
Party now, can’t use this money in the upcoming election. So 
it’s just a monitoring process. Are you doing that? 
 
(1630) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — What you’re referring to is the role of the 
Chief Electoral Officer and so practically I can’t answer that. 
 
Subvote (JU01) agreed to. 
 
Subvotes (JU02), (JU04), (JU03), (JU06), (JU05), (JU07), 
(JU08) agreed to. 
 
Vote 3 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1998-99 
General Revenue Fund 

Budgetary Expense 
Justice 
Vote 3 

 
Subvotes (JU02), (JU04), (JU03), (JU06), (JU07), (JU08) 
agreed to. 
 
Vote 3 agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you very much. I’d just like to 
thank the members opposite for their questions. I appreciated 
the chance to explain some of the things that we’re doing. 

Please feel free to ask other questions as the year goes out, and 
we’ll try to provide answers for you. I’d also like to thank all of 
the staff who are here, plus all of the in excess of 2,000 people 
who work in the Department of Justice for doing the jobs that 
they do, often in very trying and tense situations, in a very 
professional manner. And I’d like to thank them all. Thank you. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Intergovernmental and Aboriginal Affairs 

Vote 30 
 
The Chair: — And before we start, I would ask the minister to 
introduce his officials, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
I have with me my deputy minister on my right, Brent Cotter. 
Behind the deputy I have Melinda Gorrill, who’s the director of 
administration. And behind me I have Paul Osborne, the 
assistant deputy minister of Intergovernmental Affairs. And 
there are other officials with me that I will introduce as 
necessary. Thank you. 
 
Subvote (IA01) 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and 
welcome, Mr. Minister, to your officials. It’s good to see you 
here today, and I just have a few questions. 
 
First of all, Mr. Minister, with the Year 2000 coming up, I’m 
sure the government is planning some millennium events. Can 
you give us an idea of what they are and how many dollars it’s 
going to cost us? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — I thank the member opposite for the 
question. Saskatchewan is focusing on being a facilitator for the 
communities who want to celebrate and so we are focusing less 
on our own events and more facilitating the events of 
communities. 
 
We’re operating on a relatively small budget. I think our entire 
budget for planning, which includes the Internet site and the 
actions of trying to work with communities in finding an 
identity for their activities and providing facilitation for them, is 
in the order of $350,000 if I’m not mistaken. Yes. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, is there any direct grants or 
monies given to communities then for their own individual 
events that they’ll be holding out in all the towns? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — There will be a small amount of that 
$350,000 which may find its way to some special community 
projects that are presented that have merit. It’ll be a modest 
support for a small number of projects that reflect the flavour of 
this celebration in Saskatchewan province-wide. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, I guess I’m going to ask you to 
be more specific, because I’d like to know how would you 
decide which is some project that will reflect the flavour you’re 
looking for. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — One of the projects that we are . . . Let me 
begin again. We have had a millennium advisory committee 
working with Dickson Bailey who’s the departmental lead on 



1034 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1999 

 

this. And one of the suggestions that’s being made by the 
advisory committee is that they might want to look at the 
Saskatchewan atlas project, which is being carried on by the 
university possibly to help create either the CD (compact disc) 
or the atlas book itself, possibly to help in the distribution of 
that atlas to the schools. 
 
That’s the sort of idea we’re thinking about — something that 
will have lasting value that’s a reflection of an important 
turning point in the history of mankind here and a small 
remembrance that is really quite universal for everybody. 
 
Ms. Draude: — So, Mr. Minister, I take it that means there 
isn’t going to be a big New Year’s Eve party at Government 
House or that type of thing. Mr. Minister, I notice that there was 
a sizeable increase to the anniversaries secretariat and I’m 
wondering if you can tell me what that money will be used for? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — The increase in the anniversaries budget is 
the planning around this celebration. And the advisory 
committee that was put in place by the previous minister, and 
which has been working very hard since then, has also been 
given the responsibility to look at the longer celebration 
window of the period from the millennium next year to 
Saskatchewan’s centennial in the year 2005. And so they’re 
beginning to look at options for recognition events to celebrate 
Saskatchewan’s centennial as well. So there is a small build up 
in the capacity within the department to manage this celebration 
and the carrying on of that celebration into the year 2005. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, I’ve had a number of comments 
from around my constituency, different seniors groups that are 
planning events for the Year of the Older Person this year, and 
I’m wondering what kind of monetary commitment the 
government has given to these groups, if any? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — I’m advised by Dickson Bailey, the 
official who is seated two behind me here, that that is a process 
that will be driven and funded out of the Department of Social 
Services. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I know 
also in the Aboriginal Affairs portfolio, I notice that treaty land 
entitlements has actually gone down for this year, and I’m 
wondering if we’re at the end or near the end of paying off 
Saskatchewan’s portion of treaty land entitlement money? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — In the signing of the treaty and land 
entitlement structure, Saskatchewan’s committed funds were 
scheduled to be paid to the federal government over 12 years 
because it was anticipated that there would be a quicker 
settlement of land entitlements in the first six years and the 
amount allocated was higher per year for those first six years. 
 
We’re now entering the second six years of the payment 
schedule and the amount is significantly lower on an annual 
basis from here to the end of the payment schedule. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, I understand from what you just 
said that the money will go directly to the federal government 
and they pay the bands? Is there any money that goes directly to 
the bands from the government for treaty land entitlement? 
 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Yes, I think you essentially have it 
correct. We pay to the federal government into a trust and then 
when the federal government has approved the entitlement 
lands for transfer, then these funds are expended to the bands 
for their contribution to their purchases. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Is there money given from the provincial 
government to Indian bands for specific land claims? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — I didn’t quite catch the question because I 
answered the last question mildly incorrectly. The federal 
government actually having us transfer the . . . we having 
transferred to their trustee, then transfer to the First Nations 
trust on an annual basis so that it’s available to First Nations. 
 
Maybe I could ask you to repeat your last question. 
 
Ms. Draude: — I must ask this mildly. Mr. Minister, I was 
talking about specific land claims. And I’m wondering if there’s 
any monies given from the province to specific land claims. 
And I hope that this is mildly the correct answer. 
 
(1645) 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Thank you. No, there is not. In fact the 
whole question of specific claims is under discussion with the 
federal government. We are hopeful that they are recognizing 
their duty with respect to specific claims. 
 
As you know, specific claims are a much smaller total bundle of 
claims than the Treaty Land Entitlement Agreement that we 
signed jointly. There are also claims that result from the federal 
government having removed unfairly Indian access to Indian 
lands, and the specific claims are a reclaiming of that land 
which was taken inappropriately from them. And so it is a 
direct federal responsibility and the federal government will 
deal with those on an independent basis. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, with the social policy reform 
initiatives that the provincial and federal government are 
undertaking, are there obligations for provincial money under 
that program as well? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — I’m assuming your question originates in 
the new Social Union Agreement which I had the privilege of 
working on and which premiers agreed to with the Prime 
Minister only a month or two ago. The provinces have 
obligations and the federal government has obligations under 
the Social Union Agreement, and each of us is required to 
review the services we provide and access for Canadians to the 
services we provide through that agreement. 
 
So the first stage of the implementation of the Social Union 
Agreement is that each of us needs to review our existing 
programs to see whether they meet the commitments we made 
under the Social Union Agreement. For example commitments 
to access to mobility, which means that Canadians are not 
restricted by program design from access to programs in one 
province or the other, is Saskatchewan doing anything that 
restricts the mobility of other Canadians to access 
programming? And so that becomes the first obligation we have 
under the Social Union Agreement. And should there be actions 
required, it will grow from that assessment. 



May 4, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 1035 

 

Ms. Draude: — I hate to belabour this, Mr. Minister, but could 
you just tell me in clear and simple terms, have you put any 
money into that initiative right now? Or what’s it cost to do the 
work so far? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — There is no requirement under the 
agreement for money and we have not put any in, other than the 
responsibilities that we had as the lead province in the 
negotiations. And so our responsibilities will flow from an 
examination of adjusting our programs to meet the conditions of 
the Social Union. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, you indicated that the money 
from the Treaty Land Entitlement went into the First Nations 
fund. I guess before we go further I’ll just ask you if that is in 
fact correct, that money goes into that fund? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — If I used the English language carelessly, I 
should not have. They go into individual band trusts as opposed 
to . . . not the First Nations fund that exists in other agreements. 
The individual bands each have a trust with respect to their 
treaty land entitlement money, which they have a responsibility 
to then use in an appropriate way to meet their obligations 
under the Treaty Land Entitlement Agreement. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, then there is no provincial 
money that is going directly to the bands. Can you . . . can the 
people of this province feel secure that any money, any 
provincial money that’s going to bands is fully accounted for by 
our Provincial Auditor and that there’s no doubt that any money 
that goes directly from the General Revenue Fund to bands in 
Saskatchewan is accounted for — every penny? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Every penny that Saskatchewan pays into 
treaty land entitlements goes directly to the federal government. 
The federal government then has the obligation to set up the 
accountability mechanisms for the transfers and the spending of 
those funds with respect to the First Nations trusts. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I just wanted to 
make sure that there isn’t any other funds. I know that through 
the First Nations fund, there is monies that cannot be audited 
. . . that is not audited by the Provincial Auditor, but that 
wouldn’t be going through the government. They go through 
the Crowns. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — There have been and there may in the 
future be more arrangements where a First Nation has agreed to 
be a partner with a department — let’s say Social Services — in 
the delivery of a program, and that an individual department 
might have a relationship where the First Nation accesses funds 
because they both feel that they are in a better position to 
deliver a program than the department in some instances. That 
money would be accounted for through the individual line 
departments in their expenditures. Nothing would flow from my 
department into those kinds of arrangements. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I don’t have any 
further questions. Thanks to your officials. 
 
Subvote (IA01) agreed to. 
 
Subvotes (IA02), (IA14), (IA15), (IA16) agreed to. 

Vote 30 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1998-99 
General Revenue Fund 

Budgetary Expense 
Intergovernmental and Aboriginal Affairs 

Vote 30 
 
Subvote (IA16) agreed to. 
 
Vote 30 agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — I want to thank the members opposite for 
the informative discussion on the management of my 
department. Thank you for all of your questions. I want to, as 
well, thank the officials who have joined us here, for their work 
in respect to this — thank you. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Finance 
Vote 18 

 
Subvotes (FI01), (FI02), (FI04), (FI03), (FI06), (FI05), (FI07), 
(FI08), (FI09) agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Finance — Servicing the Public Debt — Government Share 

Vote 12 
 
Subvote (FD01) — Statutory. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Debt Redemption, Sinking Fund and Interest Payments 

Votes 175, 176, 177 
 

Votes 175, 176, 177 — Statutory. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Finance 
Vote 18 

 
Vote 18 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1998-99 
General Revenue Fund 

Budgetary Expense 
Finance 
Vote 18 

 
Subvote (FI09) agreed to. 
 
Vote 18 agreed to. 
 
The Chair: — I thank the minister and his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Chair, I’d like to thank the opposition 
for their co-operation and also the deputy minister, Mr. Jones 
who’s here with me. Thank you. 
 
Ms. Draude: — I’d like to thank the minister and his officials. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

 


