





























































Hansard: April 08, 1999


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 453 
 April 8, 1999 
 
The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
The Speaker: — The representatives of the three caucuses and 
all independent members available to attend the House today 
have communicated to the Chair their willingness to have the 
House convened at 10 a.m. today. Therefore the Chair seeks 
leave of the Assembly in order to open today’s sitting at this 
time, this being a time earlier than that stated in rule 3(1). Is 
leave granted? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Nurses’ Strike 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
to the Premier. Well, Mr. Premier, you failed and you are 
responsible for that failure. Once again you have failed the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Farmers say you’ve failed agriculture in a time of crisis. 
Teachers say you failed education in a time of crisis and now 
you have failed nurses. You have failed every person in 
Saskatchewan by mismanaging . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The guests in the Assembly today may not be 
familiar. It is a long-standing tradition of parliamentary 
democracy and of this Assembly that guests do not participate 
in the proceedings of the House and the Chair humbly asks for 
the co-operation of the guests today. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And you failed 
every person in Saskatchewan by mismanaging your way into a 
health care crisis. This morning nurses across the province are 
not at work because you failed. 
 
Mr. Premier, after eight years of NDP (New Democratic Party) 
government, there is nobody left for the NDP to blame. This 
health care crisis is your responsibility. The blame for this 
entire mess is yours. 
 
Mr. Premier, will you stop trying to blame hard-working nurses 
and admit your NDP government is entirely responsible for the 
health care crisis? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d be pleased 
to take this question on behalf of the Premier. As the people of 
this province will know that the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses 
and the employer have been bargaining a new collective 
agreement for the 8,400 registered nurses in this province for 
approximately 36 days. 
 
The collective agreement expired on March 31, 1999, some 

eight days ago. The nurses issued a strike notice because they 
felt that the progress being made with the employer was much 
too slow and was not meeting their needs. In an effort to bring 
the employer and SUN (Saskatchewan Union of Nurses) 
together the Premier involved himself in these negotiations in 
order to see whether or not we could reach an agreement. 
 
I’m very profoundly saddened, Mr. Speaker, deeply 
disappointed that after 11 hours of discussion last night, the 
parties going back to their respective representatives, the fact 
that we were going to leave . . . or meet this morning at 8:30 to 
continue the discussions that we now are in this position where 
the nurses are on strike. We are hopeful that we can insure 
public safety and that we can begin to normalize relations in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
again for the Premier. The Premier became involved yesterday 
because of his failures over the last eight years in health care. 
Mr. Premier, you keep saying the only issue is the nurses’ wage 
demands. If you listen to nurses, nothing could be further from 
the truth. 
 
Mr. Premier, I have listened to a lot of nurses over the past year 
and I’ve heard the horror stories. I’ve heard the phone calls that 
come five minutes before the end of a shift telling them to go to 
work at another shift. It’s unfair to nurses. It’s unfair to patients. 
If your back-to-work legislation fails to address working 
conditions and patient safety then you have accomplished 
nothing. 
 
Mr. Premier, health care in this province is in a critical 
condition and you’re offering a band-aid solution. What will 
your legislation do to address the terrible working conditions 
faced by Saskatchewan nurses? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. After 
listening, listening to what the representatives of SUN had to 
say during the discussions yesterday, we believed that we could 
address recruitment and retention, the issue of seniority, and the 
issue of nursing practice through a dispute resolution 
mechanism. We believed that. 
 
We believe that this morning. The nursing practice issue and 
recruitment and retention issue for nurses, which is extremely 
important, could be dealt with and brought into the collective 
agreement. Sadly, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Union of 
Nurses felt otherwise and we are now in this position. 
 
I’m always hopeful, Mr. Speaker, that we can work together to 
deal with recruitment and retention, deal with nursing practice 
which is key to nurses’ issues, and deal with seniority. I’m 
always hopeful about those things, Mr. Speaker. And I am 
hopeful that these issues can be addressed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. While the 
Premier had lots to say yesterday, I hope he has something to 
say today in this House. The minister talks about working 



454 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 1999 

together but it’s working together only under her and your rules. 
 
Mr. Premier, the statement you issued this morning blames 
nurses for the strike. You blame nurses for the NDP 
government’s failure to provide a safe workplace. You blame 
nurses for overcrowded hospitals. You blame nurses for putting 
patients’ care at risk. Mr. Premier, stop blaming the nurses. 
Health of Saskatchewan families is at risk this morning because 
you failed — you, sir. After eight years of NDP government, 
your mismanagement of the health care system has created a 
disaster. 
 
Mr. Premier, the nurses’ strike is the most serious evidence yet 
of your government’s failure. What does the NDP back-to-work 
legislation do to address the serious issues raised by nurses 
about the state of health in Saskatchewan? What does this 
legislation do to improve workplace conditions and patient 
safety in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As we have 
said, we are not in the position to increase nurses’ salaries by 22 
per cent. We are not in the position because we spend $730 
million each year on interest on the public debt. That came 
about as the result of the previous administration which the 
member from Souris-Cannington was a member — 730 million, 
$2 million dollars a day in interest are . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Now the Chair is having some 
difficulty being able to hear the answer provided and I ask . . . 
Order. I ask for the co-operation of all members of the House to 
permit . . . order . . . to permit the minister to be heard. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you. Two million dollars a day 
each and every day, 365 days a year, leaves this province 
because of interest on the public debt that was run up by the 
Tories, Mr. Speaker. Two million dollars a day could buy . . . 
could hire a number of nurses and health care providers and 
could deal with the issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we cannot afford, in this fiscal year, to deal with 
the pay issues that the nurses have put forward. We put forward 
some ideas to deal with nursing practice and other issues, but 
the pay we couldn’t accomplish in this fiscal year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. No money for 
nurses but lots of blame for everybody else. Mr. Premier, while 
you’re busy blaming nurses and everybody else for the NDP’s 
health care disaster, your government is spending a bundle of 
money on NDP propaganda in the newspaper such as this full 
page ad today in The Leader-Post and The Star-Phoenix at a 
great cost — a full page of taxpayers’ funded NDP propaganda. 
Meanwhile hospitals in the province are closing this morning 
because of a nurses’ strike. 
 
Mr. Premier, why are you telling nurses there’s no money to 
address their serious concerns about working conditions when 
you have no problem spending taxpayers’ money pumping out 
NDP propaganda in the newspapers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, this coming from this 
member whose party would essentially freeze health spending 
in the province of Saskatchewan — freeze it. Freeze it. Mr. 
Speaker, we introduced a budget that puts $195 million into our 
health system — the largest increase in money ever in the 
history of this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This government is putting money in; the opposition is 
proposing a freeze on health spending. I can assure the public 
that a freeze on health spending would do nothing to deal with 
the many issues in our health system. A hundred and ninety-five 
million dollars will begin to address many of the issues that the 
public cares so deeply about. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, 
I’ve looked at this NDP propaganda and I have some news for 
you. In a full page of NDP propaganda about how wonderful 
the NDP health care system is, there isn’t one single mention of 
nurses — not one, Mr. Premier. I guess that’s how important it 
is to the Premier and to the NDP. 
 
Mr. Premier, you just don’t get it. Nurses face a workplace that 
borders on the intolerable — mandatory overtime, 16-hour 
days, seven days a week, virtually no days off, and the 
workplace stress is going through the roof. Often there aren’t 
enough nurses on the ward to provide the proper level of care 
that is needed. 
 
Mr. Premier, nurses are on strike because your government 
drove them there. Is there anything in this back-to-work 
legislation that addresses the real issues of the nurses’ strike — 
overworked nurses and understaffed hospitals. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As 
we all know in the province of Saskatchewan, the 
Saskatchewan Party is proposing to freeze, in essence, health 
spending — freeze, freeze at the rate of inflation, which 
amounts, Mr. Speaker, last year, of $18 million. Eighteen 
million dollars will not deal with the many issues that nurses 
face in the workplace, Mr. Speaker; $18 million won’t do it. 
 
We put a hundred and ninety-five million dollars into the health 
system. We believe that the health providers in this province, 
registered nurses, other health providers, have been under 
incredible pressure. We know that. But we believe that with the 
added money of a hundred and ninety-five million dollars, and 
$67 million of that coming from the federal government, that 
we can begin to address in a comprehensive way, the many 
myriad of issues that nurses and others face. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we cannot afford a 22 per cent increase, Mr. 
Speaker, but what we can afford is to begin to address in a very 
systemic and systematic way, issues that nurses and others face. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. After eight 
years of NDP government and health care mismanagement, I 
certainly understand why the Premier and the minister don’t 



April 8, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 455 

want to accept responsibility for it. 
 
Mr. Premier, I’m going to ask you one more time as simply and 
as clearly as possible, what does your legislation do to address 
the nursing shortage? What does your legislation do to address 
working conditions for nurses? What does your legislation do to 
reduce stress and burnout of overworked nurses? 
 
Mr. Premier, what does your back-to-work legislation do to 
address the real problems — working conditions and patient 
safety in Saskatchewan’s hospitals? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I think this member needs 
a bit of a history lesson. This government was elected in 1991. 
When we came to government, they had a billion dollar deficit. 
They had $15 billion in debt — debt, Mr. Speaker — that we 
were paying interest on. There was money flowing out to 
Zurich and New York and Toronto. We had to do something 
about it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There are people in this province that have suffered incredibly 
because of the legacy of these people. And we are now in the 
position to start putting money back in, but we cannot afford 
today, April 8, 1999 . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order, order. Order! I’ll 
ask all hon. members on both sides of the House, all hon. 
members . . . Order. Order. If they allow the minister to 
complete . . . the Chair was unable to hear the conclusion of her 
answer. If she wishes to complete her answer . . . Order. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — My point is, Mr. Speaker, there was a 
legacy left by the previous Conservative administration. Many 
issues had to be addressed to deal with the debt and the deficit. 
People in this province have suffered incredibly because of their 
legacy and we are now beginning to make our way out of, Mr. 
Speaker — $195 million to deal with the many issues that have 
come about as a result of their legacy. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Next question. 
 

Dorsey Report 
 

Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question 
today, Mr. Speaker, is for the man of the hour — not the Health 
minister but the guy that wants to interject in everything. My 
question to the Premier. 
 
For two years this Premier has sat on his hands and refused to 
deal with the Dorsey report. For two years you’ve known about 
the inequities that nurses face. For two years nurses have been 
pleading for help. Now two years later the Premier and the 
Health minister act like they’re Bambi caught in the headlights. 
They act surprised and shocked by these demands. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a pathetic response to an issue that this 
NDP government has known about for two years — for two 
years, Mr. Speaker. Rather than fix the problem they’ve made it 
worse, and they’ve made it far worse. 

Mr. Premier, how do you think your actions have created a 
work environment that we will attract the much-needed nurses 
here in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I think it’s important to continue the 
history lesson because it was the federal Liberal government 
that also reduced transfer payments for health and 
post-secondary education to this province by over $200 million. 
And as a result of the work that has been done by our Premier, 
we are beginning to see restoration of the Canada health and 
social transfer. And in this fiscal year, Mr. Speaker, we have 
$67 million of that funding reduction of $200 million coming 
back to the province. That has assisted us very much in 
beginning to address the many myriad of issues. 
 
So a history is federal cuts from the federal Liberals and PC 
(Progressive Conservative) legacy of debt. And everybody in 
this province is paying for it — everybody. Registered nurses, 
teachers, municipalities, highways, everybody. But we’re 
beginning to see our way through, Mr. Speaker, and we have 
$195 million in new money to put into the system. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Speaker, this Premier has waited too 
long to deal with the Dorsey report. He waited too long and 
what was once the problem has now become a crisis that will 
affect health care in this province for years to come. 
 
Two years ago your former Labour minister, Mr. Mitchell, said 
Dorsey would cost a hundred million bucks. You’ve sat on your 
hands; you’ve done nothing. The Premier claims he wants to get 
to the bottom of the nursing crisis, now is the time. 
 
Will the Premier admit that his refusal to do anything regarding 
the Dorsey report has only made this problem worse, and turned 
a problem into a crisis which the people of Saskatchewan are 
pointing their fingers at him alone. And would you get up and 
answer the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I’m surprised the member from Wood 
River is so emotional given that he’s not the Health critic. I 
think it’s the member form Arm River is the Health critic. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I just want to reiterate that the registered 
nurses of this province work incredibly hard and they work in 
very difficult circumstances. We hear this from registered 
nurses because registered nurses, Mr. Speaker, are our sisters, 
our cousins, our aunts, our mothers, our grandmothers. We 
know registered nurses and we have heard very clearly that 
there are issues that need to be addressed. 
 
If the member will recall, Dorsey said that all of the issues in 
Dorsey could not be not be addressed in one collective 
agreement. That it would take a number of years because we’re 
melding various collective agreements into one, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We believe that we can address the seniority issue, the other 
issues such as nursing practice, the other issues that have been 



456 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 1999 

dealt with and brought to our attention by nurses. 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, we can’t deal with the money in 
this fiscal year but the other issues we can deal with. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Speaker, the Health minister says they 
can’t; the fact of the matter is they won’t. They refuse to. 
 
My question again to the Premier. Last week the Health 
minister threatened the nurses with back-to-work legislation and 
an imposed settlement of 2, 2, and 2. She implied that if they 
didn’t accept what was offered they would receive a lot worse 
through an imposed settlement. 
 
Now we hear reports that the Premier alluded to the nurses 
yesterday that they would get a lot more at the bargaining table 
than him forcing legislation of back to work. 
 
Did the Premier tell them this and doesn’t he think that that 
constitutes an unfair labour practice on his part? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, this is a very complex set 
of negotiations that all health sector unions are undertaking in 
this round of a collective bargaining because all workers in the 
province are now represented by one union or another, Mr. 
Speaker. So we are melding several collective agreements into 
one. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member opposite . . . What I need to advise 
the member opposite is that health care in the province is much 
more integrated today than it was eight years ago. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SUN represents practically every out-of-scope 
nurse in the province. That means that SUN represents nurses in 
home care and acute care and long-term care and community 
care, mental health, public health — everything. Mr. Speaker, 
the health districts have advised us — because they have very 
few out-of-scope nurse managers to handle the workload of all 
of these many nurses in the province, 8,400 nurses — that they 
cannot, in all fairness to the public, sustain this for any length of 
time. And they want to guarantee public safety, and so do we. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Speaker, the Health minister, the 
Premier have been talking about public safety. As much 
fearmongering as they can pump into this — that’s what they’re 
doing. That’s morbid, and shame on you, and you should be 
ashamed of yourself, Mr. Premier, for hiding behind these 
people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, two years ago then Labour minister Bob Mitchell 
told the Premier that Dorsey would cost 100 million to 
implement, and that would bring some needed stability to the 
health care system. Mr. Premier, you were warned by Mr. 
Mitchell of those costs. You did nothing. You ignored your 
minister’s advice. And surely the Premier now must be 
regretting just that, ignoring that advice. Doesn’t he admit that 
his failure to listen to his health . . . or his Labour minister Bob 
Mitchell will cost us not only a lot more than 100 million, but it 

could end up costing us our health care system on your 
shoulders, mister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, as the member will know 
that the health districts in the province are the administrators of 
the day-to-day health system in the province. Mr. Speaker, we 
have been advised by the health districts — particularly 
Saskatoon and Regina which have many, many of the various 
. . . or handle very many of the health issues in the province of 
Saskatchewan — that they cannot sustain the system for any 
length of time, Mr. Speaker. In fact the member from Battleford 
will acknowledge, as he did in the newspaper, that this cannot 
be handled for any length of time. And in fact this morning I 
heard . . . I heard the president of SUN indicate on CJME that 
this is a different circumstance than it was in 1991 when the 
system sustained a 12-day walkout. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Negotiations With Nurses 
 

Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Since the advent of 
health care reform nurses have coped with layoffs. Six hundred 
nurses fired by this government to be exact, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They have coped with bed closures; they have coped with 
inadequate funding; they have coped with enforced overtime. 
They have coped with increased patient acuity and increased 
responsibility. And most lately, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of 
Health has threatened the workers by saying that if strike action 
is taken they will legislate them back to work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, hasn’t the NDP created a wonderful environment 
for the nurses of this province, the people that look after the 
sick and the elderly? Yesterday, Mr. Speaker, the Premier 
circumvented the bargaining process and himself has gone to 
the bargaining table. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Associate Minister of 
Health, the former president of SUN. Madam Minister, do you 
agree with this process and is your conscience going to let you 
support this legislation in the House this afternoon? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I want to answer the 
question because it speaks to the issue of my request to meet 
with the president of SUN, Ms. Longmoore, and the president 
of SAHO (Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations). 
 
I want to congratulate and thank both of them with their 
assistance for coming to the meeting at 9 o’clock. And we met 
for 11 hours . . . 12 hours to review all of the options which 
were before us. 
 
Personally, and speaking only for myself, I indicated privately 
and publicly that I thought progress had been made. 
 
We didn’t succeed. I regret that very much, as much as anybody 
else does. But I do not regret having tried my very best on 
behalf of the people of the province of Saskatchewan, on behalf 



April 8, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 457 

of the nurses, on behalf of the district health districts, on behalf 
of all the people of Saskatchewan to come to a peaceful 
solution. I would do it again if I could and had to face that 
choice. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, I 
move first reading of the Bill No. 23 . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The minister requests leave to 
introduce the Bill. Is leave granted? 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 23 — The Resumption of Services 
(Nurses — SUN) Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 23, The 
Resumption of Services (Nurses — SUN) Act be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — With leave, right now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 23  The Resumption of Services 
(Nurses — SUN) Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second 
reading of The Resumption of Services (Nurses — SUN) Act. 
Mr. Speaker, it is with considerable regret and disappointment 
that today this government finds itself in the position that it 
must take the step of introducing back-to-work legislation with 
respect to the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses. Our commitment 
to collective bargaining makes this a difficult step but one that 
is essential to safeguard the lives and health of Saskatchewan 
citizens. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill brings an immediate end to the labour 
dispute between the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses and the 
employer organizations represented by the Saskatchewan 
Association of Health Organizations. All existing collective 
bargaining agreements will be continued for the purposes of 
ending this labour dispute. 
 
The Bill provides all employees with a 2 per cent salary 
increase for each of the three years commencing April 1, 1999. 
Further, it provides that the parties may agree, through the 
collective bargaining process, to provide an additional 1 per 
cent of wages payable for other benefits. 
 
The Bill also allows for up to an additional 1.2 per cent of 
wages payable to be applied to address disparities between 
employees resulting from Dorsey’s reorganization. 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, the Bill includes significant enforcement 
provisions to ensure that both parties comply with the 
requirements of the Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is our duty to ensure health care services for the 
people of Saskatchewan. It is a duty we take very seriously. We 
present this Bill to the Legislative Assembly as a necessary step 
to safeguard Saskatchewan’s health care services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I encourage all members of this Legislative 
Assembly to join the government in supporting this Bill. 
 
I beg to inform the Assembly that His Honour the Lieutenant 
Governor, having being informed of the subject matter of the 
Bill, recommends it to the consideration of the Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act respecting the 
Resumption of Services by Nurses and the Concluding of a 
New Collective Bargaining Agreement between the 
Representative Employers’ Organization and the Union. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is indeed a 
sad day in Saskatchewan that we start our session early, earlier 
than normal, to deal with this situation, a situation which I 
believe everyone in this province did not want to see happen; a 
situation, I believe, Mr. Speaker, that the nurses in particular 
did not want to see happen. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the nurses of this province have a great deal 
of concern, and for good reason they have that concern with the 
work conditions that they have been forced to work under for 
the past number of years. Work conditions, Mr. Speaker, that 
are a result of the decisions made by the government, by the 
Premier opposite. Those decisions were made for political 
reasons, Mr. Speaker, without regard for the people who work 
in the health care system, without regard for the nurses that 
work in the health care system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, during question period we raised a number of very 
important issues. And I think a very important issue which was 
asked by our colleague from Arm River, and an issue which the 
member of the Assembly for Saskatoon Eastview, the Associate 
Minister of Health did not stand and respond to, I think needs to 
be asked again, Mr. Speaker. It needs to be clarified to this 
House, to the public, and most importantly, Mr. Speaker, to the 
people who she proposed . . . she purported to represent before 
she came into this Assembly. 
 
The member from Saskatoon Eastview, the Associate Minister 
of Health, was the past president of SUN. I would like to ask 
her, will she stand in this House and vote in a free vote for her 
union or will she vote for her party? Will she vote her 
conscience? Will she vote for her constituents? Or will she vote 
to keep her job in cabinet? That’s a question . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker, our members will be allowed to vote their 
consciences and for their constituents. I would ask the members 
opposite in the government to give the same consideration to 
their members, to their consciences, and to their constituents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in question period we saw another example of 
what this government will do at the end of this day. They will 
blame everybody else for what happens in this House today. 



458 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 1999 

They will accept no responsibility themselves. 
 
The heartache, the patient fear, the family concerns, the 
disruptions that are happening across this province today will 
all be blamed on the nurses. This government opposite will 
accept no responsibility for the actions they have taken for the 
last eight years. They were the ones who implemented the 
Dorsey report. They were the ones who closed the hospitals 
across this province. They were the ones who made the work 
conditions of the nurses across this province intolerable. 
 
So is it any wonder, Mr. Speaker, that when the work 
conditions are not being addressed in the workplace, that the 
employees say, if I’m going to be forced to work under these 
conditions, you’re going to pay me for it. And that’s what the 
nurses are asking, Mr. Speaker. Since the government will not 
address the things that are happening in the hospital, the nurses 
are asking to be compensated for that. 
 
As you know, Mr. Speaker, I have spent a considerable amount 
of time in the last year — excuse me — I spent a considerable 
amount of time in the hospital in the last year. I have seen the 
conditions that the nurses are working under. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — I have heard the phone calls at midnight 
asking the nurses to complete another shift. I’ve heard the 
phone calls and talked to the nurses about coming in on their 
days off. I’ve seen them working double shifts. I’ve —thank 
you for your indulgences — I have seen them working with 
only one nurse on a ward that should have had four. And the 
reasons that has happened, Mr. Speaker, is because of the 
mismanagement of this government. 
 
This government has ignored, since they became government, 
the realities of health care in this province. They have ignored 
the patients’ needs. They have ignored the nurses’ needs. They 
have ignored the needs of all the workers in the health care 
system. And today, Mr. Speaker, they again ignore the issues by 
saying the contract that you had previously, the conditions you 
worked under previously, are the conditions you’re going to 
have to work under for the next three years. It’s wrong, Mr. 
Speaker; it’s wrong. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair appreciates the feeling that guests 
in the galleries have today and has appreciated the co-operation 
of guests in honouring the parliamentary traditions of debate in 
the House, and again ask humbly for the co-operation of our 
guests. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And it’s wrong 
that this government is now blaming nurses for the situation 
they created. Mr. Speaker, if lives are lost because of this strike 
it’s the NDP’s fault; not the nurses, not the oppositions, but the 
NDPs. And it’s time for them to take responsibility for their 
lack of commitment to the welfare of people in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Premier, as soon as you entered the negotiation process, 
literally it fell apart. It was only after the president of SUN had 
met with you that nurses decided to strike. Mr. Speaker, the 

Premier has failed farmers in this province, he has failed the 
teachers in this province, and now he has failed the nurses in 
this province, and indeed lives are at stake. 
 
It was for your own political gains, Mr. Premier, that you even 
entered the bargaining process. 
 
Mr. Premier, Mr. Speaker, this is not a true measure of a leader 
because every time the Premier gets up to bat he strikes out. 
Patients now have to be moved out of the province and the 
government is going to pick up the bill. Well where is the 
money going to come from? 
 
It costs $10,000 to move a patient from Saskatoon to the US. 
And how are you going to pay for this? Ten thousand dollars, 
Mr. Premier, is what one nurse is asking for. How much is this 
going to cost us? 
 
The fact of the matter is patients’ lives would not be in jeopardy 
if the Premier had stuck to the so-called commitment to the 
people of Saskatchewan. Monetary issues aside, the working 
conditions for Saskatchewan nurses are deplorable. They are 
overworked because of the shortage of nurses, and this puts 
lives in danger. 
 
This back-to-work legislation that your government is 
cramming down nurses’ throats is just a quick fix — it’s not for 
the long-term solution. There is no long-term solution, Mr. 
Premier, because your government is out of touch with the 
people and the issues that face them on a daily basis. 
 
Your government is out of ideas. And legislating them back to 
work is, in your opinion, your only tool. 
 
Even while the nurses are still at the bargaining table you and 
your ministers threatened them with back-to-work legislation. I 
don’t think that’s exactly what you would call a fair bargaining 
process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Premier, it’s a sad day in this province when 
the members of this House have to stand in their places to make 
up for the government’s and the Premier’s failures. 
 
I’m sure that everybody across this province, members of this 
House, nurses, families across this province, know and 
understand what has been happening with health care in this 
province over the last eight years. And that the responsibility, 
the responsibility for all those things — the heartache, the 
concerns, the fear, and the lives that are in jeopardy, Mr 
Speaker — rest only in one place. 
 
The member from Riversdale sought the Premier’s chair; he 
now must bear the responsibility for the decisions he and his 
government have made while he has been sitting in that chair. 
While he may try to avoid that responsibility, as he has tried to 
avoid the responsibility for everything that has happened in this 
province since October of 1991, that responsibility rests solely 
on his shoulders. 
 
The fact that nurses today, Mr. Speaker, are visiting our gallery 
and are not in the hospitals across Saskatchewan is the 
responsibility of the member from Riversdale. He was the one 
who last night, yesterday afternoon, and yesterday morning 



April 8, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 459 

sought to play a hero’s role. Well, Mr. Speaker, the mighty 
Casey struck out. 
 
Mr. Speaker, hopefully the people of Saskatchewan will not 
have to pay the price of his failures. That price, Mr. Speaker, 
rests with him, his government, and his party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Tommy Douglas was the person who brought 
medicare to Saskatchewan, and while it has changed over the 
years, the member from Riversdale has stood in his place very 
often and championed the cause. His claim was as the great 
defender of health care. Well, Mr. Speaker, since 1944 health 
care has not been in worse condition than it is today under the 
premiership of the member from Riversdale. 
 
So nurses, and people of Saskatchewan, you know where that 
blame lies, you know where that fault lies, and it lies only with 
the Premier and his government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this legislation is abhorrent; it’s totally inadequate. 
And, Mr. Speaker, we will be proposing amendments to this 
legislation which will address the issues that need to be 
addressed immediately. There is no time to wait to address 
these issues. Three years later is not good enough, Mr. Speaker. 
And we call on the members of this Assembly, both in 
government and in opposition, Mr. Speaker, to support the 
amendments we will be proposing that will deal with the issues 
of the workplace that nurses and other health care workers are 
facing in this province. 
 
So I challenge the members opposite, the government and the 
Premier, to support those amendments and do something about 
the working conditions in our hospitals. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well 
it’s been interesting this morning listening to some of the 
comments from both the other parties. And our party can also 
go on record right now. The very problem that that government 
has created, this group wants to further the problem by saying, 
well, we’re going to have amendments, we’re going to do other 
things. 
 
The fact of the matter is these politicians shouldn’t be involved 
in this negotiating process. I’ll tell you right now, we’re not 
supporting your Bill. We’re just not supporting it. We’re not 
having amendments. Because this should have been bargained 
fairly by the appropriate people, and the Premier shouldn’t have 
been involved in the first place. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — So you can bring in all the amendments 
you want. All you’re doing is interfering with a process that you 
don’t belong in. So leave it at that. 
 
Let’s talk about some of the other things that have happened in 
recent days and why things have led to where they are today. 
While we have had CUPE (Canadian Union Of Public 
Employees) out looking at ratifying their agreement and giving 
some consideration to it, we have in The Leader-Post, the 
Health minister of the day saying that they are going to sweeten 

the offers to SUN and SEIU (Service Employees’ International 
Union). 
 
What kind of message is that sending to CUPE? Why would 
they go and say, yes, let’s bargain and let’s get this over with 
when we know full well others are going to get a better deal. 
Don’t you see the kind of problems you create by getting 
involved, Mr. Premier? And that’s why I wouldn’t be at all 
surprised, as I said earlier in question period, that there will be 
unfair labour practices directed right at you, sir, right at you 
where they belong. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — At the same time some of this was going 
on, we have other things happening. In the paper . . . now this is 
when you’re letting on you really care about the health care 
workers of the province but can’t do anything about it. Your 
Health minister said today, we are not in a position, we are not 
in a position to further any increases — right? 
 
Well, look at this. The Leader-Post, “Big raises for Crown 
executives.” Look at that. Look at the kind of salaries — a 
hundred and ninety thousand dollar salaries for his roommate, 
Don Ching. What kind of a message? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Let’s talk about the message that sends to 
people. What about this one? “CEOs get wage hikes.” 
 
And I’m going to quote: 
 

“At a time (at a time) when the provincial government is 
telling ordinary health care workers to get by on 2 per cent 
a year, it has no problems with a 17 per cent wage hike for 
district CEOs,” says Mr. Harvey McLane. 
 

That’s a quote, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But how can that be — 17 percent for your friends, your hacks? 
Yesterday we raised some stuff in here about 50 per cent 
increases for your advertising budget going into election year 
and where does it go? It goes to your NDP hack firms to pad 
their election account. That’s what’s happening here. 
 
The Health minister says this morning: well we just can’t afford 
and we don’t have the money. And I disagree and so does the 
Liberal Party disagree. And in fact, we’re on record — and I’m 
going to quote from a press release, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Melenchuck says a Liberal government would create a 
stable work environment for health care workers at a cost 
of 110 million to 120 million or 60 per cent of the 1999 
Health budget increases proposed by the NDP. 
 

Well maybe they’re not prepared to do some stuff. I’ll tell you 
others are, others are, and at election time, boy, you’re going to 
stand up and explain why you aren’t. 
 
If I look at some of the past comments by the Premier not only 
is he on record for some stuff I think he wishes he could reel 
them back in right now, but in April 22, 1991, I’m going to 



460 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 1999 

quote Hansard: 
 

Mr. Romanow: — (And this is his quote) And finally, 
what about the health-care system? Much can be said about 
this, and much will be (said) in the days ahead as I bring 
my remarks to close — a health-care system that we see 
today where doctors and nurses and other care-givers are 
worried about intolerable working conditions, and 
difficulties of stress which manifest themselves today with 
the nurses coming to this Legislative Building to protest 
what’s happening. 

 
Well isn’t that interesting? Isn’t that interesting days before an 
election how you change your tune. Well they’re here again 
today, Mr. Premier, and I challenge you to go out on the steps 
and explain why your opinion has changed since so much since 
you became Premier. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — He goes on to say: “What in the world’s 
gone wrong with medicare and health care . . .” What a good 
question, what a good . . . and I’ve got to ask that question 
today, Mr. Premier. He goes on: 
 

(190) . . . beds, 197 people, 113 beds in Saskatoon, about 
200 in Moose Jaw, Yorkton, and Regina, I think in round 
terms, closed down. What in the world has gone wrong? 

 
Well I’ll tell you what in the world has gone wrong, Mr. 
Premier. You sit on your hands, you do nothing. Bob Mitchell 
has warned you — a hundred million bucks a few years ago. 
When you, Mr. Premier, were the architect, you brought in . . . 
what do we have here? A thousand pages? A thousand pages, 
and you chose to do nothing until the final days of the contract? 
You’ve done nothing. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The hon. member is a veteran member 
and I know well acquainted with the rules of debate in the 
House and that the debate is to be directed to the Chair. And I’ll 
ask for his co-operation to follow the rules of debate in the 
House. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I will direct 
them through the Chair because I feel the Premier feels the sting 
of the day regardless of who’s looking at him. 
 
An Hon. Member: — And rightly so. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — But you know, what about some of the 
inflamed comments that we’re getting now? I think back to last 
fall when they forced IBEW (International Brotherhood of 
Electrical Workers), who they locked out — locked out. Key 
word here — locked out, and then brought in legislation to kick 
’em back to work. And what was being said by the Premier and 
the big guy beside him, the Deputy Premier? Well it’s safety 
concerns — we’ve got to . . . there’s all these safety concerns. 
Oh, they were concerned. You know, just as they’re concerned 
now about the safety in health care. But they weren’t so 
concerned a few years ago when the community of Climax took 
them to court on safety concerns. They took you to court. 
Where’s your position then? 
 

The fact of the matter is, they inflame . . . Mr. Speaker, they 
inflame everything all the time. They said things about the 
SaskPower lockout that weren’t true. The fact of the matter is, 
when put to the test, when put to the test, Mr. Speaker . . . and 
the IBEW members were the first ones when the weather 
conditions turned sour during the lockout, they were the first 
ones there to make sure the power was left on, making these 
guys look like the fools they are. That’s what was happening. 
 
And to dare say . . . to dare say that there’s a nurse in this 
province that would put anyone’s life in danger. I’ll stand here 
and say there isn’t. You should stand up and say the same. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — It makes you wonder how we’ve come to 
this point in time, Mr. Speaker. It does make you wonder. 
 
Well things are going to move along real fast here today. We’re 
not going to hold up the legislation. You know why we’re not 
going to hold it up? We want you to put your agenda forward to 
the people, because with your majority it’s going to happen. It’s 
just whether it happens in two hours or six hours. So bring it on, 
bring it on and show the people of this province what your true 
colours are really like. All right? And especially the associate 
Health minister, I’d like to see those true colours. 
 
Bring it on but at the end of the day we’re not supporting it. 
We’re not supporting it because it should have never come to 
this, Mr. Speaker. It should have never come this far. It should 
of never had the Premier thinking that he could do his political 
manoeuvring and his spin doctoring and take people in the 
room and roll up his sleeves like we’ve all watched him do, you 
know, so slowly during his speeches. Well it doesn’t work. 
 
You shouldn’t have been there. You shouldn’t have been there 
unless you had something substantial to say and give to people. 
What are you going to say to them to get . . . What are we short 
— 5, 600 nurses in this province, Mr. Speaker? I think we’re 
short about that many. At least under a Liberal platform we are 
because we’re going to put some hospitals back out there. 
 
The fact of the matter is this Premier has done nothing but 
inflame this situation. I say bring your agenda on. We’re not 
supporting your agenda. Let those guys play whatever games 
they want. That’s all I have to say. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I was elected to this legislature in October of 1986 and as you 
know we’ve been in government since 1991. And I’ve had the 
opportunity to be involved as the Minister of Social Services, 
the Minister of Education, and now for last six-and-a-few 
months, the Minister of Health. Mr. Speaker, in the last six 
months — and before that — I understood that there were 
many, many issues that this province faced, many issues. We 
have a population of a little over a million people in 
Saskatchewan. We have fewer than 500,000 taxpayers in the 
province. And we have a large debt. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have worked as a teacher. I have worked in the 
field of social services and I know that people in this province 



April 8, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 461 

work incredibly hard. And I would say in this province today 
there are people working harder and longer than they ever have 
in the history of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I know, Mr. Speaker, that there are 
people that are working harder for longer hours for not a lot of 
money relative to what they could earn anywhere else in this 
country practically, with maybe the exception of the Atlantic 
provinces. I know that there are people in this province that pay 
high taxes, and I know that there are people in this province that 
have a commitment to this province and they stay here because 
home is where the heart is. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve had an opportunity to meet many people in 
the health field in the last six months. I know, as my colleagues 
know, that registered nurses and other health providers work 
incredibly hard under not very good conditions, Mr. Speaker. I 
know that they are committed to their jobs and they are 
committed to the people that they serve in the workplace, and 
that’s the citizens of this province. 
 
(1100) 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we all know, as citizens of this province, the 
importance of the work that people in health provide, Mr. 
Speaker, because they provide services to our citizens. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as has been indicated, Health has undergone a 
tremendous transformation in the last eight years. And that has 
had some dramatic impacts upon people who work in the 
system. What we’ve tried to do, Mr. Speaker, is to bring over 
400 different hospitals and ambulance boards and home care 
boards and all kinds of services under a structure. 
 
And the theory behind it, the idea behind it, is that instead of 
having people in various stovepipes, we would be able to 
develop a more integrated and coordinated system that would 
serve the needs of our citizens so that there would be good 
linkages between acute care, long-term care, home care, and 
community-based health services. And I think, Mr. Speaker, 
we’ve come some distance in providing a more coordinated and 
integrated system. 
 
Now as a result of doing that, there was a discussion that 
occurred between the various health sector unions and the 
government and the employer about how do we sort out all of 
the various collective agreements that would now be under one 
health district. Because there were some impediments in those 
collective agreements to ensuring that there were . . . we would 
be able to move to a more integrated and coordinated system. 
 
And let me just give you an example, Mr. Speaker. You might 
have one union representing the hospital workers, and another 
union representing the long-term care people, and another union 
representing home care, and another union representing mental 
health. And there is an agreement as I understand the history of 
this, between the unions and the province that a man by the 
name of Jim Dorsey would try and sort this out. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, at the end of the day, Mr. Dorsey indicated 
that the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses would represent all of 

the registered nurses in the province. That SEIU would 
represent the support workers and various health districts. That 
the Canadian Union of Public Employees would represent other 
support staff in other health districts, and that the Health 
Sciences Association would represent some of the social 
workers and other paraprofessionals, professionals in health 
districts across the province. In addition, the Saskatchewan 
Government Employees’ Union represents one health district in 
the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve come to the point, after the Dorsey report, 
where all of the unions are now representing the various work 
. . . health districts across the province, and various groups 
across the province. But we are trying to negotiate into one 
master agreement for each of the unions, a collective 
agreement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, as I indicated 
in question period, now represents most in-scope nurses in this 
province that work in health districts. And they are trying to 
negotiate a master agreement that basically covers 10 different 
agreements. 
 
Mr. Dorsey, when he gave the report to us all, he indicated that 
there are many, many issues that had to be resolved because 
people had different hours of work, different vacation leaves, 
different benefits, different rates of pay, and so on. But he also 
indicated in that report that all of this could not be 
accomplished in one collective agreement; that it would take 
some time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government through our process determined 
that it was extremely important that we have the mandate which 
all other public sector workers have had, that’s 2, 2, 2, and 1, 
and that there would be funds available to deal with the serious 
issues that arose out of Dorsey to deal with some of the real 
inequities in the system. So money was provided for that. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan 
indicated that the pay equity framework which other civil 
servants or public employees in government and Crown 
corporations, that pay equity framework would now be 
available to the health sector and that the health sector would go 
through a job evaluation process to get to equal pay for equal 
work. 
 
And that’s incredibly important for people in the health sector 
because the vast majority of people who work in the health 
sector are female. And as we know, historically females in this 
country have not had equal pay for work of equal value. And, if 
you look at their wages, female people in this country earn 
much less than males. 
 
And through the job evaluation process, Mr. Speaker, through 
the job evaluation process, Mr. Speaker, we were going to get 
to pay equity which would mean, Mr. Speaker, that workers in 
this province in health care would be able to access pay equity 
and pay equity money in order to improve the wages — the 
wages, Mr. Speaker — of people who work in the health sector. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses’ collective 
agreement expired on March 31, 1999. That is eight days ago, 
Mr. Speaker. And I understand from SUN and the employer, 



462 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 1999 

that they have been in bargaining for the last 36 or 37 days . . . 
where they have been down and involved in bargaining. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we understand from SUN that things were not 
proceeding very quickly at the bargaining table. And we 
certainly understood from the registered nurses that were 
contacting our constituency offices that bargaining needed to 
proceed much more quickly in order to address the issues that 
nurses found so important to them in being able to continue 
their work as registered nurses in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the parties negotiated over the long weekend, and 
as a result of information that was provided to us by SUN and 
as a result of the notice of strike action, the Premier, on behalf 
of all of the people of this province, intervened. He was 
hopeful, Mr. Speaker, that we would be able to listen very 
carefully to what the employer and the representatives of the 
registered nurses in this province were saying, and that we 
would be able to address, in a very meaningful and concrete 
way, those issues that were important to people in the 
workplace. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday at 9 a.m. the employer and SUN met 
with the Premier to try and give to the Premier information as to 
those issues that absolutely had to be addressed in order to get a 
bargained collective agreement. And at that time, Mr. Speaker, 
nurses indicated that the whole issue of nursing practice was 
extremely important to them. 
 
And this is why it’s important to them, Mr. Speaker, and we 
heard that message very clearly. In the province of 
Saskatchewan we have an organization called the Saskatchewan 
Registered Nurses’ Association. They set the standard of 
practice for registered nurses. And registered nurses are 
concerned, Mr. Speaker, that they can’t meet their standard of 
practice — and this is something that other professional 
organizations have to meet — a standard of practice in the 
workplace. And they believe that there are some management 
practices that make it practically impossible to meet that 
standard of practice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we thought we had a solution to this. And the 
nurses provided us with a solution about how we could make a 
situation binding on everybody if an arbiter decided that those 
kinds of issues needed to be addressed. And we thought we 
could deal with this issue of nursing practice, which I 
understand has been a long outstanding issue for the nurses of 
this province for many, many, many years. And we thought we 
could address that. 
 
Second issue, Mr. Speaker, that’s important to nurses is 
seniority. Practically every other workplace in this province that 
is unionized, people can access jobs based on seniority if they 
meet the minimum qualification. And, Mr. Speaker, that is not 
the case with the nurses of this province. And the nurses put 
forward a proposal to deal with that issue. And we thought we 
could meet that issue as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the third issue for nurses was to make jobs 
permanent and full time. And we understand that if you’re a 
graduate from the University of Saskatchewan College of 
Nursing or SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science 
and Technology), that in order for you to deal with your student 

loan and all of these kinds of things, you need a full-time job, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we know that there are nurses presently in the workplace 
that are working casual that want a full-time job. And we 
thought that we could address that issue, Mr. Speaker, in the 
language that could be inserted into the collective agreement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those issues were important to nurses, and they’re 
important to us. Because we don’t think nurses can work in a 
place where they can’t meet their standard of practice. And we 
thought we could deal with it. We thought in fairness to nurses 
that they too should have a seniority clause like everybody else 
that is unionized, based on minimum qualifications. 
 
And we thought, Mr. Speaker, that it was important in order to 
stabilize work in this province that we needed to move to more 
full-time employment. Because we’ve looked at the figures, Mr. 
Speaker. About a third of the workforce is casual, a third is part 
time, and a third is full time. And we need to make full-time 
jobs in health care for everybody, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, at 8 o’clock, 
representatives of the registered nurses of this province said 
they had to go back to their representatives. The representatives 
of the employer said they had to go back to their 
representatives. And we were meeting here this morning at 
8:30. And we believed that we could address issues. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, we had a strategy available to deal 
with the whole issue of recruitment and retention, which would 
be a fund available and managed by SUN and the government 
and SAHO to deal with nursing recruitment and retention and 
quality issues — quality of care issues, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we were to meet this morning. And last night 
shortly after 11 o’clock we were advised that the people in the 
Saskatchewan Union of Nurses had determined that it was an 
appropriate response to take general-wide, province-wide strike 
action in order to meet their demands. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we thought that we had come to a point where we 
could avoid this; where we could have a mutually agreed to 
collective agreement that would deal with the legitimate issues 
that registered nurses feel each and every day in the workplace. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are now in this situation. We have letters from 
the health districts that indicate to us that they are in a different 
situation than they were in 1991 when nurses took job action to 
meet their requests, their demands at the bargaining table. And 
health districts advise us that we have a much different situation 
in that the health system is far more integrated than it was in 
1991. 
 
In 1991 the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses represented the 
acute and long-term care institutions in this province. In 1999 
the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses represents acute, long-term, 
home care — where 26,000 people are looked after each day in 
the province — as well as community based care, and public 
health. 
 



April 8, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 463 

And the employers have written to the Premier and written to 
myself indicating that based on the situation today, on April 8, 
1999, that they cannot say with certainty that they can ensure 
public safety as a result of the conditions they find themselves 
in today — some nine years later, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1115) 
 
They indicate that it’s important that we ensure public safety. 
And as the Minister of Health for the province of Saskatchewan 
it’s important to ensure that not only people have access to a 
good health system that meets their individual needs, but it’s 
important that we ensure that the public in this province is not 
in any kind of jeopardy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that’s why I would say to you, Mr. Speaker, that this is a 
very, very, very sad day for all of us because we’ve got . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We somehow thought, Mr. Speaker, 
that through discussions, talking, talking, talking, listening, 
caring, listening, listening, Mr. Speaker, that we could get to a 
point where we had a mutually agreed to collective agreement. 
And that is not the case, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is . . . I think it’s an understatement that all 
members of the legislature are deeply saddened by the events. 
Deeply saddened, disappointed, because we thought, Mr. 
Speaker, at 8:30 this morning that we could continue the 
discussions, continue to talk, continue to arrive at solutions to 
the very real problems that registered nurses in this province 
face along with the citizens of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to end, I would say this, that health care is an 
extremely important service. Health care for all of us is an 
emotional issue. And why is it? Because it’s fundamental to 
who we are as members of the Saskatchewan citizenry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1962 the people of this province decided to 
implement publicly funded, publicly administered medicare — 
in 1962. We were the first province. We were the first place in 
all of North American that had publicly funded, publicly 
administered medicare. And that meant, Mr. Speaker, that it 
didn’t matter how much money you had or didn’t have, you had 
access to the health system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that there are people in this gallery today 
whose fathers and mothers fought for medicare in 1962. Mr. 
Speaker, my father and my mother fought for medicare in 1962. 
My mother and my father were not members of the KOD — 
Keep Our Doctors. My father and my mother were not at the 
steps of this legislature slamming on the doors, booting the 
doors in, in order to stop medicare. They were in the 
constituency of Biggar, which was represented by the premier 
of the province, Woodrow Lloyd, raising money to fund a 
community health clinic in order to continue medicare services 
in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there were women in this province that were 
expecting children — my mother was one of them — I was 10 
years old in 1962, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, they did 
everything in their power to ensure that we would no longer 

ever be in the position again in this province where it mattered 
whether you had money and that determined whether or not you 
had access to health care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this province has undergone some tremendous 
challenges in its history — tremendous challenges. And those 
challenges will continue into our history. Do I say medicare in 
this province is perfect? It is not. Does medicare in this 
province have challenges? It does, Mr. Speaker. In order to 
meet those challenges, we think that for the first time ever in the 
history of Saskatchewan we have $195 million in new money 
and we think that that new money can begin to address the 
many challenges that our health system faces. 
 
In order to address those many challenges, Mr. Speaker, we 
have to work together. That means that physicians and scientists 
and registered nurses and nursing assistants and the 
housekeepers and the people in dietary and maintenance and 
subspecialties and management — everybody — everybody has 
to work together. And if we can work together in a co-operative 
way, Mr. Speaker, I think the future of medicare in this 
province will be assured. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s an 
awesome responsibility to stand here today as one of the 58 
elected people in this province that are standing with a Bill 
that’s supposed to order 8,400 health care workers back. 
 
We’ve sat here in this House for the last four years, and some of 
my colleagues a lot longer than this, listening at least once a day 
— and 20 twenty times a day — to hear members opposite talk 
about Tommy Douglas and how the father of medicare and how 
this province has been relying on . . . We are supposed to have 
medicare because of this government over here. 
 
Well today I don’t think that the nurses in the Assembly are 
saying that . . . people are saying that medicare is looked at by 
the NDP government as something that’s their . . . they can 
bank on and something that they’re proud of. 
 
The collective agreement that we have looked at today, that the 
nurses are going to be looking at, is one that . . . the same thing 
that we saw a few months ago for IBEW. It’s the same one. In 
fact, we’re probably to the point now where the government is 
just going just spew them out and leave the words blank so they 
can fill in the line for whichever group next has to come 
forward. And if they have any problems at all, they just go and 
the government says, oh, we’ll legislate ’em back, just fill in the 
words and it doesn’t matter who you are or what the job is. 
 
They aren’t listening to the people out there. They didn’t listen 
to the farmers, they didn’t listen to any of the labourers, and 
today they’re not listening to the nurses. And it’s not just the 
nurses, because the nurses represent and they look after 
everybody in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I heard the minister speak about 11 hours of 
discussions yesterday. Well that wasn’t just . . . the discussions 
yesterday wasn’t what brought today about. We’ve had eight 
years. The nurses have been asking and begging for eight years 
for their problems to be brought to the surface. 



464 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 1999 

We’ve known for a number of months now that these nurses are 
ready to go to the extreme measures of strike action because 
their real goal or what they have to do their job, their 
responsibility, they can’t do it. They don’t have the time in the 
day or the hours, the physical ability to do everything that they 
want to do as trained professionals. 
 
As the people that I and my children and my grandchildren 
know that we can count on if we get ill and we are going to go 
there because they’ll come in overtime, they’ll work double 
shifts, they’ll . . . when their colleagues say, please come and 
work for me today. I’ve just had a . . . They’ll do it, they’ll do it 
because they care. They aren’t doing it because somebody is 
going to legislate them back to work. 
 
We have recruitment . . . the members opposite are talking 
about recruiting nurses to this province. Well I wonder if they 
really believe that anybody’s going to come to the province — 
this province — with the wage levels that we’ve got here today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — We have nurses that now have to go into four 
years training. And I would imagine most of them, if they’re 
like the average person in this province, they have to take out a 
student loan or a loan of some sort to go into training. So they 
train for four years and probably have a 35,000, $40,000 student 
loan to pay for when they’re finished. They go into nursing and 
what do they get — $32,000 a year maybe, to go up to a 
maximum of somewhere around 40, for four years. 
 
And let’s compare them, or do compare them to some of the 
other workers. Compare them to other essential services like the 
RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) that have to train for 
a number of months and get about the same amount of money. 
They train for six months. We are putting our lives in the hands 
of people who care very, very much and they go into this 
profession because they are caring people. They aren’t going in 
there because they’re the type of person who really doesn’t care 
about anybody down the street. 
 
The minister talked about 1 million people in the ’30s. We still 
have a million people. We’re the only province that can say we 
have the same population we had in the ’30s. And we have . . . 
That’s something that I’m not proud of. And I could stand here 
and tell you that I know why we have this problem — that their 
government opposite is still banking on having a million people 
30 years from now. It’s not going to happen. It’s going to go 
down a lot quicker than that if the government opposite doesn’t 
realize what it takes to keep people in this province recognizing 
their worth. 
 
They blame the Tories. They blame the federal government. 
They blame the health boards. Now they’re blaming the nurses 
for all the problems. And I don’t usually go into this, but I just 
want to make sure that those present remember that this $2 
million debt bill that we have every day is the same number we 
had in 1991 when these guys came into power. The same 
dollars are being spent on interest every day as there was in 
1991. Why don’t you say that? You haven’t improved that 
situation at all. 
 
We have the Dorsey report, which was passed through this 

legislature a few years ago, and at that time we said, isn’t this 
going to cause a lot of problems? We’re lumping everybody 
into one category. And with all the highly trained people that 
are working behind governments and making sure Bills come 
forward that have got some grassroots and that have some 
understanding, we all of sudden now have a problem. 
 
Didn’t anybody know that this was going to cause a huge 
problem? Weren’t you listening to the nurses at that time that 
said these things aren’t working? Why would you think that 
they can . . . why would they believe that they can believe you 
today? 
 
In my rural area I talked to the hospitals there today and they 
said that they do have some nurses that are ready, either in the 
building or ready to come into the building. They’re not worried 
about a quick emergency because they know, Mr. Speaker, that 
if there’s a phone call and there’s an emergency, everyone of 
those hospitals said we know that we can call the RNs 
(registered nurse). They will be in. They’re always there if 
they’re called in an emergency because that’s what their job is. 
Right now . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t think in any place . . . In 
rural Saskatchewan, and I know in urban Saskatchewan as well, 
they care about the people. They’re doing their job under very 
high stress levels because their job is to make sure that we as 
individuals are safe so we can do our job if this is what we’re 
doing today. 
 
We have a premier that got involved yesterday in the collective 
bargaining agreement, which is something that I can’t imagine 
the labour part of the NDP government ever thought they’d see 
happen because they based everything on the rights of labour. 
But they’ve gone so far from what they thought they were in the 
beginning that nobody can believe anything any more. 
 
The health care . . . We need nurses in this province that go to 
work knowing that they can do their job right, that they can feel 
good about their job, that they are actually helping the people 
by more than just handing them a pill; but they can talk to them 
and know that the bedside manner and the personal support by 
just being able to say how are you feeling today, I have time to 
listen to you, I care about you. 
 
That isn’t happening. They run down the aisles trying to deliver 
. . . down the hallways trying to deliver medication and they 
know that the people in a wellness model, in a whole health 
system, they have to stop and talk to people. They have to touch 
them. They have to know that they’re cared about. That’s part 
of being well in the system as well. 
 
And nurses can’t do that. They don’t have time to do anything 
but the real technical things of nursing, and that is fill out forms 
and deliver a pill. And filling out the forms is something that 
should be the lowest item on the priority scale not the highest 
one. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1130) 



April 8, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 465 

Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I think it’s sad when some of the 
colleagues in the House say today that they’re not going to vote 
or put on an amendment because it’s too bad it’s come to this. 
Well we agree. It’s too bad it has come to this today, but the 
fact is it has come to this. And now there’s people, nurses, and 
patients right across this whole province that are saying what 
are you 58 people going to do? That’s where it’s come to. You 
can’t hide your head in the sand and say, I don’t to deal with 
this any more because the reality is there’s a Bill before us that 
we do have to deal with. 
 
The reality is that we are elected and the government has 
brought forward a Bill and the people of this province are 
waiting to see if their voices are going to be heard at all. The 
Liberals are politicizing health care. And when I read the 
district health records or the Bill, the NDP is turning it into a 
business because patients in this province under the NDP are 
now called clients. Whenever I hear the word “clients” I cringe 
because as a business person the word “client” is a customer 
that I expect to get money from. 
 
Patients in this province . . . I’m sure in any of the nursing 
manuals and any of the school training that they take in their 
four years of training, they don’t have to call somebody that’s 
just had a gall bladder removed or a young mother that’s just 
had a baby a client. I think they’re called a patient and that’s 
why we have nurses — because they look after patients. 
 
The minister talks about hard work and she talks about home is 
where the heart is. Well in good old Saskatchewan we have 
worked hard and we haven’t seen an increase in pay, and I’m 
tired of doing that just because we live in Saskatchewan. I’m 
tired of apologizing for being from Saskatchewan. And I’m 
tired of saying the whole world is going to go on but just keep 
the status quo in good old Saskatchewan because that’s just the 
way it is in this province. 
 
I had an old man come and was talking to me one day and I 
said, well how are you doing? And he said oh, I’ve got 
heartburn and a headache and I’ve got ulcers and life isn’t too 
good but I’m not too bad for the shape I’m in. And that’s what 
we hear from this government. We’re not doing too bad for the 
shape we’re in. Well let’s dream about a world when the shape 
can be a whole lot better. 
 
Every province is looking for nurses and every province pays 
more than we do to our caregivers. And I believe if we think we 
can attract them by 2, 2, and 2, and then by the year 2002 we’ll 
finish our study and then trust me, the government says, by then 
we’ll be on your side, by then everything will be solved. Things 
will be fine — just trust me. 
 
Well things aren’t fine now, and I don’t think they’re going to 
be any better in the year 2002 with this government and with 
this Premier when he comes in at the eleventh hour and decides 
that he can personally deal with problems. 
 
Nurses have a standard of practice; in other words, they want to 
do their job and their job is to ensure public safety. Just as the 
minister said our job is to ensure public safety, and so is the 
nurses’. And they’ve been doing that for years and years. While 
we’re at home . . . 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — While we’re at home at Christmastime and 
opening our presents with our children and when we’re at home 
when it’s storming and at midnight and we’re saying gee, I’m 
glad I don’t have to go out tonight, somewhere — probably at 
least 12 places in this province — some nurse is getting a call 
saying, gee, can you come in and work overtime; gee, can you 
come in and cover for me tonight because I just can’t come in. 
 
And those nurses are going out. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Those nurses don’t get to decide that they’re 
going to take four days off at Easter and five days off at 
Christmas and all the rest of it because their world revolves 
around a shift that involves us. That means that our children and 
our grandchildren and our parents are going to be looked after 
even though our life is going on. 
 
The government has a responsibility. It has three real areas of 
responsibility right now. They look after education and they 
look after highways and they look after health care. Health care. 
The minister talked about KOD — Keep Our Doctors. Well 
right now I’m saying if we’re going to ensure public safety in 
this province then we should have KON — Keep Our Nurses. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Before I recognize the hon. member for 
Humboldt again I do want to ask the co-operation of the guests 
in the gallery today . . . (inaudible) . . . Order. The Chair has 
appreciated the respect for the traditions of parliamentary 
democracy from the guests and appreciates their co-operation. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to be able to stand today in the legislature as an elected 
representative of the province; and to stand not only on behalf 
of the nurses within my constituency, which is the Humboldt 
constituency, but to stand here supporting each and every one of 
you that are in the gallery and each and every one of the nurses 
out there . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Now the hon. member will 
recognize of course that rules of the Assembly also prohibit 
members from involving guests in the debate; and I know she 
understands that, and we’ll encourage her to continue with her 
debate. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, what I 
would like to say is that throughout the last four years since I’ve 
been elected, I have progressively and steadily and constantly 
seen and talked to nurses throughout the constituency and 
throughout the province who have talked about their workload. 
 
They have said that since health reform everything is in chaos. 
Their intent and their hearts are in the right place. They want to 
work; they don’t want to strike. They want to be there to 
provide the services that they were trained for. But what it has 
come to is that they are just plain tired out. They are stressed 
out. They have no more, almost, desire any more to be able to 
keep on because they are too tired. 



466 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 1999 

Now not long ago, Mr. Speaker, we had a study, I guess 
throughout the province, called family in the workplace and 
women in the workplace, and that whole study . . . And people 
that had come to those sessions on that indicated that women 
are by far more stressed out and incurring more health problems 
than anybody else in the province. These nurses are a perfect 
example. They not only are asked to come in overtime, they are 
short-staffed; they are pushed from one floor to the other in 
hospitals without having an indication of where the supplies 
are, of what to do there. They go through that stress every day 
and half of them end up feeling guilt because they can’t provide 
the services that they need to provide. They’re afraid, just as we 
are afraid, of what’s happening to the patients in the hospital. 
 
The study that went about . . . talking about women in the 
workplace and trying to contend with their families stated that 
women go home from work, after work, and they have yet to 
deal with their duties at home with their family, running around 
with their children to take them to different activities. They’ve 
got a great deal to do. And it has been indicated that women’s 
blood pressure stays up from morning till night, and it just 
never comes down. 
 
Now we have a serious health problem happening here. If we 
haven’t got people shown some honour and value for their work 
and treated properly with good working conditions in the 
workplace, we are going to have fewer nurses, in fact maybe no 
nurses, because many, many people, including our nurses, are 
leaving the province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I just wanted to make mention that some of 
the nurses in my constituency were a little lacking in ease when 
they heard the Premier mention in the media that the nurses 
were asking for 22 per cent increase in their wage. I understand 
that during the nurses’ discussions leading up to this, there 
wasn’t a discussion about 22 per cent increase in the wages. She 
said that the Premier’s numbers were unknown to them. 
 
What she surmised was that the Premier was lumping together 
the wage parity issues and the cost of the Dorsey commission 
and pay equity all together. This nurse also mentioned that 
when SGEU (Saskatchewan Government Employees’ Union) 
settled, there was a provision for 7 per cent increase and there 
were also provisions to cover the cost of Dorsey. 
 
And so this is the same thing that these nurses are asking. There 
is nothing more or less than what was already done with the 
SGEU. So I think that it’s really incumbent upon the Premier to 
clarify that for the general public out there because the general 
public is thinking that, you know, the nurses are asking for too 
much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — I think it’s really very important to be very clear 
about any deliberations that take place. It’s important not to 
mislead the public. It’s important to ensure that these people 
that are out there ready to strike now have got proper value 
given to them, that their worth is shown not only in words, by 
speaking about it, but in action and support for the nurses of our 
province who have for too long been pushed under by this 
government. Thank you. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, just to 
make a few comments this morning about the reasons we’re 
here in this Assembly at this time — normally a time when 
we’re preparing to get ready for Assembly at 1:30 — but sitting 
here debating an issue that I believe, Mr. Speaker, if there had 
been a real commitment to seek a collective agreement, a real 
commitment to the health care workers of this province, some 
real leadership, we probably wouldn’t be here this morning. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I talk about that, I think back to some of the 
comments I’ve had and some of the discussions I’ve had with 
certainly nurses in the communities that I represent and in 
particular with representatives of different locals. I had a 
gentleman in my home the other day who said to me that this is 
the first time, first time in all his years, as a representative for 
the union that he represents, that his local has actually voted for 
a strike action; that his local has come to the point where they 
just said, we can’t go any further, it’s time we have to send a 
message. 
 
And I say that’s . . . When you think about the number of years 
we’ve had unions across our province and unions involved in 
the health care field, and I have to say that I think we haven’t 
seen it all that often where health care workers have come to the 
point of saying to their union, there’s only one alternative. 
They’ve said we will do whatever we can to come to an 
agreement or to reach a consensus to meet the needs of the 
patients we are serving. And I thought that was quite telling 
when this local rep said this is the first time that his union local 
has said to him, this is the only alternative we have. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we look at the legislation in front of us, this 
legislation doesn’t make the job place any easier to work in. It 
will not make it any easier for the professionals across this 
province to go back to work even though they know they will 
be forced back to work or face some significant penalties and 
fines. It doesn’t make it any easier. It’ll be just like the little boy 
when his dad told him to go sit in the corner. He turned around 
and said, well I’m sitting on the outside but I’m still standing on 
the inside. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s a travesty. The reason I say it’s a travesty is 
because of the leadership of the Premier and the NDP Party in 
this province — a party that has basically said they stand for the 
worker; they stand for the little man. 
 
And what we’ve seen over the past few years in this province, 
while the NDP have talked about sticking up for the little 
person or the person on the low end of the totem pole, we have 
seen time and time again — and as I have in front of me a note 
from one of my locals — the thing that really gnaws at the 
conscience of individuals when they think about taking strike 
action is they know that the CEOs (chief executive officer) in 
their area have just received significant wage increases. They 
know that the administrative level have just received significant 
wage increases. SaskPower last fall, when they were legislated 
back, knew that the management levels had seen significant 
wage increases. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe everyone in this province wants to be 
fair. Everyone wants to be treated fairly. There isn’t anyone 



April 8, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 467 

who will not say, well if 2 and 2 and 2 is all we can afford, then 
we should all live by the same rules. And I believe that’s what 
most people are asking for. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — So, Mr. Speaker, when I look at this legislation 
today and as I think back to the number of times I visited in 
hospitals, certainly one of the areas of concern . . . And I know I 
visited many times in the Plains hospital here in Regina, at least 
when it was a hospital, one of the most efficiently run centres 
where you could get to where you wanted to go very quickly. 
I’ve been down to the General. It’s more like a maze rather than 
a hospital that you can feel comfortable in. 
 
But I would have to take my hat off to all the caregivers across 
this province. I haven’t talked to one who hasn’t done their job 
well. I haven’t talked to one that . . . I enjoy visiting in hospitals 
and just talking to the caregivers. 
 
It’s a pleasure when you walk into a hospital room and someone 
compliments the staffing and just talk about how well they’ve 
been treated. They didn’t like how the system treated them, but 
they sure appreciate how they’ve been treated by the staff, 
whether it’s a nurse or whether it’s the cooks or the other 
attendants. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is unfortunate that we’re here at this place this 
morning. I had to just bring those few points out. We will 
certainly have to look very carefully at the legislation that this 
government is bringing forward. And we’re going to have to at 
the end of the day, I trust and I know, I believe — I firmly 
believe — that regardless of what happens in this Assembly 
today, we do have a number of caregivers who, when push 
comes to shove, are still going to say I care about my patient; I 
care about that person I’m serving. 
 
And while they may not like what they’ve been forced back 
into, they will say, that patient means more to me than what a 
government with an iron fist is enforcing on me. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and, by leave of 
the Assembly, referred to a Committee of the Whole later this 
day. 
 
(1145) 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 23 — The Resumption of Services 
(Nurses — SUN) Act 

 
The Chair: — I would ask the Minister to introduce his 
officials please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’m pleased to 
have with me Con Hnatiuk and Carol Klassen and Allan Barss 
from the Department of Health, and Rick Hischebett and Darcy 
McGovern from the Department of Justice. 

Clause 1 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, ladies and 
gentleman, colleagues. I’d like to welcome the officials here 
today although this is a very sad day that you have to be in here. 
 
Mr. Minister, this piece of legislation is not one that is 
particularly welcome to any member of this House. 
Unfortunately though, the actions of your government has 
brought this into being and has forced this issue onto the table 
before us. I wonder if you could give us a clear definition why 
this had to happen today? Why it has to happen at this hour? 
And what is the imperative that is forcing this legislation on the 
people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Yes I’d be happy to answer that question. 
It’s very clear from the information that we have received from 
the district health boards, from doctors, from people in the 
public that there’s a concern about the ability to provide health 
care in the province. Given the reorganization of health care in 
the province, there’s not a situation where we can last very 
many hours to deal with this, and so it was clear to us that we 
should proceed with this legislation right away. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, your government 
reorganized health care, your government failed to provide 
provisions for workers in this province in the health care 
system. The fact that you have been forced to bring this 
legislation — draconian, back-to-work legislation — before this 
Assembly is clearly an admission of failure by your 
government. 
 
Now your government has never accepted responsibility for 
anything since the day you have been elected, and we witnessed 
it today in the House. The Minister of Health is up answering 
questions while the Premier was sitting in his chair hanging his 
head. And he certainly should have been hanging his head. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — He certainly should have been because 
what he has done to health care in the last eight years is 
certainly not something he wants to go out into the public and 
brag about. Whenever there is something happening in this 
House or in the public that the minister . . . that the Premier 
thinks he can get some kudos for or that he can take some 
acclaim for, he stands before the cameras or he stands in this 
House and asks to be showered with glory. But whenever the 
other end of the stick is being presented the ministers have to 
grab it — never the Premier. And it’s his responsibility for the 
actions that are taking place in this House today. 
 
The Premier sat in negotiations last night with the president of 
SUN, with SAHO, and according to the reports there was some 
movement taking place. Mr. Minister of Justice, can you outline 
for us the changes that took place from the start of negotiations 
yesterday morning at 9 o’clock to the close at 8 o’clock, and the 
reasons why we are facing a strike today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you. The Minister of Health 
outlined in her second reading speech the answer to your last 
question. I think we should all be cognizant of the fact that the 
nurses have been off the job for about five hours now, and 



468 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 1999 

every minute that goes on there’s another person without care 
because these are important people in our system. 
 
I think practically the whole procedure today is dealing with the 
fact that we have many, many workers leaving the job all at 
once. This makes it a particularly difficult for the districts. We 
know that SUN has given notice of a strike but there’s no 
definition of how long this may be, therefore we’re in a position 
where the plan has to be that this may be something of long 
duration. And given the comments that we’ve had from the 
various health districts: 
 
Regina Health District says: 
 

A walkout by the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses would 
put the safety of its patients, residents, and clients at risk. 

 
Saskatoon Health District says: 
 

As the numbers show, we are not in a position to handle a 
strike of any duration. We will do whatever is necessary to 
provide safe patient care, but it’s going to be extremely 
difficult, especially since the union continues to reject in 
large part the district’s proposal regarding essential 
services. 
 

Battlefords Health District: 
 

Battlefords Health District board strongly urges you and 
your legislative colleagues to be prepared to act swiftly in 
the case of a SUN walkout. Any withdrawal of nursing 
services for more than 24 hours is beyond our ability to 
cope. 

 
Regina Health District, Dr. Bartlett: 
 

The physicians and nurses responsible for the management 
of care to our obstetrics, neonatal, and immune-comprised 
pediatric patients are deeply concerned about an impact 
that the SUN strike would have on these vulnerable 
individuals. 
 

We have comments about how important it is to maintain the 
services for the people of Saskatchewan, and that’s why we’re 
here. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, you started off with 
the typical NDP response: blaming somebody else for your 
actions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — We met this morning with 
representatives from the Health department and the statement 
we received from them was that the nurses and the health 
districts could deal with the situation for 12 hours. Your 
statement that every minute somebody is losing care or that a 
patient is in critical safety is simply inflaming the issue and 
trying to blame the nurses for the things that your government 
has failed to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Nurses went out on job action in 1982 
and were ordered back by your predecessor government of 
which the Premier, at the time, I believe, was the minister of 
Justice, who probably had to stand in the place you’re standing 
now, Mr. Minister, and pass back-to-work legislation. So it’s 
certainly not something new for him to do. 
 
In 1988 and 1991, there was job action by nurses. In both of 
those cases there was no back-to-work legislation. In fact the 
1991 strike went on for, I believe, 11 days. 
 
So what has changed, Mr. Minister, from 1991 to 1999? Health 
care reform. Your health care reform — NDP health care 
reform. And that’s why this strike is putting so much fear and 
concern into patients and so much stress onto nurses. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — The Premier stepped forward last night 
and injected himself into the negotiations yesterday. And he 
failed. Why did he do that, Mr. Minister? 
 
He did that because a nurses’ strike, a disruption in the health 
care system today would not meet the Premier’s and the NDP’s 
political agenda. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — This has a lot more to do with politics 
than it does with health. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Chair: — Order. Order. I want to caution the galleries that 
the same rules apply for the Committee of the Whole as do for 
the routine proceedings of the House in that the spectators in the 
gallery are not permitted to participate in debate. And I ask for 
your co-operation on that. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 
Minister, in your draconian legislation, you’ve put forward a 
proposal forcing the unions to accept 2 per cent salary increase 
on April of 1999, 2 per cent on April 1 of 2000, and 2 per cent 
on April 1 of 2001. 
 
But we’ve already heard mention in this House many times that 
under the Dorsey commission there was some money being 
proposed to bring the pay scales up to equal levels. During the 
negotiations last night with the Premier, was there any 
movement on behalf of the government or on behalf of SAHO 
to address that issue and move beyond 2, 2, and 2? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I’m pleased to answer that. If you look at 
page 3 of the Bill, section 7(3)(c), that deals exactly with the 
Dorsey question that you have, the money is there to deal with 
the Dorsey issue. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, in this legislation 
you have dealt with your view of what the salary should be. But 
you have not made any moves to address some of the other 
issues that the nurses find equally important, and that is dealing 
with the conditions under which they work, the number of 
nurses with which they have to work. 



April 8, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 469 

So, Mr. Minister, we will be proposing some amendments to be 
brought in as clause 11 of this particular Bill and moving the 
present clause to clause 12. 
 
What we are proposing in these amendments, Mr. Minister, is 
that a 60-day period be put in place under which no job action 
could take place to give the government, SAHO, and SUN, the 
opportunity to sit down and work through those non-monetary, 
non-salary issues that are affecting the patients of this province 
and the nurses in this province. 
 
(1200) 
 
Mr. Minister, we’re asking that you support this particular piece 
of legislation — the amendment to it — to allow the bargaining 
process, as my colleagues to the left here say, to allow the 
bargaining process to proceed that you have interrupted. It does 
not deal with the monetary or the salary position. But after 60 
days if your government and SAHO and SUN have not been 
able to come to an agreement, that the nurses would again be in 
a position to take job action. If that means they wish to go on 
strike again to put forward their demands in the most forceful 
manner available under collective bargaining, then they would 
be allowed to do so. 
 
Mr. Minister, I ask you to consider this amendment, to speak to 
it, to whether or not you would find this a valid proposal and to 
place your government on the record on it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I’ll be happy to make my comments 
known when you’ve made the amendment and we’ll deal with it 
at the appropriate time. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, it saddens me that 
you wouldn’t be prepared to stand in your place at this time. I 
know that you have a copy of the amendment before you to 
look at, to speak on the issue, when you can speak to that issue 
and to the entire Bill at one time, rather than simply leaving it 
until the point arrives when the amendment can be presented, 
where you will, in all likelihood at that point, not take the 
opportunity to speak. 
 
So again I ask you to stand in your place today and speak to the 
proposed amendment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I’ll be happy to speak to the proposed 
amendment when it’s actually made. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, I think it’s 
really unfortunate that this morning we are addressing a very 
important issue, and we’re having a difficult time getting the 
minister to even respond to questions that are being raised 
regarding the legislation in front of us and the real purpose that 
it has to be here this morning. The minister, I’m sure, is well 
aware of individuals within the Department of Health who have 
conferred with . . . and have a pretty good idea or a realistic idea 
of what the department can do and what facilities can do to 
address the situation. 
 
The minister is also aware, Mr. Chairman, of the fact that 
district boards have been putting in place contingency plans for 
the past number of weeks to address a so-called . . . the situation 
that we face today. And the minister, I believe, is well aware of 

the fact that had meaningful negotiations been allowed and 
entered into we would not be addressing Bill No. 23 before us 
today. 
 
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, how can you stand in your place 
this morning or — well I guess it’s getting close to this 
afternoon — at noon here and say to everyone across this 
province that we had to act immediately to bring forward this 
draconian legislation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The member opposite knows from the 
information that’s been provided by officials in the Department 
of Health that their estimate of 12 hours care also included the 
fact that there are some places where three hours was the 
maximum in which the health districts would be able to deal 
with certain kinds of patients. We also know that some patients 
have been moved out of the province. 
 
I think it’s appropriate to explain why this is different than 
1991. In 1991, the nurses that went on strike were primarily in 
acute care. Right now we have the nurses leaving the whole 
system — in acute care, long-term care, and in home care. And 
what this means is that in 1991 patients who were not able to be 
cared for in the hospitals could get some care in a long-term 
facility or through home care. 
 
So we’re in a situation that’s very different from 1991. And that 
in fact increases the concern and the nature of this; that we are 
in a position where we’re planning to proceed with this today. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
I’d like to say it’s my pleasure to be in the House today to 
address some questions to the minister on his legislation, but I 
can’t. It’s not a pleasure to be here and I’m . . . I will rue the 
day that this has ever happened, Mr. Premier, and I hope you 
remember that. And I will be back here next year to remind you 
of that while you are sitting over here, Mr. Premier, and may be 
possibly sitting right where you are. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we would ask the . . . the nurses have been 
asking many questions of this government but haven’t seemed 
to be able to get any answers. So today, Mr. Speaker, I’m going 
to ask the Minister of Justice some questions on behalf of the 
nurses of this province as to how this legislation will rectify 
some of the questions that they have asked. 
 
First question, Mr. Minister, would be, the nurses are saying 
that they need the right to call in more staff in emergency 
situations. Can you tell me how this legislation will address that 
problem? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — This legislation gets people back to work 
so that we can preserve the safety within the hospital system. 
The specific issues were discussed at length yesterday and 
previous times, and that discussion will have to continue 
because this is a complex series of issues that have to be dealt 
with at many levels including in the collective bargaining 
process. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Mr. Minister, I’m wondering why these 
discussions wouldn’t have come before this legislation. Why 
didn’t you give them an opportunity? The Premier jumped in, 
wanted to be the chief negotiator and to set a precedent in this 



470 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 1999 

province for all labour unions who are going to be pounding on 
the Premier’s door from now on to negotiate their contracts. 
Why wouldn’t you have let the process work and let the nurses 
come to these decisions? 
 
Mr. Minister, the nurses have said that they need . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — The nurses have said that they need the right 
to provide nursing care that meets professional standards. Mr. 
Minister, can you tell us in the House today how this legislation 
will address that problem? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — This legislation will bring people back to 
work so that the safety of Saskatchewan people within the 
hospital system . . . within the health care system will be 
preserved. All of those issues which were discussed at length 
yesterday, and unfortunately, as explained by the Minister of 
Health, the members of SUN decided to walk away from that 
process and from some of the solutions that were there and were 
not completed at that time. 
 
But obviously these complex issues are going to have to be 
dealt with over a period of time. They have been working on 
these for in excess of 30 days, and most recently with a 
facilitator. And practically it looks like that process will have to 
continue. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Mr. Minister, can you tell us then if you were 
bargaining in good faith and with the Premier at the table, was 
this legislation drafted first thing this morning or was it drafted 
yesterday? When was it drafted? Has this been your plans all 
along that you would bring it to a head, bring the Premier in, 
and then force them to walk out because the negotiations 
weren’t going well? So tell us, when was this legislation 
drafted, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The strike notice was given to the 
government and to SAHO some time after 11 o’clock last night. 
The legislation was drafted during the night. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, it was 
drafted in the dark of the night. I’ve heard that phrase in this 
House many times and I guess that goes along those same lines. 
 
Mr. Minister, the nurses need, the nurses need pay equity, Mr. 
Minister. What does this legislation do, can you tell the people 
here today and the people of the province, what will this 
legislation do to address this need? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The whole health sector area is included 
in the pay equity discussions which start in the year 2001, and 
this does not change that. The same schedule will apply. 
 
Mr. McLane: — So nothing is happening. I can remember, Mr. 
Speaker, when I was the first chairman of SAHO back in 1994 
and this government was in discussions then about pay equity. 
They talked about how we’re going to get the unions all 
together on board. 
 

And so you’ve had seven years when absolutely nothing has 
been done. You’ve had two or three Labour ministers, you’ve 
had two or three Health ministers in the last six months. You’ve 
had a half a dozen over the course of your term. 
 
So who is it going to be? Is it going to be the Premier? Is it 
going to be the Premier that’s going to solve this problem or 
who is it going to be, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The process of pay equity starts with job 
evaluation. That process can start immediately, and basically it 
can go in the process that we’ve set up for the health sectors 
that includes all of the health sector workers. 
 
Mr. McLane: — I think your pay equity and your Dorsey 
commission report goes along the lines of the wellness model. 
There was little if any planning into the model when you 
presented it, when Louise Simard stood in this House and 
presented it several years ago. And it’s clearly evident that 
today there is still no plan in how to fix health care in this 
province and you’re not wanting to do it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, nurses are saying that they need 
more permanent jobs. How would this legislation address that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — This legislation today is to deal with the 
situation today where we need to get the workers back to the 
places of work. The discussions will continue to deal with these 
other issues. And as I’ve said before, they’re complex; they 
involve many things. 
 
Unfortunately a lot of the good work that was part of the 
discussion yesterday seems to have been left behind at the time. 
But practically we want to solve these problems and the only 
way we’re going to do it is if we work together with the 
employers, the employees, and all of the people within the 
health system. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Mr. Chairman, it seems that right across this 
province we have all kinds of horror stories happening every 
day as calls to my office, whether it’s in Davidson or whether 
it’s Imperial, whether it’s in this office, about what the lack of 
staffing, the lack of numbers, the lack of nurses in this province 
does for health care. The nurses are doing their level best that 
they can to provide the services and looking after the sick and 
the needy in this province. Unfortunately the government of the 
day doesn’t seem to have that same commitment to the sick 
people in this province and are prepared to let them suffer and 
languish on long waiting lists. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, the nurses are saying that they need 
better staffing. How would this legislation address that issue? 
 
(1215) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — In the budget that was presented this year, 
there was $195 million more for health care, and many of these 
dollars are to be used to deal with the concerns that relate to 
staffing. Staffing relates to waiting lists. We’ve got plans to 
deal with waiting lists. Staffing relates to all of the different 
types of elective surgeries and how you deal with that. Those 
things are in the dollars that are there. They’re going to work 
with that. 



April 8, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 471 

The various kinds of monies related to education of staff and 
the long-term nature of the employees within the health system 
are starting to be addressed within that budget. 
 
Now practically what we need to do is to get people back to 
work so that the care of the public is protected, and we need to 
continue the discussions that have been ongoing. It’s 
unfortunate that this is the place that we have to do this but we 
are in that position and we’re going to proceed with it. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Mr. Minister, you talked about $195 million 
into health care, and I heard the Health minister in question 
period saying that the government just doesn’t have the money 
to meet the demands of the nurses for this year. 
 
If I recall, a few short days ago, about a week, we stood in this 
House and listened to your Finance minister present his budget. 
And when he came to the point of reducing the PST (provincial 
sales tax) by 1 per cent everybody high-fived. They gathered 
around him and they shook the hand. The Premier strolled over 
and shook his hand and patted him on the back. My 
understanding is that the 1 per cent on the provincial sales tax 
represents about a hundred million dollars. 
 
Now you made a choice there, Mr. Minister. Your government 
made a choice. You said we’re going to lower the PST by 1 per 
cent but we can’t fix the nurses’ problem in this province. Mr. 
Minister, did you agree with that decision? Or is it one that you 
would rather have not had to deal with? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — It’s very clear that this government’s 
policy is fairness and balance. And in our dealing with this 
particular issue and all of the other issues, we have to look at 
what’s fair for employees, what’s fair for employers, and what’s 
fair for taxpayers. 
 
And we end up making some very difficult choices, but I think 
that what we do know is that we have a fiscal management 
policy within this government that provides some certainty and 
hope for the long term. And we know that many of the issues 
that have been raised within this particular bargaining and 
within this particular discussion today will be addressed as we 
move forward. But the only way we’re going to do that is if we 
do it together. 
 
Now I don’t like to get into this but it’s very surprising when 
the member, a Liberal member, gets up and doesn’t reflect on 
the fact that if we didn’t have the Martin 1995 budget which 
took out a huge amount of money from health care in the whole 
country, we would not be in this situation where nurses in every 
province are suffering along with administrators, other health 
care workers, doctors, everybody, because the federal 
government pulled out. 
 
And we know how little effect that you and your colleagues had 
as Liberals in Saskatchewan in correcting this. We thank the 
present minister for bringing back some of that money, but if 
we hadn’t had that big kick in 1995, I don’t think we would be 
in the same discussion we’re in right now. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Mr. Minister, the fact of the matter is if your 

government hadn’t started on ill-conceived health reform, a 
wellness model, back in 1992, we wouldn’t be in this House 
today because you wouldn’t have had to lay off 600 nurses. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Mr. Minister, in the lobby a little short while 
ago I was out visiting with some of the nurses, and some of the 
comments that they were talking about is their vacation and 
how . . . that they haven’t had any summer vacation because 
they’ve had to go in and cover overtime shifts and work extra 
shifts. And they’re saying that this legislation will only 
reinforce that again for the next two or three years of the term 
of the agreement. 
 
Can you tell us, Mr. Speaker, if that’s a fact, that you’re going 
to be forcing nurses not to take vacation pay because of the 
shortage of nurses because they’ve got to cover shifts? And 
what does this legislation do to rectify that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — It’s very interesting that you would raise 
these issues around vacation and some of these other things 
because in the 30-plus days of discussion over the last month, 
many of these issues were resolved. And frankly, frankly, we’re 
quite surprised that SUN walked away from the table and all of 
those kinds of things. 
 
What we know is that all of those issues have to be dealt with, 
and they’re going to be dealt with with some of the money that 
we’ve put in. They’re going to be dealt with by reviewing with 
the administrators within the health system how some of these 
things can be organized. And clearly they’re going to be dealt 
with as the bargaining process continues. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Over the last number of years, Mr. Minister, 
your government has fired approximately 600 nurses in this 
province. Six months ago you were begging them to come back. 
Now you’re going to legislate the ones that are working back to 
work. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — I guess my question would be then, if you’re 
trying to attract nurses back to this province, you’re trying to 
attract them from the United States, some of the ones that have 
left — I know many nurses, some of my friends have moved to 
the States, some of them have moved across the borders east 
and west — can you tell us what this legislation today will do in 
attracting nurses back to the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — This legislation here will bring people 
back to work. All of these . . . all of these . . . all of these issues 
that you’ve raised were part of the discussion yesterday. 
They’ve been part of the discussion over the last number of 
weeks. They will continue to be part of the discussion as we go 
forward and try to sort out how we deal with the worldwide 
shortage of nurses. 
 
I think this is something that is part of the plan within the 
Department of Health and within the health districts in the 
province. I think it’s also part of the plan that’s within the 



472 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 1999 

nursing profession itself. 
 
All of these things have to work together to answer some of 
these questions. But the only way we’re going to do it is 
together. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Mr. Minister, I don’t believe legislating 
people back to work is going to solve the problem that you want 
it to do. I think you’re going to find that many of the nurses that 
are now working are ready for retirement, and they’re going to 
throw up their hands and say that’s enough. We’re sick and 
tired of you guys pushing us and bullying us around, stomping 
and kicking . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Our new trainee nurses are going to look to 
other provinces where they can go where there’s a little more 
stabilized environment, better paid, better working conditions. 
What in the world are we going to do here? Ship all the sick 
people to Edmonton, Alberta for treatment? Is that what you’re 
plan is? I mean you’re saying that you’re doing that now 
because the nurses aren’t looking after them. Is that your total 
plan, Mr. Speaker? 
 
One of the things that I hear . . . and I have a brother-in-law 
that’s in the dialysis unit in Saskatoon, and I’ve had occasion to 
be in hospitals, and certainly over the last 25 years in my career 
in health care I’ve been to many hospitals, and nurses are 
known for their compassion. What I’m hearing now is there’s 
no time for compassion. The nurses are run off their feet. They 
don’t have time to deal with the really extremely sick people 
and comfort them — the compassionate side of them that deals 
with people that are dying. 
 
Can you tell us what this legislation, Mr. Minister, will do to 
help nurses get back to do the job that they were trained to do? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — This legislation is designed to deal with 
the fact that there are essential health services that are required 
in Saskatchewan. And when people are back at the job, then 
they will continue to provide the compassionate care that we 
know that they can provide in this province. 
 
And we want to be able to do that within a situation where the 
risk to the public is no longer there. And this legislation relates 
to that, and we will proceed with it today. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Mr. Minister, we heard your colleague the 
Minister of Health today talk about a 22 per cent raise for the 
nurses. Can you tell us if that indeed is a correct number, and 
how that would . . . what they’re asking for in a per year basis, 
and what the legislation today presents does to that? 
 
As this proposal was presented to the SAHO people and also to 
the officials in the Department of Public Health, we understood 
it to represent 22 per cent. The mandate in the health sector, and 
in the public sector, is 2, 2, 2, and 1 for some other things as 
well as dealing with the Dorsey issues, and over the longer term 
dealing with the pay equity issues. And that’s where we are and 
that’s what this legislation proposes. 

The Chair: — Order, order. Now the galleries have been 
warned several times and they’re getting worse and worse at it. 
I’m going to ask your co-operation and I guess . . . the hon. 
member from Wood River is not helping the situation neither. 
 
Now I would ask again that the . . . Order. I’m going to ask 
again that the people in the galleries are here to hear the 
proceedings and the questions and answers and not to 
participate by clapping or hollering or in any which way . . . 
And I ask for your co-operation in that. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I do recognize the 
rules of the House, but day in and day out we come into this 
House and we ask questions and the Minister of Health, in 
particular, stands up and gives us a snow job and today the 
Minister of Justice is doing the same. But the difference is that 
today there are people in the gallery that know the real truth and 
they’re expressing it, Mr. Speaker. So I’d ask you just to have 
some leniency with those people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Mr. Minister, we’ve heard also because of the 
shortage of nurses that of course there are exorbitant overtime 
bills being paid which eats into the Health budget. Can you tell 
us today what this legislation will do to rectify that in bringing 
back some of the nurses that we need, some of the 600 that your 
government fired, and just explain for us and the people across 
the province what this legislation will do to that to create many 
permanent full-time jobs for nurses. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — We need to get people back to work as 
soon as possible so that we can continue the discussion around 
overtime work. It’s something that was obviously been 
discussed over the last 30-plus days, discussed yesterday. And I 
think that the discussion around how we solve some of these 
things has to be done in a way where everybody is working at it 
together because there are many different issues that impact on 
that. And we’ll continue to do that. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Well, Mr. Minister, if you truly believe that, 
would you stand in your place right now and scrap this 
legislation and say let’s go back to the bargaining table and 
come up with an agreement that is fair for nurses in the 
province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — We are now into five and a half hours of a 
strike. That is what we are dealing with. We’ve got people off 
the job. The plan clearly was up until 11, 11:30 last night that 
these discussions on these important issues would be continuing 
this morning at 8:30. That has not happened. We now have to 
deal with the public safety and the health services provided to 
the people of Saskatchewan, and that’s what we’re going to do. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Mr. Minister, right across this province 
you’ve heard, your ministers have heard in all stripes and I’m 
sure you’ve heard it in your post-budget scramble across the 
province, that at many public meetings that you and your 
government were told that people are going to die in this 
province if something isn’t done in health care. 
 



April 8, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 473 

Can you tell us, Mr. Minister, how this legislation will help 
protect the lives of people in this province and ensure that no 
one else has to die due to your inability of your government to 
provide health care in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — It’s critical that we get people back to 
work right away so that we can provide the health care in this 
province, and then we can continue the discussions around all 
of these other issues that impact on the long-term health care of 
our people. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Mr. Minister, can you tell us then what this 
legislation will do to rectify the 10,000 people or so that are 
probably suffering and dying on waiting lists in this province 
today? What will this legislation do to ensure that that stops? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — As I’ve said before, there’s $195 million 
extra within the budget this year to deal with many issues and 
one of the issues is waiting lists. We’re participating with all of 
our western provinces to deal with the waiting issue problem 
and we will continue to work on all of those issues. 
 
But right now we have people who need care, and we are in a 
situation where the nurses have been on strike for over five 
hours and we’re wanting to proceed with this legislation to have 
them go back to work. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Well, Mr. Minister, I’ll not hold up the 
legislation because you’re bent for election to proceed with it. I 
think, speaking of elections, that come that day — and we hope 
it’s sooner than later — that this issue will be resolved once and 
for all and you will look back on this day and say, oops, I think 
we made a mistake. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1230) 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, I would like to 
just address the minister for a moment. The reason, you say, for 
this legislation of forcing workers back into the workplace is for 
public safety. Have you not heard, Mr. Minister, the echoes of 
the nurses over the last two or three years — in fact even longer 
than that — that they are concerned about the safety of their 
patients because of inadequate working conditions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — It is the very nurses of this province that are taking 
the cause of public safety to the fore by their actions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — And, Mr. Minister, it is time for you to listen to 
the people of the province and especially to the nurses. They 
have been saying this over and over because they are 
concerned. They are saying that lives in hospitals and across the 
province have been put in jeopardy. They have been saying that 
people are dying due to understaffing and due to poor working 
conditions due to the confusion. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, to force people back to work, nurses back to 
work now on the premise that it’s for the good of public safety, 

well that thought has long been brought forward by the nurses 
in this province for years already. They want public safety; 
that’s the very reason for their action. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — I’d like you to comment on that please. Have you 
not heard what the nurses have been saying? Will you please 
improve the working conditions that they have so desperately 
been asking for, for public safety? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The province, this government has 
listened very carefully to the public, including the nurses, and 
we have responded with a budget that increased the budget for 
Health by $195 million, the largest increase in the history of the 
province, and also now at 1.9 billion, the largest amount ever 
spent on Health. 
 
We know that these issues have been discussed over the last 
30-plus days. They were on the discussions yesterday. And all 
of us — the nurses and those people within the health system 
and the government — have as the primary concern the welfare 
of the people of Saskatchewan, especially those people who 
need health services. And we wish to have the workers back in 
the hospital system so that all of the other discussions can 
continue to deal with some of these other issues. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I think you 
well know, and I know the people of this province well know, 
that there has been an increase in funding to health over the 
years. That is not the problem. The problem is mismanagement 
and misuse of the funds. We don’t have the money . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Everyone knows that there has been a squeezing 
of funding for front-line services in the province. How can 
people trust the new infusion of money into the health care 
system right now is going to go to front-line services? There is 
no guarantee. 
 
What I’d like to ask you, Mr. Minister, is what is your overall 
plan for health care in this province. It seems to me that you 
have pushed doctors out. You have pushed nurses into 
unbearable conditions and some of them are leaving the 
province. Many won’t come here any more. 
 
So what is the overall plan? Is it to push the system to squeeze 
it so it is so small in the end, manageable and controllable by 
your NDP government, push people into having to pay for 
services sometimes in the province, sometimes having to go 
out. That is privatization and that’s what’s happening because 
there is no other choice under this government. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Minister, please explain your overall vision, your 
overall view for health care in this province. Where are they 
going with it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think that the hon. member has heard our 
Minister of Health give quite an eloquent description of the 
overall plan for health for this province. But clearly the plan is 
that we will provide the best help possible that we can within 
the resources that we have for the people of the province of 



474 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 1999 

Saskatchewan. And we will continue to do that. 
 
This debate this morning is about how do we get workers back 
on the job because there are concerns that are continuing to rise 
about members of the public who are within the health system 
or who may require health services in the next short while. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Chair, I’d just like to make one more 
comment. From some information that I have — and that’s 
based certainly on discussions that have taken place between 
some different people within this province, and I dare not say 
right now what that is — but that we will end up in this 
province with possibly eight regional hospitals with full service. 
 
What we will end up with looking at that, and maybe a few 
health centres throughout the province, how many nurses will 
we need? If our health system is going to be that compact, it is 
evident to me that considerations for nurses need not be given 
because you’re not going to need that many anyway, the way 
you have health planned for the province. 
 
And I concern myself with that and I think the members 
opposite will be hearing more about that in time to come and 
especially if your government continues after the election. 
 
So I would leave it with that and I thank you, Mr. Chair. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 10 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 11 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have an 
amendment that I would propose at this particular point in time. 
 
The amendment deals with the work conditions under which 
nurses are facing in their places of work. It would allow, as I 
explained earlier, a 60-day period under which negotiations 
between the government, between SAHO, and between SUN 
could be carried out to deal with these issues. 
 
If at that point in time no agreeable accommodations had been 
made, then work action could proceed again by the nurses at 
that point in time. It gives the government an opportunity to 
correct the errors they have made in negotiations up until this 
point, to sit down with SUN and to iron out the workplace 
condition that needs to be dealt with, to deal with the very 
difficult situations that nurses are facing on the job. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this amendment deals with the safety of patients, 
and overall it deals with fairness. What we see in this particular 
piece of legislation, Mr. Minister, is in large measure about 
fairness and its fairness to nurses and its fairness to the people 
of Saskatchewan, because of the incompetence that has 
occurred amongst the government benches on the issues of 
health and of governance. 
 
This amendment, Mr. Speaker, speaks to the threat to patients 
and the need for fairness to nurses in their workplace — 
fairness, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Mr. Chairman. The people of 
Saskatchewan recognize bullying and unfairness when they see 
it, and the actions of this government today paint this 

government black with unfairness. 
 
Mr. Chairman, regardless of the political stripes of the people of 
Saskatchewan, they know unfairness and bullying when they 
see it, and they will punish those who practise those tactics. 
 
Nurses . . . We support the nurses in dealing with the issues of 
their workplace conditions. Mr. Chairman, Mr. Ministers, let 
the nurses go back to work with their heads high and a positive 
desire to serve the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I move the following motion, Mr. Chairman: 
 

Add New Clause 11 as follows: 
 

Limited application of certain provisions 
11(1) Subject to subsection (2), the provisions of 
sections 3 to 6 and 8 cease to apply at the expiration of 
sixty days from the coming into force of this Act. 
 
(2) Sections 3 to 6 and 8 apply with respect to any issues 
that involve wage rates payable to employees by 
employers in dispute between the representative 
employers’ organization and the union after the 
expiration of the sixty days mentioned in subsection (1). 

 
Clause 11 of the printed Bill 
 
Renumber clause 11 as clause 12. 

 
I so present, Mr. Chairman. 
 
The division bells rang from 12:41 p.m. until 12:46 p.m. 
 
The Chair: — I would caution the members in the gallery are 
not allowed to converse with the members on the floor, and vice 
versa the members on the floor with the gallery. So you know 
the rules and I would assume that you would respect the rules of 
the House. Order. 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas—9 
 
Krawetz Toth Bjornerud 
D’Autremont Boyd Draude 
Gantefoer Julé Heppner 
 

Nays—36 
 
Calvert Wiens MacKinnon 
Lingenfelter Shillington Atkinson 
Goulet Johnson Whitmore 
Serby Lautermilch Cline 
Kowalsky Van Mulligen Teichrob 
Bradley Koenker Trew 
Lorje Sonntag Scott 
Nilson Langford Murray 
Junor Stanger Jess 
Kasperski Ward Belanger 
Murrell Thomson Osika 
McPherson Aldridge McLane 
 



April 8, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 475 

Clause 11 agreed to. 
 
Schedule agreed to. 
 
The division bells rang from 12:48 p.m. until 12:50 p.m. 
 
Clause 11 agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 33 
 

Romanow Calvert Wiens 
MacKinnon Lingenfelter Shillington 
Atkinson Goulet Johnson 
Whitmore Serby Lautermilch 
Cline Kowalsky Van Mulligen 
Teichrob Bradley Koenker 
Trew Lorje Sonntag 
Scott Nilson Langford 
Murray Junor Stanger 
Jess Kasperski Ward 
Belanger Murrell Thomson 
 

Nays — 14 
 

Krawetz Toth Bjornerud 
D’Autremont Boyd Draude 
Gantefoer Julé Heppner 
Osika McPherson Aldridge 
McLane Haverstock  
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 23 — The Resumption of Services 
(Nurses — SUN) Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

ROYAL ASSENT 
 
At 1:01 p.m. His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber, took his seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 
to the following Bill: 
 
Bill No. 23  -  The Resumption of Services (Nurses — SUN) 

Act 
 
His Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name I assent to this Bill. 
 
His Honour retired from the Chamber at 1:02 p.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 1:04 p.m. 
 
 



 

 


