





























































Hansard: March 25, 1999


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 241 
 March 25, 1999 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I have a petition to present on behalf of residents of 
the Prairie West Health District concerning acute care. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
abandon any plans to reduce acute care or close any more 
hospitals in the Prairie West Health District. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition come from the 
communities of Dodsland, Kerrobert, Luseland, Macklin, and 
Unity. 
 
I’m pleased to present on their behalf. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have 
petitions to present on behalf of Saskatchewan disenfranchised 
widows. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to have the Workers’ 
Compensation Board Act amended whereby benefits and 
pensions are reinstated to disenfranchised widows and 
whereby all revoked pensions are reimbursed to them 
retroactively with interest to April 17, 1985. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions come from the Moose Jaw areas, Mr. Speaker, 
and from Cabri in the southwest. 
 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present on behalf of the farm crisis in 
Saskatchewan. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
demand that the federal government work with 
Saskatchewan to put in place a farm aid package that 
provides real relief to those who need it and that the 
provincial government develop a long term farm safety net 
program as it promised to do when it cancelled GRIP 
against the wishes of farmers. 

 
The community involved in the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are the 
community of MacNutt. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as well to 
present petitions to the Legislative Assembly. And the prayer 
reads: 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to have the Workers’ 
Compensation Board Act amended whereby benefits and 
pensions are reinstated to disenfranchised widows and 
whereby all revoked pensions are reimbursed to them 
retroactively with interest to April 17, 1985. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the petitions I have and I’m presenting to the 
Legislative Assembly are signed by individuals from the 
Regina, Lumsden areas of the province. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
citizens concerned about the level of royalty taxes on new 
drilling in Saskatchewan. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Whereas your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reduce the royalty taxes on new drilling in Saskatchewan, 
to stop job losses, and create new employment in this 
sector. 

 
Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
communities of Gainsborough, Carnduff, Glen Ewen, and 
Carievale. I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I also have a petition to present 
today. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
abandon any plans to reduce acute care or close any more 
hospitals in the Prairie West Health District. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this are from 
Dodsland and Kerrobert. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I too rise to present a petition 
and I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
abandon any plans to reduce acute care or close any more 
hospitals in the Prairie West Health District. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And these are all signed by the good people from Kerrobert. 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
rise again today on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan to 
present a petition. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call on federal and provincial 
governments to dedicate a significantly greater portion of 



242 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1999 

fuel tax revenues toward road maintenance and 
construction so that Saskatchewan residents may have a 
safe highway system that meets their needs. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition has been signed by the good folks out 
in Montmartre, Fillmore, Creelman, and Osage. 
 
And I so present. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 
petitions on behalf of citizens that are concerned with respect to 
the budget for highways they’ll see tomorrow, that perhaps 
highways won’t be given the priorities that they should, and as 
a result we need to put more money towards highways. 
 
The petitioners pray as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call on federal and provincial 
governments to dedicate a significantly greater portion of 
the fuel tax revenues for road maintenance and 
construction so Saskatchewan residents may have a safe 
highway system that meets their needs. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will every pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, those who’ve signed these petitions are from 
communities across the Thunder Creek constituency — 
Gravelbourg, Gouldtown, Morse, Rush Lake, Main Centre, 
Herbert. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
once again on behalf of Saskatchewan citizens who are very 
concerned about children with specific learning disabilities. It’s 
my pleasure to read the prayer as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide essential funding and ensure the delivery of 
scientifically proven diagnostic assessment and 
programming for children with learning disabilities in 
order that they have access to an education that meets their 
needs and allows them to reach their full potential. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

The signators today, Mr. Speaker, are from Prince Albert and 
Montreal Lake. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I present petitions, a prayer of 
relief, which reads as follows: 
 

That your Hon. Assembly may be pleased to relocate 
Highway 40 in order to alleviate the congestion at the 
entrance to the city of North Battleford. 
 

Your petitioners this afternoon come from the communities of 
Gallivan, Richard, Cochin, North Battleford, and Mosquito First 
Nation. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have petitions to 

present on behalf of Saskatchewan citizens. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call upon the provincial and 
federal governments to immediately take steps to end 
unfair world subsidies and provide farmers with prompt 
relief from declining income and act as watchdogs against 
rising input costs which are harming the rural economy. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, numbers of people from one end of the province 
to the other, from Humboldt to Rockglen, Lebret, Fort 
Qu’Appelle, Whitewood, Broadview, and many other places, 
Mr. Speaker, are represented in these petitions. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This morning, Mr. 
Speaker, I have from the rural municipality of Longlaketon, No. 
219, a petition, and I’ll read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately start work on the rebuilding of our secondary 
highway system to provide for safe driving on what are 
becoming known as pothole roads, to enter into 
negotiations with SARM and SUMA for a long-term plan 
of rural road restoration reflecting future needs, and to 
provide safety for all drivers as the new trucking 
regulations changes safety factors on these roads. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

These come from Earl Grey, Mr. Speaker, as well as other 
communities around that area, and I’m happy to present them 
today. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the petitions presented at the last 
sitting have been reviewed and found to be in order. Pursuant to 
rule 12(7) these petitions are hereby received. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 

Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day 
no. 14 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Social Services: how many Social 
Services recipients have been in contact with your 
department regarding repayment of the overpayments that 
were made to beneficiaries in January because of a bank 
error? 
 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on the 16th day move first reading of a Bill, The Highway 
Traffic Amendment, 1999; and I also give notice that I shall on 
day no. 14 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Energy and Mines and Minister of 
Highways: how many open dumping sites are there where 
radioactive materials mixed with salt water or tailings from 



March 25, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 243 

fracing of crude oil and natural gas wells are there in the 
province; are exemptions from road bans provided to 
transport these materials to separating plants in the 
springtime; if not, why not. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce 
to you and through you to all members of the legislature 
somebody who doesn’t need an introduction to this place, and 
I’m talking about Jan Baker who is going to be appointed our 
Chief Electoral Officer this afternoon. 
 
Jan Baker has worked since 1979 in the electoral office for the 
province of Saskatchewan. For the last almost two years, she 
has been the Acting Chief Electoral Officer. And before that, 
she was the assistant Chief Electoral Officer. She’s worked with 
many elections. And she also worked on the various electoral 
boundary committees as technical support. She also was a 
Canadian observer and worked in elections in Namibia in 1989, 
Ethiopia in 1992, and Peru in 1992. 
 
I would ask all members of our legislature to provide a warm 
welcome to our new Chief Electoral Officer, and I would ask 
that she would stand so we can acknowledge her. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As part of the 
official opposition we would also like to welcome Jan Baker to 
the Assembly today and we look forward to her officially taking 
over the role of Chief Electoral Officer of Saskatchewan. We 
look forward to working with her in the very near future both at 
our campaign school and during the election time. 
 
While I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce 
some other guests that are in your gallery, members of the 
Saskatchewan disenfranchised widows. I would ask these 
people to stand as I call out their name. 
 
I’d like to introduce you to Rose Polsom, who has been in the 
House many times; Patricia Lang from Saskatoon; Helen 
Kazuska from Saskatoon; Ruby James from Saskatoon; 
Margaret Diener from Saskatoon; Opal Barkman from 
Saskatoon; Eleanor Berg, also Saskatoon; Grace Munro from 
Saskatoon; Daphne Bergen from Saskatoon; and Lois Lanning, 
also of Saskatoon. 
 
Also up there in the gallery, Mr. Speaker, from Moose Jaw are 
Dorothy Davies and her husband Bob Davies, and Shirley 
Rolfe. 
 
I would ask the Assembly to welcome both Jan Baker to our 
Assembly and the members of the disenfranchised widows of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to add the 
voice of the Liberal caucus in our welcoming Jan Baker to the 
Assembly today, and I will be making some further comments 
later this afternoon. 
 

And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I would also like to 
welcome to the Assembly some friends, Cal and Noreen Mills, 
who are seated in the east gallery. I welcome them to the 
Assembly as well. It’s nice to see them here. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 
would like to introduce Cal and Noreen Mills to you and 
through you to all of my colleagues in the legislature. They’re 
dear friends of mine from Fleming, Saskatchewan, and they 
most certainly have had an avid interest in the workings of this 
Assembly as well as politics throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
So I ask everyone to please give them another warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I invite 
the members to become comfortable — this is going to take a 
while. 
 
First of all, Mr. Speaker, I would be remiss if I did not on behalf 
of my colleague, the Minister of Labour, and all members on 
this side of the House extend a very warm welcome to the 
Disenfranchised Widows Action Group. We welcome their 
participation in the democratic process and we welcome them to 
this Assembly today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, I should like to draw the 
attention of the members and yourself to a group of young 
students who are seated in your gallery. They are from Wilfrid 
Walker School in the constituency of Regina Victoria. They are 
21 grade 3 and 4 students. They are accompanied by their 
teachers and a couple of pre-interns: Renée Quinlin, Jeff 
Symsniuk, and Kristina Potter. 
 
I look forward to meeting with this group shortly after question 
period to see if they have any questions, recognizing they can’t 
ask them in here but to see if I can answer those questions for 
them, Mr. Speaker. And I would ask all members to extend 
them a warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — And, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on 
my feet, there’s another group in your gallery that are here 
today and they are concerned about issues for children. They 
are youth, families, and youth workers who have provided 
information to the Department of Social Services and other 
agencies about services needed for at-risk youth and families 
and they are keenly interested in issues related to the 
exploitation of children and youth. And I would ask them to 
stand as they are introduced. 
 
First, Delora Parisian. Delora is the co-ordinator of the action 
committee for children at risk in Regina. Ashley Kyle-Tyndale 
who is the co-facilitator for the Rainbow Youth Center, peer 
helper program. Valerie Racette. Val is the outreach support 
worker with action committee for children at risk in Regina. 
Jamie Johnson who is a peer helper. Louise Bananish, Candace 



244 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1999 

Bitternose, Kristy Littlechief, Michelle Bananish, Katherine 
Bananish and William Goodpipe. They are accompanied here 
today, Mr. Speaker, by Denis Losie who is a program manager 
with family youth services for the department in the Regina 
regional office and I would ask all members to make them feel 
very welcome here today. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I want to . . . I was going to say introduce, 
but I want to . . . I think it’s unnecessary to introduce this 
person to anyone except perhaps the pages. I want to 
acknowledge the presence in the House of a former Speaker of 
the Assembly, Herman Rolfes. He was in addition a 20-year 
veteran of the House, had the — I wouldn’t say pleasure — but 
he had the honour of being the minister of Health — I’m not 
sure being Minister of Health has ever been described as a 
pleasure — but the honour of being Minister of Health, Social 
Services, Continuing Education during the Blakeney years and 
that comes on top of a distinguished career as an educator. So 
I’d invite all members to join me in acknowledging this 
distinguished Saskatchewan citizen. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 
the Minister of Social Services and the other colleagues in the 
House to welcome the people here today from the family youth 
services. I’m sure there’s going to be lots of information to gain 
today and I hope you come back very often to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — I’d like to add my welcome and introduce 
to you again a distinguished constituent of Saskatoon Eastview, 
Mr. Herman Rolfes, and add my welcome as well as everyone 
else’s to Herman again. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I would like to 
introduce from northern Saskatchewan, but first of all with a 
northern Saskatchewan greeting — edlanetey and tansi — and it 
means how are you and very welcome to the House of this 
legislature. 
 
And up in our gallery, in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, we have 
Max Morin, also Joan MacDonald — Max is from 
Ile-a-la-Crosse; Joan is from Stony Rapids — Wilf Boychuk 
from Creighton, Margaret Aubichon from Patuanak. Mr. 
Speaker, these are the members of the New North, and also with 
them is Audrey Aubichon and Marcel Piche. I would like all 
members to give them a warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join my 
colleague from Cumberland to also welcome the people from 
the far north. And I know the hon. member does do the Cree 
introduction now and then, and I want to do the Dene 
introduction to these people. I do want to point out that it is 

Audrey’s birthday today and her mother is one of the top bingo 
players in northern Saskatchewan, so . . . 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Dene.) 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — I forgot, Mr. Speaker, to introduce as well 
deputy minister of Northern Affairs, Mr. Alex Campbell. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Show and Sale of Bulls in Lloydminster 
 
Ms. Stanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Minister of 
Energy and Mines and myself attended and spoke at a chamber 
of commerce luncheon in Lloydminster yesterday. And the 
folks are optimistic and enthusiastic about our future. 
 
Recently the Lloydminster Agriculture Exhibition Association 
hosted the 80th annual Pride of the Prairies bull sale and show. 
It is the biggest bull sale in all of Canada and a major one for 
Saskatchewan breeders. Eighty years, Mr. Speaker, of hard 
work, determination, tenacity, and a special brand of tender 
loving care on the part of Saskatchewan cattle producers has 
ensured this show’s existence and success. It’s also ensured the 
success and existence of the Saskatchewan breeders. 
 
And the Lloydminster Agriculture Exhibition Association and 
its manager Mike Sidoruk deserve recognition on a job well 
done. More than well done, actually, because sales from the 
four-day event this year were $1.2 million, Mr. Speaker. Free 
enterprise and hope are alive and living in Lloydminster, and 
that’s no bull, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Meetings Held in Hafford and Rosthern 
 

Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have two issues 
this afternoon I’d like to briefly speak on. It is my pleasure to 
rise in the Assembly today to give an up-to-date version to all 
the members on the health meeting I attended in Hafford on 
Tuesday evening. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there were approximately 80 people in attendance 
and it was a very lively debate. I’m proud to make known to all 
members that the resolution the Saskatchewan Party brought 
forth to the people of Hafford was enthusiastically passed with 
only about a half dozen people voting against it. Unfortunately, 
the three-year plan could not be released as the Minister of 
Health is holding it tight. 
 
The people of Hafford are intensely proud of their facility. They 
want to keep it but there is a definite fear that the frequent and 
eloquent pleadings of the MLA (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly) from Redberry, together with the acute and intense 
attention he pays to all proceedings, may not be enough to save 
the hospital. 
 
On another front, Mr. Speaker, yesterday afternoon I attended a 



March 25, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 245 

meeting in Rosthern where the whole plan for the debranning 
plant was presented. The hall was packed with enthusiastic 
farmers and supporters. Their wish is to all someday soon be 
able to market their products for cash and without a quota book. 
Some are already doing this. It is an exciting venture in an 
exciting constituency. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Community Volunteers Honoured 
 

Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past Saturday 
I was pleased to attend a special event at the Normanview 
Shopping Centre in my constituency — the 10th annual 
volunteer wall of fame induction ceremony. 
 
The event was sponsored by Harvard Developments Limited 
with the help of the West Zone Community Association Board. 
 
The wall of fame, Mr. Speaker, which is on permanent display 
at the shopping centre, honours those who volunteer their time 
and talent to enhance life at the community level. As nearly is 
always the case, Mr. Speaker, three new people honoured for 
volunteering their spare time are already leading active, full 
lives. I have the time only to mention their names, not in the 
many ways which they serve our community. 
 
Judy Zawyrucka is a licensed practical nurse at the Pasqua 
Hospital and was named outstanding community leader for her 
years of service with the Rosemont-Mount Royal Community 
Association. Carol Biberdorf has been a volunteer on the 
Dieppe Community Association for more than 20 years and was 
named outstanding volunteer. And Ian Stavness, a grade 12 
honour student and student leader at O’Neill High School was 
named outstanding youth for his work in athletics, music, and in 
his church. 
 
My congratulations, and those of all in the Assembly here, to 
these three outstanding volunteers for being honoured last 
Saturday. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

University Funding 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Since the NDP came to 
power in 1991, funding at both the University of Regina and the 
University of Saskatchewan has been cut seven times over eight 
years. Yesterday the U of S (University of Saskatchewan) said 
that it’s going to be forced to increase tuition next year and in 
some faculties tuition may even double. 
 
The Premier often talks about his government’s desire to invest 
in our future. But this is the same Premier that has allowed a 
nursing shortage, a potential teacher shortage, and now has the 
universities talking about doubling tuition in many of the 
professional fields we need the most. 
 
When the budget is tabled tomorrow, I hope the Premier can 
assure the future doctors, veterinarians, and all the other 
students in professional faculties across Saskatchewan that they 
will not be forced into any further debt to finance their future. 
 

The Government of Saskatchewan has already cut 
post-secondary education funding to the bone. More and more 
students are forced to take out student loans for their education 
and the amounts just keep growing. The average university 
student is borrowing $7,000 per year. That’s close to $30,000 
over the course of a degree. 
 
The Premier isn’t investing in our future, he is mortgaging our 
future. Mr. Speaker, this isn’t the Saskatchewan way, this is the 
NDP way. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Cheerleading Competition 
 
Ms. Murray: — Thank you, thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would 
like to tell you about a cheerleading competition I attended at 
Riffel High School on Saturday, March 13. After watching the 
timing, the athletic ability, and the total sense of rhythm that 
these wonderful groups of young people had, I can certainly 
appreciate why cheerleading is now officially recognized as a 
sport. Lifts, basket tosses, dancing, tumbling — I saw it all and 
then some. 
 
It was certainly clear to me that a great deal of skill, practice, 
and concentration went into each of these performances. And to 
my delight, Mr. Speaker, the junior team from Winston Knoll 
Collegiate had boys on their squad, some of whom I am told 
also play on football and soccer teams. It’s my understanding 
that this co-ed team is new to Winston Knoll and, to my 
knowledge, Regina as well — way to go boys. 
 
I would like to congratulate Riffel High School for hosting this 
second annual cheerleading competition, and to Riffel High 
School cheerleaders for their third place finish in the 
competition. I also extend my congratulations to the Lumsden 
High School cheerleaders for taking home the gold in the small 
varsity competition and to the Winston Knoll Collegiate senior 
cheerleading squad for taking home the gold in the large varsity 
competition. 
 
Coaches have done a fantastic job of working with these young 
people to create an amazing entertainment package. Your 
schools are so fortunate to have the talent you bring to their 
staffs. They must be proud of you and their cheerleading teams. 
 
What delightful young people and what wonderful talent. I am 
so tremendously proud that you attend schools in the 
constituency I represent. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Swift Current Health District 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to take a moment 
to talk about the progressive and necessary things happening in 
the Swift Current Health District, the birthplace of medicare, 
and the home of health district number one. 
 
We have a new chemotherapy outreach program so that 
residents of the great Southwest no longer have to make the 
long trek to Regina or Saskatoon for treatment. The program 
manager is nurse Debbie Unger, and her team leader is Fern 



246 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1999 

Nevard. 
 
Our wellness programs which provide health monitoring, foot 
care, and health education are really catching on. We began 
with five locations serving an average of 350 people in 1994. 
Last year programs were held in 11 locations a month and 
served 2,251 people per month. Barb Luchenski, our home care 
case manager, coordinates the program. 
 
Wellness works, Mr. Speaker — an argument lost on the 
members opposite. 
 
We have initiated a pilot project at the Swift Current Care 
Centre — a zero lift program — to help eliminate workplace 
injuries and increase the quality of care for residents, run by 
Nurse Shannon Reaves. 
 
And we have a traumatic response team at the ready to respond 
to the stress caused by farm accidents, vehicle accidents, or 
community emergencies or suicide — coordinated by Swift 
Current District mental health staff. 
 
A few examples, Mr. Speaker, of the excellent health care 
provided by excellent doctors, nurse, and staff people in Swift 
Current where good health is our byword. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Charity Foundations 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, my question is for the Premier. 
 
Mr. Premier, the Saskatchewan Party has discovered another 
one of these NDP (New Democratic Party) charity foundations, 
the foundations that were overcharging taxpayers. From 1989 to 
1992 the Churchill Heights Assistance Association collected 
over $41,000 from the expense accounts of the NDP MLA for 
Coronation Park. 
 
Mr. Premier, did any of this money ever go to the NDP? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, as I indicated 
yesterday that as far as anyone knows — although the records 
of political donations are public, any donations over $100; if the 
member opposite was concerned he’d go and check — but as 
far as anyone knows there was absolutely no money going to 
the NDP. 
 
But one thing I do want to say to the member opposite, I was 
reading in the Esterhazy Journal about members of the 
opposition, and in the editorial, Mr. Bruce Penton says: 
 

I still maintain those Sask Party reps, while working 
vigorously on our behalf in a number of areas, are still 
serving in a rather fraudulent (fraudulent) way. 
 

And he does go on to be critical of the Bill. 
 

An Hon. Member: — Said what a wonderful guy he is . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well the member says that what a 
wonderful guy he is; he also says: 
 

Our MLA, Bob Bjornerud, still doesn’t appreciate my 
repeated calls last year for the Sask Party MLAs to resign 
and seek election under their new Sask . . . banner. 

 
Now if you are what you say . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Next question. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday the Deputy Premier said the MLAs had nothing to do 
with running these charity foundations. Let’s just go down the 
list of the Churchill Heights Assistance Association. The NDP 
member for Coronation Park was one of the original directors. 
So was Mike Dalrymple, the president of Tommy Douglas 
House; Donna Wytrykush, the member’s 1991 campaign 
manager and constituency secretary; Scott Gray, the member’s 
1991 election fundraising co-ordinator; Larry Scheffer and Gail 
McKay, two more campaign workers; Larry Deters, former 
chief official agent to the provincial NDP. And the list goes on 
and on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Premier, will you admit that the member for Coronation 
Park and the NDP were running phoney charity foundations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Nothing could be further form the 
truth. Nothing could be further from the truth. You list out a 
number of directors of the non-profit organization, all of them 
who I think are honourable people. And what you’re trying to 
do, as I said yesterday, is cast a wide net, cast mud and see if 
anyone will stick to anyone else to try to cover up for your 
friend Mr. Berntson. 
 
And I want to say to the member opposite, on his credibility, 
which he is testing again today, I want to quote from the 
newspaper, Star-Phoenix, November 21, ’97, where Mr. 
Krawetz says: 
 

Liberals should always wear . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Now the hon. member 
recognizes of course than other than within a quote he’s not 
going to make reference to proper names of members of the 
House and I’ll ask him to guide himself accordingly in his 
remarks in the House. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I am quoting 
from the article and I want to make that clear. It goes on to say 
that: 
 

Although he had been a party member for only four years, 
Krawetz . . . assured supporters throughout (the) . . . 
campaign . . . he was a man of commitment and a man of 
his word. 
 

And what did he say? He said: 
 

“. . . I want to bring back that sense of trust in a politician 
that what is said by me is what I stick with,” Krawetz told 



March 25, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 247 

reporters. 
 

He later went on in the interview and said: 
 

. . . his rural upbringing taught him that “if you committed 
yourself to be part of a team . . . (then you should stick to 
the project.) ” 

 
That’s what he said. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, during 
the first year of operation the NDP member himself was one of 
its directors. During that year, the NDP charity foundation had 
expenses of $12,600, but it charged Legislative Assembly the 
maximum amount available for constituency expenses, $15,700. 
This NDP charity foundation overcharged by about 20 per cent 
and ended the year with a $3,000 surplus. Your NDP member 
was one of its directors and he was signing the requests for 
payment forms. Mr. Premier, do you think that’s legal? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — The member is going back over 
information he delivered to the House yesterday but yesterday it 
was a $10,000 surplus, today it’s a $3,000 surplus. So they’re 
backing away; they’re backing away. 
 
But I want to say to the member opposite that what was done 
with the money on the wind up of the corporation is it went to a 
fund, a scholarship for young people at the universities in 
Saskatchewan. That’s what happened to it. It’s clear, it’s 
obvious; and compare that to the boys and girls in the backroom 
dealing out thousand dollar bills. Eric, a thousand for you, a 
thousand for you, do you want another hit over here. The 
thousand dollars going around. And trying to compare the 
people in this organization to the Eric Berntsons and the others, 
to try to do political support for your Tories because you’re 
embarrassed about your position. You should be ashamed of 
yourself. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would appreciate if the Deputy Premier would listen to my 
question because the comment today was regarding the 
Churchill heights association; yesterday’s questions were about 
North Broad. Totally two different foundations. 
 
Mr. Deputy Premier, I’d like to read paragraph 98 of Justice 
Gerein’s ruling. And I quote: 
 

. . . several things are clear about . . . the constituency 
office and services allowance. The first is that there must 
be an expense incurred. A Member cannot simply 
requisition the allowance . . . advance payments are not 
possible. 
 

A $3,000 surplus means the member was either requisitioning 
for expenses that were not incurred, or he was getting advance 
payments. Either way, it’s against the rules. And he can’t blame 
someone else because he was one of the board of directors. 
 
Mr. Deputy Premier, do you think these payments were legal? 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
member opposite, yesterday in the House when he made 
allegations of illegality here in the Assembly, and when 
challenged by reporters out in the foyer, said, no, no, I don’t 
mean it. Trying to be protected by accusations here in the 
House, and then walking outside and changing your tune you 
know isn’t fair, but it doesn’t surprise me when you’re part of 
the Tory caucus. That shouldn’t surprise anyone. 
 
What Mr. Wally Coates said, who was president of the Regina 
community development fund, he said that there was no reason 
to return the surplus to the legislature when the organization 
was wound down when it was. That was their opinion. Now if 
you have evidence that Mr. Wally Coates or any members — 
any members of the non-profit organization — did anything 
wrong with the money, benefited themselves or anyone else, 
then you should follow the process that you and your Tory 
friends — Joan Duncan, Eric Berntson — know so well; ask 
them how to do it, they will know the process of what you 
should do with that information. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know it’s very 
clear that none of the NDP members’ expense allowance was 
supposed to go to the NDP. However, on the 1992 financial 
statement, there is an entry of $1,559 paid to the Albert North 
medieval feast. The Albert North medieval feast, Mr. Deputy 
Premier? That’s an NDP fundraiser. In fact, I have a lovely 
picture of the Albert North medieval feast right here. This 
picture contains Doug Archer, Bob Lyons, and other members 
from Moose Jaw. And here’s the member, the NDP member for 
Coronation Park, standing next to what looks like an 
executioner, Mr. Speaker. It seems kind of appropriate. 
 
Mr. Deputy Premier, do you think it’s appropriate that money 
from an MLA expense allowance was funnelled through this 
NDP charity foundation to the NDP Albert North medieval 
feast? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — What I won’t accept on that 
member’s advice and his words here in the House that what 
he’s saying is accurate. 
 
But what I do say, if the member opposite has any accusation or 
evidence that he believes that there was wrongdoing, that there 
was wrongdoing — you know the process. 
 
But I want to say to the member opposite that the money, when 
the group dissolved, was put to a scholarship fund. And I have 
here from the University of Saskatchewan 1998-99 
undergraduate awards, a guide for entering students, all students 
in the province, the scholarships that are listed — one, two, on 
the next page . . . oh there it is, the Allan Blakeney Entrance 
Scholarship. A public document from the university that the 
member will know about. 
 
So I say to you, if you believe or if you know that there’s 
evidence that any money, any money that was used 
inappropriately, you know the process and what you should do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



248 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1999 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Premier, this NDP charity foundation was struck from 
the corporate registry in 1994 for failing to file financial 
statements. I should note that it only filed financial statements 
for three years. And every year the so-called auditor’s report 
was signed by directors of the corporation, including the 
member’s constituency secretary. Not exactly an appropriate 
accounting procedure, Mr. Deputy Premier. 
 
Mr. Deputy Premier, the financial statements show they ran a 
surplus every year. And the last financial statement shows an 
accumulated surplus of $6,564. Mr. Deputy Premier, where did 
that money go? Did any of it go to the NDP? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — First of all I say to the member 
opposite, obviously the members who were on the board of 
directors and the board of the organization will have made 
decisions that they made with the money that they charged to 
the MLAs. My point is here is that the directors who have been 
interviewed say that it was all used in an appropriate manner. 
 
The question is, Mr. Speaker, why this panic in the Tory ranks 
this week. Why is that? 
 
Well Maclean’s magazine of March 29 says, “Prairie Titan 
falls.” And there’s a nice picture of Mr. Berntson and the 
headline is, “A Saskatchewan senator may face a year in jail.” 
That’s why you’re panicking. 
 
And the article goes on to say: 
 

Screaming aside, Romanow’s NDP now completing its 
second term appears in good shape for a June vote. A 
Liberal-sponsored poll to be released this week has the 
NDP as the first choice at 54 per cent of the decided voters, 
and leading in all areas of the province. The Saskatchewan 
Party trails at 22 per cent. 

 
So the old hockey gloves come off. Throw off the gloves, throw 
off the gloves, let’s have a fight and see if we can’t accomplish 
something. You know you not going to win the election. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Next question. 
 

Salaries of Chief Executive Officers 
of District Health Boards 

 
Mr. McLane: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP is telling the health 
care workers to settle for 2, 2, and 2. But just like anything else 
the NDP does, it’s not do as I do but do as I say. 
 
Your government, Mr. Speaker, is offering workers a flat 2, 2, 
and 2. However, if you are an NDP-appointed health board 
pack, forget those guidelines and write your own salary 
increase. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly what they did. 
 
From freedom of information requests obtained, we have 
learned that over two years, the CEO (chief executive officer) 
of North-East Health District gave himself a 14.4 per cent 
salary increase. The North Central CEO gave himself a 13.3 per 
cent increase. The CEO of the North Valley Health District 
thought he deserved a 16.4 per cent increase. And the poor, 
poor CEO of the Prince Albert Health District felt he needed a 

17.6 per cent increase on his $95,000 a year salary in order to 
make ends meet. 
 
My question, Mr. Speaker, to the ministers, how come the 
salary guidelines apply to the desperately-needed and 
overworked health care workers in this province, but not to your 
political-appointed hacks? Why is there one rule for NDP 
appointees and another one for your hacks? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, as the member may not know, the majority of 
people on district health boards are in fact elected through a 
ward system and a majority of those people on the health 
district boards are appointed through a nomination process. Ads 
are run in the paper and various people in the community can 
ask for people to be nominated and those names are submitted 
to the Department of Health, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s not 
the Department of Health or the ministers of Health that 
determine the remuneration for the CEOs. 
 
And just as a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, which I think is really 
important in this discussion, as you know we have had the 
Dorsey report, we have indicated to the health workers and the 
employer that not only do we have the mandate available, but 
because of Dorsey and because of some of the inequities, 
there’s additional money available to do equal pay for equal 
work. And on top of that, Mr. Speaker, we are applying the pay 
equity policy to the health sector. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As far I know, Mr. 
Speaker, health board CEOs are not elected. And as usual, the 
NDP are trying to convolute everything so that they don’t have 
to fess up to what they’ve done. Mr. Speaker, on June 21, on 
June 21, 1990 a former backbencher, now Deputy Premier, said 
and I quote: 
 

And I just don’t know how you can expect the public to 
believe that some, who are making an area of $100,000 a 
year deserve a 10 per cent increase, while people on the 
front line are being told there is no money for increases. 
 

That’s the Deputy Premier, Mr. Speaker. It’s funny how being 
in government for eight years can change one’s priority. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government for the past two years has had no 
money for front line care workers but has had enough for their 
appointed hacks in the district health boards and others. Mr. 
Minister, why are your priorities so wrong? Why was there no 
money for health care workers or much needed services but 
buckets for your hand-picked CEOs? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to tell the member 
that I’m a girl not a boy; I’m Madam Minister. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what I can say to the member opposite is that in 
the province of Saskatchewan we are the only province that has 
gone to a majority of the people being elected on the district 



March 25, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 249 

boards. All other provinces have government-appointed boards. 
That’s point number one. 
 
Point number two, Mr. Speaker, it is the boards that determine 
who is appointed CEO for their district. 
 
I might also add, Mr. Speaker, that we were the first province to 
go towards an integrated, coordinated approach to health 
services. In the old days we used to have over 400 independent 
boards. And we didn’t have an integration between long-term 
care, home care, mental health services, addiction services, 
acute care, respite, and palliative care along with all of the other 
services, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We do not want to go back to the past as the members just 
announced in their platform. We want to have an integrated 
approach to health delivery. Health is a continuum of care, Mr. 
Speaker, and that’s what we’re doing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Highway Maintenance 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister 
of Highways. I wonder if the Minister of Highways would care 
to share with this House the logic behind your department 
paying Quest Communications over $6,000 to measure 
customer satisfaction with Saskatchewan highways, while at the 
same your time your department’s paying out over $4,000 for 
damage claims on Highways 334 and 339 alone in the Thunder 
Creek constituency. Now how many potholes did Quest 
Communications tell you to repair? How can you ever repair 
customer satisfaction considering these damage claims paid out 
to Saskatchewan drivers? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to say in 
response to that question on communications is that this year in 
our communications that we actually are down in our spending, 
about $40,000 down. But part of our communications program 
has certainly been on knowing on customer satisfaction. One of 
the programs that we’re very proud of is the Highway Hotline, 
which is a great service for all people that are using our 
highways and transportation system right across this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, it’s funny that the Highway 
minister would mention her communications budget. I wonder 
if she knows what it costs to twin a kilometre of the 
Trans-Canada Highway or a kilometre of highway. I suspect . . . 
You know it costs about $500,000 per kilometre to twin a 
highway. Well that could easily be done within your $620,000 a 
year communications and public relations budget for ’98-99. 
You’d still have a hundred and twenty thousand dollars to 
spare. 
 
With the highway maintenance budget not expected to increase 
in tomorrow’s budget, why is the minister squandering money 
in her department instead of ensuring money gets to where it’s 
most needed on highway maintenance and construction. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think the 
communications at the Department of Highways has done is 

exemplary for the people of Saskatchewan. Putting in the 
Highway Hotline is one of the many services that helps; and we 
have got compliments from the people right across this province 
to do it toll-free, to do it for the safety of ambulance service, for 
school bus services, and for everybody that are utilizing the 
transportation system across this province. It not only tells them 
about road conditions, about weather conditions, about ferry 
crossings — this is important information that the people of 
Saskatchewan need. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Dispersal of Funds from Charity Foundations 
 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I have one supplementary question for the Deputy 
Premier this afternoon. 
 
Mr. Deputy Premier, given that all monies used for MLA 
allowances are taxpayers’ dollars, why wouldn’t any surpluses 
be returned to the Legislative Assembly or in some way to 
Saskatchewan taxpayers so they can choose whether a particular 
charity or scholarship should benefit? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, as the member knows, 
the organizations, the non-profit organizations that were 
established more than 20 years ago had a certain set of 
principles and number of people who were members of the 
board, and I can’t speak for the discussions that went on during 
that period of time. 
 
I think the other thing that’s important to know and the, Mr. 
Speaker, you will know, that the changes that occurred to these 
allowances —and this will be borne out by anyone who cares to 
find out from the Clerk’s office — many changes occurred 
during the period of time from the formation of the allowances 
to the period we’re at today. And what might have been okay at 
one period wasn’t at another. And you would have to go back 
and take specific issues and deal with them in light of the 
regulations that applied that given day. 
 
So for me to second-guess what the board was doing at any 
particular day is very, very difficult. But what I can say is that 
Mr. Wally Coates who was president of the Regina community 
development fund said there was no reason to return the surplus 
to the legislature when the organization was wound down. That 
was his opinion. 
 
Now if you’re saying Mr. Wally Coates and others did 
something wrong, then there’s a process in place. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Support for Farmers 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
intrigued by all of the partisan politics that’s going on but I’m 
worried that agriculture might be forgotten as we go through 
these days to the budget. 
 
I want to ask a question therefore from the Minister of 



250 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1999 

Agriculture. Mr. Speaker, twice in the past week and a half this 
government has refused to debate agriculture on an emergency 
basis and we do have an emergency in agriculture. 
 
The forms have come out now for applications for the new 
program, the crisis program, and people are so frustrated and so 
angry with those forms that they tell me —and I’ve heard 
through the media — that farmers across the country are 
demanding the resignation of Ralph Goodale, and of Vanclief 
the federal minister. All the federal ministers involved in this 
program they want to be rid of. 
 
My question to the minister is: do you support those farmers in 
their demands for the resignations of these federal Liberals? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
answer an agricultural question because at least somebody’s 
getting around to policy, and not other things. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — I think it’s maybe a bit of a fear of 
debating their policy. I thank you for the question. 
 
Yes at the Regina farm rally . . . if you were at the Regina farm 
rally, it was quite noticeable that there were no federal 
representatives. Especially, especially, especially Mr. Goodale. 
Especially Mr. Goodale who’s from Regina — he’s the member 
of Parliament, the cabinet minister from Regina — to not show 
up at a farm rally to at least listen to the people . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . well I know the Liberals get upset about this, 
but they should be embarrassed and I’m sure that’s why they 
get upset. 
 
Now, farmers calling for their resignations — they have every 
right to do that. I think that the Prime Minister has to put 
forward, put down his foot on Mr. Goodale and Mr. Vanclief 
and demand that they come out here and talk to these people 
who they’re putting in this position. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Supplemental to the 
Minister of Agriculture. Minister, most farmers I think, believe 
that there will be some money for some hog producers and they 
desperately need that, there’s no question about that. 
 
But the truth of the matter is that most of the farmers do believe 
that in spite of their needs they’re not going to get enough to be 
able to keep on going from this federal program. And I’ll get to 
that part a little later. 
 
But here at home what can we do? That is my question and the 
gist of where I want to go. Can we reduce the costs of farming 
in the province of Saskatchewan to try to offset some of the 
neglect we’re getting from Ottawa? 
 
Can we now look for you to bring about, perhaps in the budget 
or in days to come, some reduction in the costs of farming, and 
not just costs that the government can provide? 
 
Can you also provide some reduction in costs by examining 
things like fertilizer costs which I understand now that you can 
bring in from the United States cheaper than from buying it in 
Saskatchewan? 

Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is a very 
important area and we’ve done a lot in Saskatchewan. In fact on 
a per capita basis, Saskatchewan contributes to agriculture four 
and a half times more than the average of all the provinces in 
this country. And we are continuing to do that. 
 
Just last year we exempted the E&H (education and health) tax 
from intensive livestock operations. In the last three years 
we’ve cut the price of premiums of crop insurance by 40 per 
cent. 
 
We are leading by example. Even though the members opposite 
and the opposition — and the opposition, the Liberals and the 
Tories — even though they just say, oh spend more taxpayers’ 
money, spend more taxpayers’ money, when 40 per cent of the 
taxpayers get their income from agriculture. That mentality will 
take us to the bottom. 
 
I appreciate the question and we’re going to do all we can to be 
leaders. On the input cost side, we’ve also addressed this 
situation with Ottawa and are working with other provinces. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 214—The Saskatchewan Property Rights Act 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I move first 
reading of Bill No. 214, The Saskatchewan Property Rights 
Act. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 21 — The Coroners Act, 1999 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 21, The 
Coroners Act, 1999 be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Appointment of Chief Electoral Officer 
 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, at the conclusion of 
my remarks I will be moving a motion that Janice G. Baker be 
appointed as the Chief Electoral Officer by this Assembly. 

 
Mr. Speaker, as you will recall in the spring 1999 session of the 
Legislative Assembly, The Election Amendment Act, 1998 was 
passed providing for the establishment of the Office of the 
Chief Electoral Officer as an independent officer of this 
Assembly. 
 
While the operations of the electoral office have for many years 
been conducted on an independent basis, this final step was an 
important confirmation of this long-standing practice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to note that a co-operative approach 
was adopted in the selection process for this important position. 



March 25, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 251 

A search committee was struck with representatives from all 
three party caucuses and a national search was conducted. 
 
Following receipt of over 70 applications and conducting 
interviews with nine candidates over the summer months, the 
search committee made its recommendation to the Board of 
Internal Economy. Its unanimous recommendation was that 
Janice G. Baker be appointed as the Acting Chief Electoral 
Officer. The Board of Internal Economy accepted this 
recommendation and appointed Ms. Baker as Acting Chief 
Electoral Officer on September 28, 1998. 
 
Since that time Ms. Baker has been very busy administering a 
northern by-election, as well as commencing preparations for 
the first general election to be held under the new legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Janice Baker has a long and distinguished career 
with the electoral office in the province of Saskatchewan. From 
1979 to 1991 she served as director of operations for the 
electoral office. From December, 1991 to June, 1997 she served 
as the Assistant Chief Electoral Officer. And finally from June, 
1997 to her confirmation in that position by the Board of 
Internal Economy this September, she has served as the Acting 
Chief Electoral Officer. 
 
Ms. Baker is obviously well acquainted with the operations of 
this office and with its crucial role in ensuring the demonstrable 
fairness of the democratic process in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
(1430) 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are indeed fortunate to have had a person of 
this calibre with such long-standing commitment to the 
electoral process to serve as the Acting Chief Electoral Officer 
to this point. 
 
I am pleased to propose her appointment as the province of 
Saskatchewan’s Chief Electoral Officer. 
 
I would like to conclude my remarks, Mr. Speaker, by making 
the following motion, seconded by the Leader of the 
Opposition, the member from Canora-Pelly: 
 

That this Assembly hereby appoint Janice G. Baker of the 
city of Regina, in the province of Saskatchewan, Chief 
Electoral Officer pursuant to section 4 of The Election Act, 
1996. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’m happy to second the motion presented this 
afternoon formally appointing Jan Baker to the position of 
Chief Electoral Officer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t think we should underplay the procedure 
that was put into place for the first time in selecting 
Saskatchewan’s new Chief Electoral Officer. For the first time, 
an all-party committee came together with equal representation 
from all sides to make this selection, and through open 

discussion and a sense of co-operation that we just don’t see in 
this legislature often enough we were able to come to a 
consensus on the best candidate for the position. 
 
I’m happy to report that the interview and selection process was 
done in a non-partisan way. That is only appropriate when 
we’re dealing with an office like that of the Chief Electoral 
Officer. This is a position that must not only be fair and 
unbiased, it’s got to be perceived to be fair and unbiased at all 
times. 
 
The electoral process is the foundation of our democracy. And 
it’s always struck me a bit odd that up to this point this position 
was technically at least an employee of Executive Council. So I 
congratulate the government side for recognizing this problem 
and doing something to rectify it. 
 
The position of Chief Electoral Officer is now an independent 
officer of the legislature and that’s the way it should be. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think the all-party committee made an excellent 
choice in the appointment of Jan Baker. She has a great deal of 
experience at the electoral office and was clearly the most 
qualified to step in and fill this important role. 
 
Ms. Baker was selected after a nationwide search. I think it says 
a lot about her when she emerged as the top candidate from the 
76 applications that were received. And it’s a little wonder, Mr. 
Speaker, Jan Baker has been at the electoral office for two 
decades. For the past year and a half she has amply filled the 
role as Acting Chief Electoral Officer after the retirement of 
Mr. Kuziak. 
 
In that time she has overseen the Saskatoon Eastview and 
Athabasca by-elections and in both cases she has proven very 
helpful to our party, and I’m sure to all parties, with any 
questions we had or clarifications we needed. And as we of this 
side of the House were going through the task of establishing a 
new party in 1997, Jan Baker was most helpful in explaining 
the rules and regulations to us as was her duty. 
 
I am confident that Miss Baker will prove a very effective Chief 
Electoral Officer. And I look forward to working with her and 
her staff as we move towards the next election. It’s a lot of 
work for the electoral office but I know they will be up to the 
challenge that a general election brings. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party caucus is very happy to 
support the appointment of Jan Baker to the position of Chief 
Electoral Officer. And I am proud to second this motion here 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to add 
welcome on behalf of the Liberal caucus to our newest Chief 
Electoral Officer who is here today. I would like to preface my 
comments. A lot has already been said by the Government 
House Leader and by the Leader of the Opposition. I’ll keep my 
remarks brief. 
 
However, I would like to say that it was indeed a pleasure to 
work with other members of this Assembly and their staff in 



252 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1999 

this very vital and important process. Ms. Baker, as has been 
already said, has been with the office over 20 years, an 
acknowledged expert in her field. Jan has probably seen just 
about everything that can happen in an election campaign. I’m 
sure of that. 
 
She was an integral part of the provincial Electoral Boundaries 
Commission, seconded from the electoral office to serve in the 
role of technical adviser to the chairperson at that time, Justice 
Ted Malone. 
 
For the past 22 months in her capacity as Acting Chief Electoral 
Officer we have seen her make every effort to both educate and 
facilitate both current members and future candidates on the 
role that . . . on the rules, pardon me, that govern the electoral 
process. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it is with great pleasure that I rise on behalf 
of the Liberal caucus to congratulate Jan Baker on her official 
appointment as Chief Electoral Officer. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Congratulations. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to nemine contradicente. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Before orders of the day I ask leave 
of the House to move a motion of condolence. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

CONDOLENCES 
 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, before I begin my 
comments I just might say that this motion will be moved by 
myself and seconded by the member for Rosthern who I 
understand will say a few words as well. And on the conclusion 
of my remarks I will actually read the motion, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to say to you, Mr. Speaker, thank you for the opportunity 
to rise today to pay tribute to the passing of a former member of 
this Legislative Assembly, Mr. Isaak Elias. Mr. Elias was born 
on April 27, 1912 in Rosthern, Saskatchewan. And he leaves to 
mourn his daughter Ruby, his son Clarence, 6 grandchildren, 12 
great-grandchildren, his sisters Margaret, Anna, Mary, 
Katharina, and his brothers John and Jake, and a host of nieces 
and nephews. 
 
Mr. Elias was predeceased by his wife Annie, his brother Peter, 
and his sisters Sarah and Helena. Isaak spent many of his 
working years teaching in rural schools in the province of 
Saskatchewan, And he was also manager of the Hepburn Co-op 
for eight years and he enjoyed meeting people in the store and 
in the community. And obviously being a member of the 
Legislative Assembly, this fit very well. 
 
Mr. Elias was also a store keeper in Langham for four years, 
and it was during these years, the period between 1956 and 
1960, that he served as an MLA with the Social Credit Party 
representing the constituency of Rosthern. 
 
Isaak spent his last years working with Touche Ross & Co. and 

during his final years he lived at the Bethany Manor Senior’s 
Complex. And Isaak used his time and talent to reach out to 
others throughout a long and productive life. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Isaak will be remembered for his beliefs and for 
his service to the people of Saskatchewan while a member of 
the Legislative Assembly. His contributions to important social 
changes of that time helped make Saskatchewan a more caring 
and compassionate place to live today. 
 
His daughter says of her father, and I quote: 
 

. . . a sensitive man, an excellent caregiver to his wife. He 
was genuinely concerned with the well being of others. He 
was an honest business person, and he enjoyed meeting 
people. 

 
Mr. Speaker, on that note, I would move, seconded by the 
member for Rosthern: 
 

That the Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of the Legislative Assembly 
and expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution 
he made to his community, his constituency, and the 
province. 
 
Isaak Elias, who died on May 1, 1998, was a member of 
the Legislative Assembly from 1956 to 1960, representing 
the constituency of Rosthern for the Social Credit Party. 
Mr. Elias was born April 27, 1912 in Rosthern. He was 
married to Annie Epp on October 2, 1934 and together 
they had a daughter and a son. 
 
Mr. Elias was an active participant in affairs of the 
communities in which he lived. A teacher by training, Mr. 
Elias devoted many years of teaching in rural public 
schools and subsequently served as a school trustee. Mr. 
Elias was also a merchant, and ill health in 1946 prompted 
him to leave the teaching profession and he turned his 
attentions to the retail business. 

 
He managed the Hepburn Co-operative Association for 
eight years and was employed as a bookkeeper in Langham 
for an additional four years. In later years he was 
predeceased in his retirement . . . or preceding his 
retirement, Mr. Elias worked for Touche Ross & Co. in 
their department which related to bankruptcies. 

 
In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 
this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy with 
the members of the bereaved family. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my privilege to 
second this motion of condolence, and on behalf of my caucus I 
would like to speak to this motion since Mr. Elias was the MLA 
for Rosthern which I have the honour of representing today. 
While I did not know Mr. Elias personally, I am certain I can 
vouch for his character since he was elected by the people in the 
best constituency in the province. 
 
Prior to entering politics, Mr. Elias spent many years as a 



March 25, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 253 

school teacher in the Rosthern constituency. Another thing that 
I have in common with him, Mr. Elias was a very 
community-minded individual. 
 
As manager of the Hepburn Co-op and storekeeper in Langham, 
he had a chance to meet and greet many of the people who lived 
in the areas, something that must have left a good impression 
because in 1956, Mr. Elias was elected as a Social Credit 
member of the legislature for the Rosthern constituency. Mr. 
Elias spent the next four years ably serving the good people of 
Rosthern, something which is a great honour I’m sure he carried 
with him for the rest of his life. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the Saskatchewan Party caucus I 
would like to express our sympathies to Mr. Elias’s children, 
Ruby and Clarence, and to the rest of his extended family. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to, on 
behalf of the Liberal caucus as well, extend our deepest respect 
and sympathies to the families. Thank you. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I have to apologize 
for not having a motion that would send this message off to the 
family. I wondered if I could just take a minute and have a 
moment to do that. 
 
The Speaker: — The Deputy Premier requests that the 
Assembly recess just momentarily to provide for the crafting of 
a motion to have the condolences sent to the family. Does that 
meet with the approval of the Assembly? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
The Assembly recessed for a period of time. 
 
(1445) 
 
The Speaker: — Our House will come to order and before 
orders of the day, I’ll recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the 
Assembly, I would move, seconded by the member from 
Rosthern: 
 

That the resolutions just passed, together with a transcript 
of the oral tributes to the memory of the deceased, be 
communicated to the bereaved families on behalf of this 
Legislative Assembly by Mr. Speaker. 

 
And I so move. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Ms. Murrell: — With leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Ms. Murrell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure to 
introduce to this House a former colleague and member of this 
legislature who represented the constituents of North Battleford 
as a cabinet minister, an MLA, and who served them with 
honour. I ask that this Assembly please welcome Doug 
Anguish. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Leave to introduce a guest please. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to the 
members of the Assembly I would like to introduce a person 
seated in your gallery who is very important to my constituents, 
and particularly to myself personally. Her beauty is only 
exceeded by the excellent work she performs. 
 
I would like all members to extend a warm welcome to 
Margaret Campbell, my CA (constituency assistant) in Swift 
Current. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Johnson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With your 
assistance, I’ll get the hang of this at some point or other. 
 
Mr. Speaker, holding with the open and accountable 
government policies, I table the answers to three questions: 
question no. 14, question no. 15, question no. 16. 
 
The Speaker: — The answers are provided for item nos. 1, 2, 
and 3. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 1  The Child and Family Services 
Amendment Act, 1999 

 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise 
today to move second reading of The Child and Family 
Services Amendment Act, 1999. 
 
Mr. Speaker, someone once coined the phrase, it shouldn’t hurt 
to be a child. Indeed, Mr. Speaker, I think we would all agree 
that childhood and adolescence should be as free as possible 
from pain and hurt. 
 
As parents, as grandparents, neighbours, friends, aunts and 
uncles, we try to ensure that those we love and care for 
experience no more than the normal disappointments and 
frustrations which are a part of growing up. By providing 
structure, love, and protection from harm, we try to ensure they 
have the best possible chance for success and happiness in the 
future. 
 



254 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1999 

But, Mr. Speaker, not all such children are so fortunate. For 
some, family dysfunction, poverty, racial prejudices, abuse, or 
other problems leave them vulnerable. Some have little or no 
consistent and reliable support to which they can turn. They are 
young, in pain, and often very naïve despite the tough, 
streetwise image some portray. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, there are those within our society 
who do not hesitate to take advantage of this situation. There 
are those who do not hesitate to exploit those children and 
young people for their own purposes. 
 
Every day these children are victimized and abused by pimps 
and other individuals who sexually abuse children and youth 
through prostitution, particularly in the cities of Prince Albert, 
Regina, and Saskatoon. Mr. Speaker, in a caring and 
compassionate society, this cannot be tolerated. 
 
In 1997 we introduced a five-point strategy to address the issue 
of children and youth who are sexually exploited. Since that 
time, Mr. Speaker, we have, with the enthusiastic support and 
assistance of a number of community and service organizations, 
distributed nearly 90,000 informational posters across the 
province. These posters identify the exploitation of a child for a 
sexual purpose as both child abuse and a criminal offence, and 
make it clear that those who engage in such behaviour will be 
treated as criminals. 
 
I am pleased to tell this House, Mr. Speaker, that my 
department has provided funding to assist with registration 
costs to enable members of the community to attend the Street 
Symposium 1999 to be held in Saskatoon later this spring. 
 
The focus of the symposium, which will bring together 
representatives from the western provinces, is children and 
youth who are on the street, many of whom are sexually 
exploited through prostitution. It is being hosted by the 
Saskatoon Tribal Council and the Saskatoon Police Service and 
will build on the success of a similar conference held in Calgary 
in 1998. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, over the past two years we have 
allocated nearly $1 million to communities to address issues 
related to street youth and children who are sexually exploited. 
The bulk of this funding was targeted to Prince Albert, Regina, 
and Saskatoon, the cities where the problem has been identified. 
 
Other funding partners, including Human Resources 
Development Canada, SGI (Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance), and some civic administrations, health boards, 
school divisions, and community associations have contributed 
financially or in kind to various local service initiatives. 
 
To further enhance our ability to deal with these problems and 
to provide services to our children and youth, Mr. Speaker, we 
will amend The Child and Family Services Act. I am pleased to 
report to this House that the changes we are making at this time 
are based on the opinions expressed by Canadian children and 
youth at the International Summit of Sexually Exploited Youth 
held last year in Victoria, British Columbia, and on discussions 
with a network of community representatives to determine their 
perspective on and support for legislative reform. 
 

These amendments will serve to protect and provide support to 
victims of this crime and facilitate the prosecution of those who 
would commit such offences against our children and young 
people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we want to ensure that all of our young people are 
afforded protection under The Child and Family Services Act. 
As it currently exists, section 11(iii) of the Act identifies a child 
who has been exposed to harmful interaction for a sexual 
purpose as a child in need of protection. While not stated, this 
was intended to include a child involved in prostitution. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we want to ensure there is no confusion on this 
point. We will therefore amend section 11(iii) to include the 
term “including involvement in prostitution” to make it clear 
that a child involved in prostitution is considered to be a child 
in need of protection and that such a child is entitled to all of 
the protections and services available under the Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in some cases, a protection hearing is required to 
determine whether a parent or parents may be unwilling or 
unable to protect their children from abuse or neglect. 
Depending upon the circumstances, children may be extremely 
reluctant to testify because of fear of reprisal. Clearly in 
situations like this, it would not be in the child’s best interest to 
testify. 
 
We will therefore amend the Act to allow for the admission of 
hearsay evidence at a protection hearing if, in the opinion of the 
court, the evidence is credible and trustworthy. Such evidence 
may include statements made by the young person to police, 
doctors, social workers or others. This amendment will help 
protect victims of sexual abuse while still allowing the court to 
attach the appropriate weight to the evidence, including 
recognition that the evidence is not subject to 
cross-examination. 
 
Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, this amendment is in keeping with 
the spirit of amendments to the Criminal Code and The 
Saskatchewan Evidence Act to encourage protection of the 
victim in prosecutions of sexual abuse. 
 
Mr. Speaker, where there are reasonable grounds to believe that 
contact between a child under the age of 16 and a certain 
individual or individuals would cause the child to be in need of 
protection under section 16 of The Child and Family Services 
Act, an application may be made to the court for a protective 
intervention order which would direct the individual named in 
the order to refrain from any contact or association with the 
child. Mr. Speaker, we want to ensure that 16- and 17-year-olds 
can also benefit from a protective intervention order where it is 
considered to be in their best interests. 
 
Therefore we will amend section 18 of the Act to include 16- 
and 17-year-olds as young people on behalf of whom a 
protective intervention order may be requested. 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. Speaker, those who sexually abuse or assault children and 
youth rob them of their childhood, destroy their self-esteem, 
shatter their innocence, and darken their futures. We believe 
that as a society we must send a strong, clear public message 



March 25, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 255 

that this kind of behaviour toward our children has no place in 
our society. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, we will amend The Child and Family 
Services Act to clarify that the offences of abuse includes 
allowing or encouraging a child to engage in prostitution. 
Furthermore, we will increase the penalties for those found 
guilty of exploiting our children and youth, including those 
guilty of sexual exploitation. 
 
The amendments result in a substantial increase in fines and is 
intended to reflect the seriousness of these offences. These 
offences will give police and prosecutors another option as they 
charge and prosecute offenders. These amendments are based 
on a legislative framework that includes both The Child and 
Family Services Act and the Criminal Code in addressing the 
protective and supportive needs of victims and the successful 
prosecution and conviction of offenders. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we do not believe that stand-alone provincial 
legislation is adequate to meet these objectives. This is a 
problem which knows no provincial boundaries and we need 
strong and effective federal laws that will help protect our 
children and youth. 
 
The Criminal Code remains the most effective legislative tool 
available for the prosecution and conviction of persons who 
sexually assault and exploit children and youth through 
prostitution. In Saskatchewan this is the legislation of choice 
used by prosecutors. 
 
I’m sure that all of us in this House are keenly aware that 
government at any level cannot solve social problems 
single-handedly or in isolation from the community where the 
problem exists. Experience has repeatedly demonstrated that if 
a problem resides in the community, the ideas and commitment 
needed to solve the problem very likely reside there as well. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, when we were faced with the serious 
problem of children and youth being sexually abused through 
prostitution, we turned to the communities where this problem 
exists. We discussed these issues with First Nations and Metis 
representatives and with groups across the province, including 
youth who had been actively engaged in finding solutions to 
this problem. 
 
We discussed the option of providing for the detention of 
children and youth and were cautioned about moving in this 
direction. In addition to the constitutional and human rights 
concerns involved, we were told by the community groups 
including youth, that because of the complex issues faced by 
youth leaving the street, including issues of trust and 
independence, the prospects of being detained against their will 
could potentially drive youth further away from help. As 
victims of abuse, children and youth need support. Forcible 
confinement feels too much like punishment. 
 
The use of authority could result in very short-term benefits, 
whereas a co-operative and voluntary approach might be more 
successful in engaging youth in longer-term planning and an 
exit from the street. And the risk that it would be primarily First 
Nations and Metis youth who would be detained could lessen 
the resolve to develop and deliver culturally-sensitive programs 

designed to address the underlying problems. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to express my gratitude to the community 
leaders and agencies in the cities of Regina, Saskatoon, and 
Prince Albert, who have given so much of their time and effort 
in addressing problems associated with the sexual exploitation 
of children and youth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, taking services to where these people spend their 
time, being it a mobile support program, a youth activity centre, 
or a safe residence in the neighbourhood, are examples of how 
the community is responding to the needs of these children and 
youth and better connecting them to other support services. The 
reality is, Mr. Speaker, that for a variety of reasons in 
Saskatchewan, First Nations and Metis children and youth are 
overrepresented among those young people who are sexually 
exploited on the streets of our cities. 
 
The Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations, directors of 
First Nations child and family service agencies, and the board 
of directors of Metis Family and Community Justice Services 
Incorporated have a significant role to play in addressing this 
problem. In our discussions with these First Nations and Metis 
organizations and other community groups, we have been urged 
to take a planned and focused approach that has the approval of 
all parties. Mr. Speaker, we have taken that advice to heart. 
These issues are varied and complex, and unfortunately do not 
lend themselves to single, simple, or speedy solutions. 
 
In considering the direction we should take, we have adopted a 
balanced approach and we have kept our options open. We have 
consulted with individuals and groups who have the expertise, 
the knowledge, and the experience needed to successfully 
address these problems, and we have heeded their advice. 
 
We will continue to support the development of outreach 
programs and establishment of safe shelters for children, 
contingent upon the advice of our community partners. We will 
continue to support strict law enforcement initiatives. We will 
use the authority granted to us through The Child and Family 
Services Act and the Criminal Code to respond to the needs of 
children and youth and to see that offenders are held 
accountable. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we will monitor the outcome of efforts taken 
in other provinces to deal with the problem of the sexual 
exploitation of children on the streets of Canada’s cities. I 
assure you, Mr. Speaker, that should our continuing discussions 
with those most knowledgeable about these issues conclude that 
additional legislative reforms are needed, we will certainly give 
any such approach very serious consideration. 
 
As the government, we will continue to work in partnership 
with First Nations and Metis organizations, communities, and 
community agencies who are committed to addressing the 
issues in order to prevent the sexual exploitation of our children 
and youth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will be making several other minor 
amendments to The Child and Family Services Act. These 
amendments are of a housekeeping nature and do not change 
either the nature or intent of the Act. 
 



256 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1999 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The Child and Family 
Services Amendment Act, 1999. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, just a few comments before I move to adjourn debate 
regarding this piece of legislation that’s been introduced. 
 
I can you assure you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that my colleagues 
and I have a number of concerns in regards to the issues that the 
minister has raised — certainly the fact that children would be 
considered one of the most vulnerable and innocent of our 
society. And we certainly need to do everything within our 
power as legislators to reach out to young people, and in many 
cases even to families, and come to grips with some of the 
problems that face us. And certainly our Justice critic is looking 
forward to entering the debate as well as the Social Services 
critic in regards to this specific piece of legislation as they have 
some suggestions and ideas. 
 
And I’m pleased to hear that while the minister has already had 
groups that have been coming forward with the ideas and 
putting forward suggestions that are part of the piece of 
legislation before us, has left the door open for further 
suggestions, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that would enhance and 
indeed give the Department of Social Services not only the 
tools but an opportunity to determine and make sure that they 
are indeed meeting the needs of disadvantaged and abused 
children, while at the same time respecting the rights of 
families. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, certainly we look forward to getting into 
full debate, but in view of the fact that we have just nicely 
re-entered the Legislative Assembly, we have a number of Bills 
that have been certainly presented to us. And it’s appropriate for 
us, as well, as a caucus to — now that we have the Bills before 
us and have more of an opportunity to see what the government 
is proposing — to even take the time to discuss a number of the 
issues and get responses back from concerned groups in our 
communities whether they be in the large urban centres such as 
Regina or even outside of the city of Regina, to make sure that 
when we are debating fully this piece of legislation we are well 
informed and more better informed and more able to ask the 
type of questions and respond to determine exactly where we 
should be going with this piece of legislation, to see whether or 
not the amendments the minister is suggesting are appropriate 
or whether or not there should be some minor changes. 
 
And so in view of that fact, and as the process of ongoing 
discussion and debate, I would move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 2 — The Municipal Employees’ Pension 
Amendment Act, 1999 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise 
today to move second reading of The Municipal Employees’ 
Pension Amendment Act, 1999. 
 
The municipal employees’ pension plan provides retirement 
benefits to municipal workers, school board employees, and 

designated police officers and firefighters. Currently more than 
9,000 active and inactive members participate in the plan. 
About 2,700 members are currently receiving pensions from the 
plan. The plan is administered by the Public Employees 
Benefits Agency in Saskatchewan Finance. 
 
The proposed amendments to the Act will allow the plan to 
improve service to its members and comply with other statutes 
to which the plan is subject. In order to comply fully with the 
Income Tax Act of Canada, the plan will require employer 
contributions in an amount determined by an actuary, while at 
the same time maintaining the responsibility of employers to 
share equally in the funding of their employees’ pension 
benefits. Maximum contribution levels will be amended to 
ensure members do not make contributions to the plan from 
which they will derive no benefit. 
 
The definition of spouse under the Act will be amended to 
correspond to the definition of a spouse under the Income Tax 
Act of Canada. This will eliminate the potential for conflicts 
with Revenue Canada especially in the event of assignment of 
benefits to surviving spouses. Benefits under the plan will be 
improved by allowing members to continue to contribute to the 
plan during periods of maternity, parental and adoption leave as 
mandated by The Labour Standards Act. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are currently some members of the 
municipal employees’ pension plan with money standing to 
their account under a former pension plan. These employees 
will be given the option of transferring these monies to the new 
plan with approval of this Bill. The administration of the Act 
will be improved by updating the names of participating 
employers and organizations with representation on the 
commission contained in the Act. 
 
Finally the commission will no longer be required to report the 
names of members receiving a pension or the names of 
pensioners who died during the fiscal year in its annual report. 
This amendment protects members’ rights to privacy while not 
impairing the accuracy or relevancy of financial statements 
tabled before this legislature. 
 
These proposed amendments to The Municipal Employees’ 
Pension Act allow the plan to provide improved benefits while 
adhering to the scope and meaning of other legislation. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to 
amend The Municipal Employees’ Pension Act, 1999. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1515) 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I listened 
with interest to the Minister of Finance talking about this Act 
and the amendment to The Municipal Employees’ Pension Act. 
We know that there are a number of 9,000 individuals who are 
affected by this Act with 2,700 active ones at this time. And 
anything that will improve service and added benefits to 
employees without costing additional money is something that 
everyone is interested in. 
 
I also noted with interest that Revenue Canada is involved and 



March 25, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 257 

I’m sure that again that’s something that employees are going to 
be interested in as it will affect their future. 
 
The amendment that will recommend removing names of the 
employees is something that I imagine that you’ve explored 
with the people that will be affected. But as official opposition 
we know that it is our responsibility to make sure that we check 
with everyone and make sure that this is something that’s going 
to benefit everyone. So I ask then that we adjourn debate at this 
time. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 19—The Superannuation (Supplementary 
Provisions) Amendment Act, 1999 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I rise 
today to move second reading of The Superannuation 
(Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 1999. This Act 
pertains to the following defined benefit pension plans: the 
liquor board superannuation plan; the Power Corporation 
superannuation plan; the Workers’ Compensation Board 
superannuation plan; and the public service superannuation 
plan, which encompasses the Anti-TB league superannuation 
plan, and the Saskatchewan Transportation Company 
superannuation plan. That’s a number of superannuation plans, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And there are approximately 5,200 active and inactive members 
participating in these pension plans. Each of those plans has a 
board that oversees the operations of the plan. Except for the 
SaskPower superannuation plan, the defined benefit plans are 
administered by the Public Employees Benefits Agency in 
Saskatchewan Finance. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the proposed amendments to The 
Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Act, are intended 
to clarify certain provisions, remove redundant provisions in the 
legislation, and comply with the federal Income Tax Act. 
 
The definition of spouse under the Act will be amended to 
correspond to the definition of spouse under the Income Tax 
Act of Canada. This is consistent with other pension statutes. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the provision to deem past service in the 
municipal justice system as provincial service will be repealed 
because all persons to whom this section applied have accessed 
the benefit available to them and there are no other employees 
who can benefit from this provision. 
 
To comply with the Income Tax Act of Canada, Mr. Speaker, 
the refund of contributions to members in excess of Revenue 
Canada maximums will now be given without interest. The 
opportunity to retire early due to ill health will be clarified in 
the Act. The option to have dependants as joint annuitants will 
be eliminated and the practice of paying refunds on an 
instalment basis will cease. 
 
Certain provisions pertaining to restricted early retirement need 
to be clarified for the purpose of paying benefits promised to 
members under the legislation. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the amendments being proposed to the Act 

serve the purposes of clarifying plan benefits for members 
while adhering to the scope and meaning of other legislation. 
 
So with that, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 
Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Act, 1999. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I can hardly 
contain my excitement about speaking to this superannuation 
plan supplementary provision Act amendment, Bill No. 19. But 
when I recognized there was 5,200 people that this involves I 
guess there was a large number of people out there who will 
have a direct benefit and this will impact them directly. 
 
Removing redundancy and working with Revenue Canada is 
always a large step, so I imagine that’s taken a considerable 
amount of work to get this Bill this far. But I heard that there 
was going to be . . . there would be without . . . some refunds 
would be given without interest, and of course that’s something 
that will affect people and they’ll probably have a right to give 
us their opinions on that. A refund will no longer be refunds by 
instalments, and I guess that we’ll have to ask the minister on 
what basis that was done. 
 
So I guess at this moment then we’ll ask if we adjourn debate 
on this Bill and come back to it later. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 14  The Urban Municipality 
Amendment Act, 1999 

 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, Bill No. 14 amends The Urban Municipality Act, 
1984. Bill 14 introduces amendments to adjust the property 
assessment and assessment appeals processes to make 
Saskatchewan’s system more equitable and more effective. It 
addresses a number of concerns raised by appellants and others 
over the past two years. 
 
A review of the 1997 reassessment experience has been 
completed as well as a review of statutory property tax 
exemptions. These reviews and consultations with stakeholders 
such as the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association, 
the Saskatchewan School Trustees Association, the Department 
of Education, and the Saskatchewan Municipal Board point to a 
need for a change. 
 
The government will be introducing further amendments to The 
Urban Municipality Act, 1984 in the subsequent session of the 
legislature. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the changes proposed in this Bill are ones 
that need to proceed now. They include adjustments and new 
provisions that will streamline the process for assessment 
appeals. These amendments come as a result of the 
government’s ongoing commitment to ensure that our systems 
work for people as well for municipalities. 
 
We are pleased to provide a number of improvements to the 
existing system. As our communities change, so does the need 
to continually improve the systems which help our communities 



258 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1999 

stay strong. Constant improvement of our legislation and urban 
municipal system is an imperative that the Government of 
Saskatchewan has recognized and responded to. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Each year administrative and 
operational issues are brought to our attention by municipal 
administrations, local government associations, other 
stakeholders, and my own department staff. The amendments 
proposed in this Bill contain changes to some administrative 
procedures and are in keeping with our ongoing efforts to 
ensure Saskatchewan citizens have user-friendly legislation and 
municipal administrative practices. 
 
This Bill helps to ensure that the process of completing property 
assessments is transparent and accessible to the property owner. 
Further, it ensures that the property owner is in the know and 
treated fairly throughout the appeal process. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I would like now to briefly describe the key provisions 
of this Bill. 
 
First, the addition of a new provision allowing assessment 
appeals on like properties in multiple jurisdictions to be 
consolidated and heard directly by the appeal board. This will 
allow for more expedient and consistent appeal decisions. 
Examples of this would be railroads and oil companies and 
elevator companies that have properties assessed in a large 
number of municipalities throughout the province and will 
relieve them of the responsibility of the local appeal in each and 
every case. 
 
Second, we are adding new provisions allowing complex 
commercial or industrial appeals to be heard directly by the 
appeal board when the appellant, the board of revision, and the 
municipality agree. This provision could remove some of the 
burden of very complicated appeals from the boards of revision 
and streamline the administrative process. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the third provision I wish to mention 
clarifies the acceptable methods for delivery of notice of appeal 
available to an appellant and provides several reasonable 
alternatives for delivery of notice. 
 
Fourth, the addition of provisions requiring fair and just 
assessments for lands and improvements within school 
divisions as well as within municipalities addresses a very 
important equity issue. The current Act requires equity among 
assessments within a municipality. These provisions propose to 
extend the requirement for equitable assessment to school 
divisions, or a school division which may be part of a 
municipality. These changes call for a greater amount of 
co-operation and in some cases collaboration between city 
assessment staff and the Saskatchewan Assessment 
Management Agency. 
 
In some cities where school and municipal boundaries are not 
coterminous, assessment methods will also have to be reviewed 
to be consistent with the new provisions. For these reasons we 
have proposed that these provisions not come into effect until 
the date of the next reassessment, January 1, 2001. They will 
have no effect on appeals currently in progress. 
 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Bill also includes a fifth provision that 
removes all potential perceptions of bias in the constitution of 
local boards of revision. The committee examining the 1997 
reassessment experience identified a concern that appellants to 
local boards of revision had a perception of bias when members 
of the council or school board were also members of the board 
of revision. 
 
This Bill recognizes that there is no statutory requirement for a 
council to be represented on the board of revision. To eliminate 
any possible bias or any perception of bias, council or school 
board members should not be eligible to sit as members. This 
provision is also consistent with the Supreme Court decision 
which called into question the institutional independence of 
boards of revision when council members serve on the board. 
 
An amendment has been introduced, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
providing the Saskatchewan Municipal Board with some 
discretionary power to proceed with an appeal where there has 
been substantive but imperfect compliance with procedure. This 
amendment responds to concerns expressed regarding what may 
seem an onerous and complex system of appeals, particularly 
for less knowledgeable applicants. 
 
This amendment should give appellants full assurance that no 
minor procedural detail will stand in the way of their appeal 
moving forward or erode their appeal rights. 
 
Another amendment proposed in this Bill clarifies that all 
parties to an appeal have equal duty to file written materials 10 
days prior to a board of revision hearing. This includes the 
Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency, and the 
assessor in the case of an urban municipality which completes 
its own assessments. 
 
In addition, appellants will be assured of receiving assessment 
field sheets and an explanation of their assessment no later than 
this time, that is 10 days prior to the appeal. 
 
This Bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker, responds to three significant 
concerns. One, equitable assessment of similar properties within 
both municipal and school divisions; secondly, the appeal 
process regarding appeals of assessment on like properties in 
multiple jurisdictions and regarding complex commercial or 
industrial appeals on property; and finally, the accessibility and 
transparency both of the information and process regarding 
assessment appeals, helping to make the appeal process easier 
to use. 
 
The provisions enunciated in this Bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
address all of these concerns. These provisions ensure that 
property owners, municipalities, and school divisions receive 
fair treatment and are part of a transparent and equitable process 
in order that all may have confidence in the system. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, these amendments should be supported by 
all members of the legislature. They are in the best interests of 
municipalities, their communities, and all Saskatchewan 
residents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I therefore move second reading of Bill No. 14, 
The Urban Municipality Amendment Act, 1999. Thank you. 
 



March 25, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 259 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, it’s very interesting and timely that the urban 
municipalities Act is indeed amended, especially following all 
the difficulties that this province experienced in the latest 
assessment and renewal process. 
 
The minister mentions that this is a part step in terms of 
addressing some of the issues and concerns that were raised by 
property owners, municipal governments, school boards, and 
many people who felt that the process was flawed in many 
areas. I certainly think that we as the official opposition would 
share those concerns about the need for many amendments to 
make the process fairer, more transparent, more efficient. 
 
I’m a little concerned, however, that when the minister says this 
is only the first step, that perhaps the other steps have to be 
taken into account as well because we don’t want to get into a 
situation where all of this is happening at the eleventh hour, and 
as a result many inconveniences and mistakes are made. 
 
I think it’s very important that the whole process is improved, 
and that when the process fails the property owners or indeed 
the municipal authorities, that the system of appeal and 
mitigating some of the wrongful decisions that potentially fall 
into the system is streamlined so that it’s very user-friendly. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the official opposition has begun to 
circulate this legislation to people that have asked to be 
consulted on the process, and we certainly look forward to their 
comments and their reflections as to if this legislation meets the 
needs that have been expressed and the concerns that have been 
expressed. And we look forward to their input following this 
consultation process. 
 
And so as a result, while we await that information, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I move that we adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(1530) 
 
Bill No. 3 — The Intestate Succession Amendment Act, 1999 

/Loi de 1999 modifiant la Loi de 1996 sur les successions 
non testamentaires 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of The Intestate Succession Amendment Act, 
1999. 
 
The Intestate Succession Act sets out the rules for distributing 
the estate of someone who dies without a will. 
 
In 1960 the Act introduced for the first time a preferential share 
for the surviving spouse. When the Act was amended in 1978 to 
increase that preferential share, it did not clearly reflect the 
entitlement to the preferential share. The Act states that where a 
person dies without a will prior to 1978, the preferential share is 
$10,000. In fact, that preferential share only applies if the 
person died after July 1, 1960, and before 1978. 
 
The amendment before us today reflects this. It is important to 

note that the amendment does not change the law. Rather it will 
eliminate confusion by ensuring that the law is accurately 
reflected in the current Act. The amendment will help prevent 
mistakes in determining the beneficiaries of old estates. The 
amendment is made in response to requests by lawyers who 
specialize in wills and estates. 
 
I move second reading of An Act to amend The Intestate 
Succession Act, 1996. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you again, Mr. Speaker. This Bill No. 3, 
The Intestate Succession Amendment Act, 1999 seems like to 
be a small, sometimes maybe not that an important Act. But 
when we look at it and understand that it could potentially 
affect all of us in this room at some time or some people that we 
know and love, we know that it’s something that we should be 
looking at and make sure that it’s something that will benefit 
everyone in the province. 
 
I understand that the government has done their work on this, 
and lawyers that have been working on it have of course the 
first-hand experience that they need. But at the same time, 
there’s always individuals out there who have specific cases and 
concerns, and we again would like an opportunity to discuss 
these with them before we move on with this Bill so I request 
that we adjourn debate on this Bill at this time. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 4 — The Securities Amendment Act, 1999 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m pleased to rise 
today to move second reading of The Securities Amendment 
Act, 1999. 
 
The principal reason for this Bill is to extend the time periods 
associated with takeover bids and issuer bids. Rules governing 
takeover bids give shareholders 21 days to deposit their shares 
in response to a bid. That time period is often not long enough 
for the target company to find other bidders in order to 
maximize the value of its shares. Consequently there have been 
applications to security commissions to extend the 21-day time 
period. The limited time period has also led to a growth in 
shareholders’ rights plans, for example, poison pills, which 
have the stated objective of giving the directors of the target 
company more time to evaluate the bids and solicit, consider, 
and negotiate alternatives. 
 
Industry representatives have expressed concerns that these 
plans are unwarranted, defensive tactics that have the effect of 
entrenching the management of the target company. An 
industry committee chaired by Adam Zimmerman, the 
Zimmerman committee, studied these issues and proposed the 
changes outlined in the legislation. This committee consulted 
widely with many companies and agencies which gave general 
support for the amendments proposed. These amendments are 
part of a national initiative undertaken by all provinces to 
improve the takeover bid process. 
 
In summary, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with these amendments 
shareholders will have a longer time period in which to respond 



260 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1999 

to a bid and an option for shares is more likely to develop 
enhancing share value. In addition it is expected that these 
changes will slow or halt the growth of so-called poison pill 
arrangements. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move second reading of 
An Act to amend The Securities Act, 1988. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m glad 
to have the opportunity to speak to The Securities Amendment 
Act, 1999. And from some of the minister’s comments I think 
that we find them favourable, but at this time we are also 
checking with groups within the province and shareholders of 
companies that would be affected by this amendment. And 
we’ll speak more on the issue at a later date. 
 
So at this time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would move to adjourn 
this Bill. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 15 — The University of Regina 
Amendment Act, 1999 

 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I ask 
for the support of the legislature for a request from the 
University of Regina to amend The University of Regina Act. 
 
The university has requested two amendments: one concerning 
its borrowing authority and one regarding parking control. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, with respect to the university borrowing 
authority, the purpose of the amendment is to clarify the 
approval process required for the university to incur overdrafts 
for short-term borrowing. 
 
The Provincial Auditor is of the view that the university 
requires an order in council to approve overdraft borrowing. 
The University of Regina has therefore requested that the Act 
be amended to clarify the board’s authority. This situation does 
not exist at The University of Saskatchewan because the 
University of Saskatchewan Act has an overriding subsection 
which applies specifically to short-term borrowing. 
 
What the University of Regina is requesting is essentially the 
same subsection in its Act. The University of Regina does not 
now have the right or authority under the Act to make the 
bylaws concerning parking on the university’s lands. The right 
is vested in the Wascana Centre Authority. 
 
Although the Wascana Centre Authority has delegated 
enforcement powers to the university, this has created 
administrative difficulties for both the university and the 
Authority. The university is requesting that The University of 
Regina Act be amended to vest in the university, the right and 
ability to make bylaws regarding parking control. 
 
This is similar to the rights vested in the University of 
Saskatchewan under the provisions of its enabling legislation. 
Accordingly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are proposing The 
University of Regina Amendment Act, 1999, and consequential 
amendment to The Wascana Centre Act. 
 
These amendments will give the University of Regina 
essentially the same rights as the University of Saskatchewan 

enjoys in incurring overdraft borrowing and in making bylaws 
regarding parking control. We continue to encourage the 
universities in our province to revitalize, to become more 
streamlined and efficient. The proposed amendments will assist 
in that effort. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I ask for the support again of the 
legislature for the proposed amendment to The University of 
Regina Act and the consequential amendments to The Wascana 
Centre Act. 
 
And therefore, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move second reading of 
Bill No. 15, The University of Regina Amendment Act, 1999. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. From the 
minister’s comments this afternoon, any time we can simplify 
administration for any part of any part of government, I think 
we would be in favour of that, and we’re also standardizing the 
U of S with the University of Regina. 
 
We still would like to have time to take a look, and in a little 
more depth look into the changes here. So at this time, I would 
like to adjourn, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 5  The Municipal Hail Insurance 
Amendment Act, 1999 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am pleased to rise 
today to move second reading of The Municipal Hail Insurance 
Amendment Act, 1999. The present Act describes the 
framework for the Saskatchewan Municipal Hail Insurance 
Association. 
 
This is a body corporate that provides farmers throughout 
Saskatchewan with a minimum level of insurance against hail 
damage to crops. Through a consultative process the 
Saskatchewan Municipal Hail Association has requested 
amendments that will update the current Act and allow for 
additional flexibility when change is required in the future. 
 
For instance, the association advised us that the requirement to 
name a person to represent a claimant who is within four miles 
of the crop damage is antiquated. Removing this requirement 
will allow claimants to select the most appropriate 
representative no matter what the geographic proximity. 
 
The Act currently requires that notification of a claim for 
insurance be filed no later than October 15 of any crop year. 
The amendment will extend the time when notification can be 
filed to October 31 of the crop year. 
 
As well, moving numbers from legislation into regulation will 
allow for changes on a more timely basis. The amounts that will 
be set out in regulations include the amount that the association 
may invest in its wholly owned subsidiary, the maximum 
amount of basic coverage, and the maximum amount of extra 
coverage. The current figures will appear in regulations. 
 
To summarize, Mr. Speaker, the amendments allow for changes 



March 25, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 261 

to dollar amounts if and when a need arises, as well as updating 
the current Act. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to 
amend The Municipal Hail Insurance Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I am 
pleased to speak briefly on this proposed legislation and in 
listening to the minister, I think it’s a very positive sign that this 
legislation was requested by the association that’s been affected 
mostly by it. And we think that when associations come 
forward requesting changes to legislation that’s governing 
them, it’s a very positive sign if the government responds in an 
appropriate way and certainly meeting the needs that the 
requests were originated on. 
 
I also note that the minister indicates that a part of this 
legislation is housekeeping in nature to bring the legislation up 
to the realities of the current situation. I heard the minister say 
that some of the fees, etc., are going to be moved from the Act 
itself to regulations. And while I think that in some instances 
that type of a move is practical, we also always are very 
concerned when things are moved from legislation to 
regulations because it can allow for changes to the effect of the 
legislation without having it debated in this Assembly. 
 
And so we have some concerns about that. And as well we are 
consulting with the association involved and we look forward to 
their input and comments on the legislation, if it meets the 
requests that they had expressed and the concerns that they had 
expressed. 
 
So therefore at this time while we’re awaiting feedback from 
the association I move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(1545) 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, please to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Ms. Lorje: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I would like to 
draw your attention and the attention of all my colleagues in the 
House on both sides to the presence of two very distinguished 
gentlemen in the Speaker’s gallery. 
 
Dr. Gordon Barnhart, I’m sure is known to many of you, a 
former Clerk in this Assembly and also a Clerk in the Senate in 
Ottawa. Dr. Asit Sarkar may not be so well-known to many of 
you, but to anyone from Saskatoon he is extremely well-known 
through his extremely diligent work with the College of 
Commerce, and most particularly, most recently, that I’ve had 
contact with Dr. Sarkar, with the Raj Manek Memorial Dinner. 
 
Both these gentlemen are very involved in promoting 

democracy, both here in Canada and around the world, most 
recently in the USSR (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) and, 
as my colleague from Regina Northeast will attest, also in 
Vietnam. 
 
The work that they are doing both for commerce and for 
democracy is extremely important and relevant and ensures that 
the good name of Saskatchewan on a non-partisan basis is 
carried throughout the world. 
 
I would ask all my colleagues to join in welcoming these two 
gentlemen. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 18  The Constitutional Questions 
Amendment Act, 1999 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of The Constitutional Questions Amendment 
Act, 1999. This Bill provides for an amendment to ensure that 
the office of the Attorney General of Saskatchewan has due 
notice of all constitutionally based matters before the courts in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Notice is provided to the Attorney General pursuant to section 
8(7) of the Act so a decision may be made as to whether it is 
appropriate for the Attorney General to appear on behalf of the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
The amendment is required to address the concern that the 
amendments made in The Interpretation Act, 1995 may have 
unintentionally narrowed the operation of the term “regulation” 
and therefore the scope of application of The Constitutional 
Questions Act. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is desirable that we address this concern 
with the term “regulation” and ensure that the desired broader 
definition of “law” is utilized under the Act. To do this, the Act 
is amended to directly define law as it is defined in The 
Interpretation Act, 1995 and the Interpretation Act of Canada, 
rather than through reference to The Regulations Act, 1989. By 
defining the term law specifically, the legal interpretation issue 
is avoided and the full scope of the phrase law can be utilized. 
 
There is an argument that without this amendment, 
constitutional challenges to matters such as bylaws or other 
secondary legislative instruments may have been outside the 
scope of the notice provision under The Constitutional 
Questions Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would note that members of the Saskatchewan 
legal community have as a matter of practice provided this 
notice to the Attorney General’s office with respect to all such 
constitutional matters. 
 
This amendment will therefore reinforce an existing practice 
and ensure that the legally required notice is provided in a way 
that will ensure that the constitutional interests of the people of 
Saskatchewan will remain protected in all matters before the 
Saskatchewan courts. 



262 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1999 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of an Act to amend The 
Constitutional Questions Act. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This 
constitutional amendments Act is something that I would 
imagine most of my constituents won’t feel it’s going to affect 
their life greatly at this time. But then when we stop and think 
that the constitution is of course the foundation of all our lives, 
we have to make sure that the people that are dealing with it — 
the lawyers — are happy with it. 
 
I understand from the Minister of Justice that the lawyers are 
already doing what this amendment is suggesting be done; it’s 
just clarifying it within the legal laws . . . legal terms. So if they 
are happy with it — and I’m sure they’ll be contacting us if 
they’re not — then I imagine it would pass on. But at this time 
we’d like to just adjourn this Bill. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 20 — The Business Corporations 
Amendment Act, 1999 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I’m pleased to rise today to move second 
reading of The Business Corporations Amendment Act, 1999. 
 
The purpose of these amendments is to keep our legislation 
current by dealing with specific issues that have arisen from 
time to time in the analysis and application of the existing Act. 
 
The three main reasons for the amendments are: to address 
specific outstanding legal concerns, to allow for electronic 
communications, and to satisfy the requirements of the 
agreement on internal trade. 
 
Two specific legal concerns have arisen under the current Act. 
First is clarification of how consent to acting as a director takes 
place. Second is the rules about disclosure of financial 
assistance from corporations to employees. 
 
With respect to acting as a director, generally an individual 
cannot be appointed as a director of a corporation without his or 
her consent. Whether an individual has consented to act as a 
director is a question of fact to be determined in each case. The 
amendments will clarify that for the election or appointment of 
a director to be effective, an individual must either: (a) consent 
in writing on or within 10 days after the date of the election or 
appointment; (b) be in attendance at a meeting where the 
election took place and not refuse to accept; or (c) act in the 
capacity of a director after an appointment. 
 
The effect of the amendments will be to shift the onus to the 
person making the assertion that a director has in fact been 
appointed. 
 
The second area of legal amendments is the requirement that 
financial assistance from a corporation to employees be subject 
to specific disclosure provisions. Previous versions of the Act 
contained an exemption from the disclosure of financial 
assistance to employees for living accommodations and for 
purchase of shares held by a trustee. These amendments will 
reinstate those exemptions. 
 

Electronic communications are an increasingly important part 
of our businesses and marketplaces. These amendments in this 
area will make it easier to do business in Saskatchewan by 
allowing the electronic transmission of documentation to 
directors and shareholders and by setting out methods to 
conduct electronic meetings of shareholders. Further details of 
how these meetings and communications will take place will be 
set out in the regulations to the Act. 
 
The Agreement on Internal Trade was developed to reduce and 
eliminate to the extent possible, barriers to the free movement 
of persons, goods, services, and investments within Canada and 
to establish an open, efficient, and stable domestic market. The 
parties recognize and agreed that enhancing trade and mobility 
within Canada would contribute to the attainment of this goal. 
 
In keeping with that agreement the following amendments 
appear in this Bill — companies who are licensed under either 
The Vehicle Administration Act or the Motor Vehicle Transport 
Act of Canada will no longer be deemed to be carrying on 
business in Saskatchewan. As well corporations from other 
jurisdictions with a director or officer resident in Saskatchewan 
will not be required to file a power of attorney within 
Saskatchewan. 
 
To summarize, Mr. Speaker, these amendments will address 
legal concerns, provide for electronic communications, and 
further implement the Agreement on Internal Trade. 
 
I move second reading of an Act to amend The Business 
Corporations Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, this Bill at first sight has many parts to it and I 
believe will affect many people within the province. A number 
of the comments made by the minister, I think, a number of the 
changes are probably for the good. I think once again though 
my concern, and I know of my seatmates, the concern that we 
have had in the past and I believe it’s going to come into effect 
here, is that we’re leaving a number of things to regulation 
again. And we are not allowed to debate them in this House; 
they will automatically be brought in by the government. So I 
guess at first sight that would be one of our main concerns. We 
will have others at a later date after we’ve checked with 
members of the public. So at this time I would like to adjourn. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 7 — The Prairie Agricultural 
Machinery Institute Act, 1999 

 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, at the end of my remarks I will move 
second reading of The Prairie Agricultural Machinery Institute 
Act, 1999. As well as, we’ll be asking for a recommendation for 
consideration of the Assembly, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Prairie Agricultural Machinery Institute Act was first 
passed in September of 1974. The Act allowed for the creation 
of the Prairie Agricultural Machinery Institute which opened on 
April 1, of 1975. In 1971 the Royal Commission on Farm 



March 25, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 263 

Machinery had recommended the establishment of a central 
agency for testing and evaluation of farm machinery. As well 
surveys conducted provided overwhelming support for farm 
machinery testing. 
 
Then in 1972 a committee composed of representatives from 
the three Prairie provinces was established to examine the 
concept of a machinery institute. This group was called the 
interprovincial study committee for a proposed prairie 
agricultural machinery institute for the provinces of Alberta, 
Manitoba, and for Saskatchewan. This committee’s 
recommendation established a Prairie Agricultural Machinery 
Institute known as PAMI. 
 
In ’74, Saskatchewan passed legislation, the PAMI Act, to 
create PAMI. The provinces of Alberta, Manitoba participated 
in PAMI to an interprovincial agreement. Field offices were 
located in Humboldt, Saskatchewan; Portage la Prairie, 
Manitoba; and Lethbridge, Alberta. The head office was located 
and still is located in Humboldt, Saskatchewan. 
 
PAMI conducted independent testing on farm machinery and 
issued an independent evaluation report on each machine tested. 
In 1988, effective March 31, Alberta withdrew from PAMI 
agreement leaving Saskatchewan and Manitoba to continue 
operations. At that time in 1988, PAMI’s budget was composed 
of about 75 per cent government grants and 25 per cent 
fee-for-service operations. Effective April 1, 1999, PAMI enters 
its 25th year of operation. 
 
Today, although PAMI still receives some government funding, 
75 per cent of its budget is earned from fee-for-service contract 
work for agriculture and industry. Today PAMI has a staff of 30 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to emphasize the importance 
of PAMI to Saskatchewan’s agricultural community and the 
agricultural industry of western Canada. According to a recent 
Saskatchewan Research Council study, the agricultural 
machinery sector of Saskatchewan generates about $559 million 
in domestic and export sales. The study says the agricultural 
machinery sector employs about 5,500 Saskatchewan residents. 
 
PAMI has worked and collaborated with and gained confidence 
of the universities, various farmers, farm organizations, and a 
group representing physical and challenged and mentally and 
physically handicapped farmers. 
 
(1600) 
 
PAMI has listened to the ideas and suggestions these groups 
have made for modification and adaptation to equipment. The 
ideas have made various types of farm equipment more usable. 
As well as modifications and adaptations, PAMI has 
contributed to the design of new equipment. One example is 
PAMI’s response to public concerns about manure management 
in livestock operations. 
 
To ensure that Saskatchewan is able to take advantage of 
diversification opportunities in livestock sector and to ensure 
the environmental and aesthetic concerns are addressed, PAMI 
has been very involved in the development of technology 
related to manure management, particularly with respect to hog 

operations. For example, PAMI has developed specific 
equipment related to the storage of hog manure and its 
distribution as fertilizer. Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is important 
because hog manure is a resource opportunity and can be used 
as fertilizer in this province. 
 
PAMI has developed methods of handling manure to reduce its 
odour. PAMI has developed direct injection and pipelining 
equipment, and PAMI has developed the most effective piece of 
equipment called a straw cannon. It chops barley straw and 
blows it out into manure lagoons. This helps to prevent the 
odour. 
 
Members of Saskatchewan’s media can testify to the 
effectiveness of this technology because several reporters and 
editors attended the 1997 odour control tour of PAMI and 
enjoyed a barbecue at the lagoon site. The media reported that 
PAMI’s technology works. That technology that may one day 
be sold to other countries; technology that’s helping to diversify 
the agriculture economy. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the last 25 years, PAMI has expanded 
and evolved. It has a national reputation. Last fall PAMI was 
hired by the federal department of national defence. PAMI was 
asked to conduct a review and examination of agricultural 
equipment to be adapted to the mine sweeping, for removing 
mines from the minefields found around the world. 
 
The Department of Defence approached PAMI because of 
PAMI’s broad knowledge of agricultural equipment and its 
application — not just as agricultural equipment. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I feel that citizens of Saskatchewan can take great 
pride in knowing that PAMI is involved in helping to rid the 
world of land mines of . . . a major international issue. At the 
same time, however, PAMI continues to work for prairie 
farmers by developing or modifying equipment that will assist 
farmers in diversifying their operations. 
 
For example, Mr. Deputy Speaker, PAMI has recently awarded 
funds from Saskatchewan Agriculture Development Fund, or 
ADF, for two projects. The first project is to produce an 
instructional guide so that Saskatchewan herb and spice farmers 
can convert their older, small field cultivators to . . . (inaudible) 
. . . crop use. Funding for this project from ADF amounts to 
$13,000. 
 
The second project will examine dockage for cleaners to add 
value to grain. The ADF funding for the project is $58,000. 
PAMI will pre-clean performance requirements and compare 
operating characteristics among three pre-cleaners. Results of 
this project will assist prairie farmers by determining which 
system works best to reduce dockage before taking the grain to 
the elevator or the terminals. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Saskatchewan Agriculture 
Development Fund is proud to work with PAMI and to assist 
the development of equipment that helps Saskatchewan 
producers. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, PAMI has outgrown its legislation. After 
examination and evolution over a 25-year period, it’s time to 
modernize the PAMI Act. It is necessary to amend the Act in 
order to reflect the scope of PAMI’s work as it moves to the 



264 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1999 

21st century. 
 
As I mentioned, PAMI’s operating budget is now composed 
primarily of fees received for service and PAMI’s services has 
evolved. While PAMI continues to evaluate farm machinery 
and issue reports about it, PAMI also assists and advises private 
industry on the development of agricultural machinery. 
 
As we all know, Saskatchewan’s agriculture implement 
manufacturing sector is one of the greatest diversification 
success stories for agricultural industry. As mentioned earlier, 
PAMI has been a major contributor to the success of the 
agriculture machinery sector in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, since 1988 PAMI’s work and budget has 
doubled. Where PAMI’s budget was about 2 million in 1988, its 
budget is now 4 million, with 75 per cent of the 4 million 
derived from fee for service. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Act has now been clear in terms of 
PAMI’s working outside the agricultural sector. In fact, it is 
questionable if PAMI is allowed under the Act to venue outside 
the sphere of strictly agricultural work. 
 
Therefore we have clarified this term of PAMI’s operation so 
that PAMI is able to work outside the parameters of the 
agricultural industry. The proposed amendments will allow 
PAMI to conduct activities involving mechanization, electronic 
instrumentation, and related research and development for 
value-added agriculture in the food industry. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is also necessary to broaden the scope of 
the Act to guide copyright, trademark, and industry design 
concerns that affect PAMI. The proposed amendment will allow 
PAMI to borrow funds or to establish a line of credit to meet the 
cash flow demands inherited in the activities of the institute. 
The amendment will allow PAMI to build on its technical 
capabilities to create additional financial stability for the 
organization as the result of increased service fees received and 
to access technologies from other industry. 
 
Finally, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the language and terminology of 
PAMI is outdated. Several pieces of legislation, legislation 
which affect the PAMI Act and which is referred to as the 
PAMI Act, have already been amended and updated. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, The Prairie Agricultural Machinery 
Institute Act was introduced by this government . . . by the 
government of the day, and I am pleased today to stand with the 
NDP government and to introduce amendments to this Act. The 
amendments proposed to the Act here today will provide an 
opportunity for PAMI to build on the success of its last 25 
years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the proposed amendments of legislation will allow 
PAMI to continue to contribute to the economic diversification 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the members of the 
Legislative Assembly and I encourage you to adopt these 
amendments on The Prairie Agricultural Machinery Institute 
Act, 1999, and therefore move The Prairie Agricultural 
Machinery Institute Act, 1999, to be read the second time. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I wish to announce to the Assembly the 
receipt of Royal Recommendation on the following Bill which 
was not in time to appear on the order paper. Therefore I beg to 
inform the Assembly that His Honour, the Lieutenant Governor, 
having been informed of the subject matter of Bill No. 7, The 
Prairie Agricultural Machinery Institute Act, 1999, recommends 
it be the consideration of the Assembly. Thank you, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — The recommendation has 
been received. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s with 
great pleasure that I rise to speak on this proposed legislation. 
PAMI, over the last 25 years, has been an institution in our part 
of the province that has been a very important. 
 
I recall with a great deal of interest 25 years ago when the 
institute was first formed and the great deal of optimism that 
surrounded its announcement of the three prairie provinces 
working together, and that agricultural machinery was going to 
be evaluated so that the farm community could have an 
independent analysis as to the claims that are made in terms of 
the working efficiencies and reliability of machinery. 
 
Certainly in our corner of the world, in the Englefeld’s and St, 
Brieux’s, and Annaheim’s of the world, there’s a great and very 
important agricultural manufacturing, equipment manufacturing 
industry. And I know that these institutions and agencies rely 
very much on the work and the studies that PAMI can and has 
done over the years. And so I think it is very fitting that we 
acknowledge and congratulate PAMI on 25 years of service, not 
only to this province but to the agricultural community in the 
Prairie provinces. 
 
It also is very true that the scope and the range of PAMI’s 
activities have expanded over the years, and I think it is 
appropriate that the government indeed look at updating the 
mandate and legislation that operates the mandate so that PAMI 
can indeed expand its horizons and take opportunities from its 
expertise that will benefit not only Saskatchewan but the Prairie 
provinces as well. 
 
And so we are very hopeful and quite confident that the 
legislative changes that are proposed in this legislation are 
going to be in the best interests of PAMI and the agricultural 
testing sector in a general rule. 
 
However, we want to again consult with some of the people that 
have been involved with PAMI to see if there are perhaps 
further improvements or enhancements that can be made that 
we perhaps will be able to suggest when the appropriate time 
comes forward. 
 
And so with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and ending on a 
congratulatory note for PAMI at 25 years of service, we would 
ask to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
 



March 25, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 265 

Bill No. 8 — The Assessment Management 
Agency Amendment Act, 1999 

 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, 
Bill No. 8 amends The Assessment Management Agency Act. 
The Act establishes the Saskatchewan Assessment Management 
Agency. The Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency 
is responsible for preparing property assessments, and in the 
case of municipalities that employ assessment staff, overseeing 
the process. 
 
The Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency is also 
delegated responsibility for determining assessment policies for 
Saskatchewan through its assessment manuals. In co-operation 
with the local government associations and other stakeholders, a 
review of the 1997 reassessment experience has been 
undertaken. After extensive consultations with the stakeholders 
including the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association, 
the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities, the 
Saskatchewan School Trustees Association, the Department of 
Education, the Saskatchewan Municipal Board and the 
Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency itself, the 
government proposes, as a matter of some urgency, the 
introduction of this Bill to amend the Saskatchewan Assessment 
Management Agency Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the changes proposed in this Bill are pressing and 
include adjustments to the mandate of the Saskatchewan 
Assessment Management Agency and the timetable for the next 
provincial reassessment. 
 
These amendments come as a result of government’s ongoing 
commitment to ensure that our systems work for people, for 
industry, for communities, and municipalities. We are pleased 
to provide a number of improvements to the existing assessment 
management system. As our communities change, there is a 
need to continually improve the systems which help our 
communities stay strong. 
 
Constant improvement of our legislation and assessment and 
property tax systems is an imperative that the Government of 
Saskatchewan has recognized and has responded to. All of the 
changes in this Bill are in keeping with our ongoing efforts to 
ensure that Saskatchewan citizens have user-friendly legislation 
and fair and up-to-date assessment management practices. 
 
The changes, Mr. Speaker, proposed in this Bill are of 
significance to property owners who look to government not 
only to ensure a fair and just system but to balance the interests 
of the competing stakeholders. And, Mr. Speaker, this 
government has done that in these amendments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like now to briefly describe some of the 
key provisions in the Bill. First the Bill introduces a new 
provision adding a definition for the term “base date”. It also 
provides authority to set limits by regulation on the 
Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency’s discretion to 
choose the date that the property values used in a revaluation 
are to reflect. 
 
It is desirable and in the public interest for the government to be 
able to set limitations by regulation on the Saskatchewan 
Assessment Management Agency’s discretion in setting this 

date in relation to when a reassessment occurs since it has a 
direct impact on the time available to both local and provincial 
governments for tax policy analysis and decisions and also 
affects when preliminary assessments are available for this 
purpose. 
 
In order to resolve a potential conflict of interest, this Bill 
introduces a new provision removing participation by the 
Saskatchewan Municipal Board in the Assessment Management 
Agency’s technical advisory committee. The Saskatchewan 
Municipal Board requested that it be removed from this 
committee to avoid a potential conflict of interest with its role 
as the assessment appeal board. The Saskatchewan Municipal 
Board feels that participation in the process of developing 
assessment policies and methods conflicts with its role as the 
final appeal body. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while the focus of the Saskatchewan Assessment 
Management Agency’s mandate on assessment is implicit in the 
current Act, this Bill focuses the Saskatchewan Assessment 
Management Agency’s activities explicitly and more clearly on 
assessment and places the burden of the preparation of taxation 
policy, analysis of taxation shift, or the preparation of 
information on procedures for assessment appeals where it 
belongs — in government. 
 
The Bill achieves this by requiring the Assessment 
Management Agency to protect assessment shifts arising from 
changes in assessment rules and by removing references to 
researching shifts in taxation. This is in line with the division of 
responsibilities that evolved for the 1997 reassessment. 
 
(1615) 
 
For clarity of purpose and in the public interest, this Bill also 
revises the requirement that the agency carry out consultations 
prior to revaluation and preparation of its assessment manual. In 
order to receive a current . . . further a conflict of interest . . . to 
resolve a further conflict of interest — pardon me — references 
to the Assessment Management Agency’s role in 
recommending amendments related to assessment appeal 
procedures are deleted. 
 
These amendments will remove a conflict of interest between 
the Assessment Management Agency’s present roles in relation 
to assessment appeals, for example, the conflict of being an 
extensive participant in the appeal process and also making 
recommendations on rules for assessment appeals. 
 
The Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency should not 
be involved in or be perceived to be involved in establishing the 
legislative rules for assessment appeals. Removing this 
potential conflict of interest makes good sense. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill also substitutes a four-year revaluation 
cycle in place of the current three-year cycle. It thereby defers 
the next provincial reassessment from the year 2000 to 2001. 
This will resolve a structural timing problem that arises from 
two factors: the introduction of new provincial and local tax 
tools; and the Saskatchewan Assessment Management 
Agency’s decision to advance the base date for assessment 
values by an extra year for the next reassessment. 
 



266 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1999 

The present three-year cycle does not allow sufficient time for 
proper analysis and decision making in conjunction with setting 
provincial and local policies. This change in the cycle will also 
give the Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency and 
the cities more time to prepare for the introduction of the next 
round of major changes in assessment methodology now 
proposed for 2003 and to be deferred until 2005. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill also provides new authority for the 
government to set a deadline for the Saskatchewan Assessment 
Management Agency and the cities to complete preliminary 
assessments for a re-evaluation and to provide them to 
government for the development of tax policies as appropriate. 
 
And finally, this Bill adds a new requirement that lands and 
improvements be physically re-inspected at least once in a 
number of years that is to be specified in regulation. This is to 
ensure fairness and a sound assessment. 
 
These changes, Mr. Speaker, which affect so many people and 
so many stakeholders, called for a greater amount of 
co-operation and in some cases collaboration between the 
government, municipalities, the six cities which prepare their 
own assessments, the Saskatchewan Municipal Board, and the 
Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency. But we know 
that co-operation, at least in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, never 
goes out of style. Furthermore co-operation is the culture on 
which we have built this province. We are confident that 
together we will meet this goal. 
 
In summary, this Bill, Mr. Speaker, among other things 
responds to four significant concerns. First, clarifying the focus 
and mandate of the Saskatchewan Assessment Management 
Agency to ensure effectiveness and clarity of purpose. 
Secondly, the resolution of potential conflicts of interest 
between the Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency’s 
roles as assessor and assessment appellant, and its involvement 
in policy-making respecting the assessment appeal process. 
 
The establishment of a fair and dependable timetable and cycle 
for reassessment is the third point; and fourthly, the need for a 
regular, physical, on-the-spot inspection of lands and 
improvements to ensure fairness and equity. 
 
The provisions enunciated in this Bill, Mr. Speaker, address all 
of these concerns. These provisions ensure that industry, 
property owners, municipalities, government, and school 
divisions receive fair, timely, and up-to-date property 
assessments in order that all may have confidence in 
Saskatchewan’s assessment system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 8, The 
Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, 1999. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would imagine there are 
a very large number of administrators around this province have 
been waiting to see what this Bill says as well as the 
landowners in the province. The 1997 assessment caused many 
headaches and heartaches for a lot of people that they’re still 
being dealt with out in, well not only rural Saskatchewan, but in 

the cities as well. 
 
The four areas that this Bill is dealing with are ones that we’ve 
heard about often, I imagine as all of us have as elected officials 
— with clarifying the mandate; removing a conflict of interest 
issues; the timetable, changing it from three years to four years; 
and the physical reassessment — are all issues that we’ve all 
been hearing about in our offices. I believe that . . . Again 
we’ve heard the government is changing a lot of the rules that 
we often debated in this House and discussed openly and put 
them into regulations which may be a concern for some of the 
. . . not only landowners but for administrators across the 
province, and it’s something that I’m sure we’ll be hearing 
about in the next few days as this Bill becomes obvious to a lot 
of the administrators. 
 
So while we wait for the words from the people that these are 
going to . . . this Bill is directly affecting, I’m asking that we 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 8, The Assessment Management 
Agency Amendment Act. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 10 — The Boiler and Pressure Vessel Act, 1999 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Bill No. 10 
will replace The Boiler and Pressure Vessel Act, 1978. The new 
legislation provides a revitalized framework for the way in 
which the boiler and pressure vessel industry is regulated, 
preserving safety and updating what is indeed a very old piece 
of legislation — older than me, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In fact, the underlying philosophy of the way in which the 
boiler and pressure vessel industry is currently regulated dates 
back to the turn of the century. Back then the industry lacked 
formal standards for the design, construction, and operation of 
boilers. As a result, governments took a highly intrusive role in 
the industry. 
 
The industry has since undergone many changes. Much of the 
safety of pressure equipment now results from self-regulating 
systems and processes in the industry rather than direct 
government intervention. Comprehensive codes and standards 
of design, manufacture, inspection, and operation have evolved 
at national and international levels. 
 
However, the philosophy under which the industry is regulated 
remains relatively unchanged. Government is still involved in 
virtually every aspect of the boiler and pressure vessel industry: 
reviewing designs, certifying welders and operators, inspecting 
initial installations, ongoing inspections, investigating failures, 
as well as setting standards for design, construction, installation, 
inspection, and operation of pressure equipment. 
 
The way in which this industry is regulated should continue to 
protect public and worker safety, recognize today’s technology 
and allow our industries to remain not only viable but 
competitive into the future. Our government’s approach to 
modernizing the regulatory framework for the boiler and 
pressure vessel industry is based on five key principles. 
 
The primary reason for regulating the boiler and pressure vessel 
industry is safety. This is the first principle — that safety is the 



March 25, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 267 

prime consideration for regulatory legislation. The way in 
which this industry is regulated must continue to protect 
workers and the public as they go about their daily lives. 
 
Second, regulatory legislation must be necessary, appropriate, 
and enforceable, and it must reflect the balanced needs of 
industry and the public. 
 
Third, those affected by the regulatory framework need to be 
involved in both its review and its ongoing operation. 
Consultations were held with a number of representatives in the 
industry prior to developing this new legislation. This type of 
consultative process will continue. 
 
Fourth, the responsibilities of everyone involved in the industry 
must be clear. The new legislation clearly assigns 
responsibilities to those who are most capable of meeting them. 
Owners ensure the safety of their operations. Operators carry 
out their duties in a safe manner. Manufacturers and installers 
maintain responsibility for their work and inspectors exercise 
reasonable judgment in carrying out their duties. 
 
Fifth, any changes made to the way in which the industry is 
regulated must be safely achievable in the short term, and must 
allow the industry to adapt over time to changes in needs and 
technology. 
 
The legislation before you today meets all of these principles. It 
provides a modernized framework for regulating the boiler and 
pressure vessel industry that through continued consultations 
will allow the industry to evolve while preserving the primary 
purpose of the regulatory regime, that being safety. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is time for us to examine the way in which the 
boiler and pressure vessel industry is regulated, to ensure that 
we are doing what is best to preserve public and workplace 
safety while providing a framework under which the industry 
can progress. The legislation before you today allows us to 
undertake this process of review and reform. 
 
The new legislation moves more detailed requirements to 
regulations and establishes an appeal process for decisions of 
inspectors. It clearly outlines people’s responsibilities within 
the regulatory framework and updates the fines associated with 
violation of these requirements. And it creates the opportunity 
to explore, through consultations, alternate means of industry 
regulation but does not rush into any changes without 
considering public and workers’ safety. 
 
It is our government’s intention to proclaim this Bill after 
completion of the regulations called for in the legislation. Again 
we welcome the participation of interested parties as these new 
regulations are drafted. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of this Bill, Bill No. 10, 
The Boiler and Pressure Vessel Act, 1999. Thank you. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Bill No. 10 
— The Boiler and Pressure Vessel Act, 1999, the Minister said 
we were replacing the old with the new. On this side of the 
House, we are very much in favour of replacing the old with the 
new. I’m sure it’s something . . . and we do it quite gleefully in 
this building. 

The new regulations that this Act is going to bring in is, of 
course, the safety being the most important aspect but at the 
same time the industries that are involved often shudder at the 
thought of new government regulations especially if they 
haven’t had a chance to have input in them. We’re very much 
hoping that the government is — while they keep the safety 
aspect of it to the forefront — make sure that we don’t have a 
whole pile of rules and regulations that are again just going to 
be a very large annoyance for business and something that’s 
going to cost a lot of money without being of real benefit to 
anyone except people who can weigh the number of papers that 
it usually takes to make sure the regulations are covered. 
 
I also . . . we’re hoping that the regulations are some that are 
consistent across the provinces so again we harmonize with the 
other provinces instead of having something that’s entirely 
different and we’ll find something that will be of benefit to 
everyone. 
 
So I’m waiting with anticipation to hear from industries that are 
involved in this and we will be discussing it later, so at this time 
I’d like to adjourn debate on this Bill. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 13 — The Rural Municipality 
Amendment Act, 1999 

 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Bill 13 
amends The Rural Municipality Act, 1989. Bill 13 introduces 
amendments to adjust the property assessment and assessment 
appeals process to make Saskatchewan’s system more equitable 
and more effective. As well it addresses a number of concerns 
raised by appellants and others over the past two years. 
 
A review of the 1997 reassessment experience as well as a 
review of statutory tax exemptions have been completed. 
Through those processes and consultations with stakeholders 
such as the Saskatchewan rural municipalities association, the 
Saskatchewan School Trustees Association, the Department of 
Education, the Saskatchewan Municipal Board, the government 
will be introducing further amendments to The Rural 
Municipality Act, 1989 in a subsequent session of the 
legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the changes proposed in this Bill are the ones that 
need to proceed now and include adjustments and new 
provisions that will streamline the process for assessment 
appeals. These amendments come as a result of government’s 
ongoing commitment to ensure that our systems work for 
people as well as for rural municipalities. We are pleased to 
provide a number of improvements to the existing system. 
 
While the amendments proposed in this Bill are incremental 
changes, they are important and are in harmony with 
amendments proposed in similar Bills to amend The Urban 
Municipality Act and The Northern Municipalities Act. 
 
This Bill helps to ensure that the process of completing property 
assessment is transparent and accessible to the property owner 
and ensures further that the property owner is in the know and 
treated fairly throughout the appeal process. 
 



268 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1999 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to briefly describe some of the key 
provisions in this Bill. The addition of a new provision allowing 
assessment appeals on like properties in multiple jurisdictions 
to be consolidated and heard directly by the appeal board will 
allow for more expedient and consistent appeal decisions. 
 
Examples of the possible application of this provision in rural 
Saskatchewan include pipeline properties, oil and gas wells, and 
others where common assessment methods arise as issues in the 
appeal process. The addition of new provisions allowing 
complex commercial or industrial appeals, including major 
mines or industrial plants, to be heard directly by the appeal 
board when the appellant, the board of revision, and the 
municipality agree, will remove some of the burden from local 
boards of revisions and streamline the administrative process. 
This Bill clarifies the acceptable methods for delivery and 
notice of appeal available to an appellant and provides several 
reasonable alternatives for delivery of notice. 
 
(1630) 
 
The addition of provisions requiring fair and just assessments 
for lands and improvements within school divisions, as well as 
within municipalities, addresses an important equity issue. The 
existing Act provides that the value at which any lands or 
improvements are assessed must be their fair value. The Act 
currently requires equity among assessments within a 
municipality. However, there is no requirement that 
assessments be equitable within a school division or divisions 
which may be part of the municipality. The 1997 reassessment 
certainly demonstrated that this is very important. 
 
The Assessment Management Agency Act requires the 
Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency to prepare 
assessments in accordance with the Act. The fundamental 
principle of equity among assessments applies equally for 
municipal and school taxes. For example, differences in the 
market index applied to agricultural land within a school 
division must be defensible. 
 
This amendment addresses, first and foremost, a fundamental 
equity issue and establishes a principle which is in the overall 
best interest of taxpayers, municipalities, and school divisions. 
We are proposing that these provisions not come into effect 
until the date of the next reassessment, January 1, 2001. They 
will have no effect on appeals currently in progress. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill also includes a provision that removes all 
potential perceptions of bias in the constitution of local boards 
of revision. The committee examining the 1997 reassessment 
experience identified a concern that appellants to local boards 
of revision had a perception of bias when members of the 
council or school board were also members of the board of 
revision. To eliminate any possible bias or any perception of 
bias, council or school board members should not be eligible to 
sit as members. 
 
This provision is also consistent with the Supreme Court 
decision which called into question the, quote, “institutional 
independence” of boards or revision when council members 
serve on the board. This provision excluding members of 
council from sitting on the board of revision may require new 
approaches — for example, greater use of district boards of 

revision which have proved to be so successful in some rural 
districts in Saskatchewan. 
 
We believe that these new provisions are fair and are in the best 
interests of the taxpayer and the municipality. 
 
Another amendment proposed in this Bill clarifies that all 
parties to an appeal, including the Saskatchewan Assessment 
Management Agency, have equal duty to file written materials 
10 days prior to a board of revision hearing. 
 
This Bill, Mr. Speaker, among other things, responds to three 
significant concerns. First, equitable assessment of similar 
properties within both municipalities and school divisions. 
 
Secondly, the appeal process regarding appeals of assessment 
on like properties in multiple jurisdictions, and regarding 
complex commercial or industrial appeals, potentially including 
pipeline property, oil and gas wells, mines, and industrial 
plants. 
 
And finally, the accessibility and transparency both of the 
information and process regarding assessment and appeals, 
helping to make the appeal process easier to use. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amendments should be supported by all 
members of the legislature. They are in the best interests of 
rural municipalities, our communities, and all Saskatchewan 
residents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 13, The Rural 
Municipality Amendment Act, 1999. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 
quite sure that I heard most of the comments of the minister 
some moments ago when she talked about Bill No. 14, the 
urban municipalities Act. It sounds as if the changes are 
virtually identical to that legislation and I’m anticipating that 
they are also the same to the northern municipalities Act. Bill 
No. 12 will be very, very similar. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I will just say I would reiterate all the 
comments that I made in regard to the urban municipalities Act 
and express them as well in this regard. And in anticipation of 
Bill 12 being very similar, saying that I would have the same 
concerns and the issues in that regard. And in the interest of 
brevity I would encourage the minister to just tell us if the 
changes are the same. 
 
But at this point, waiting the input from our stakeholders and 
the people affected by this legislation, I would move to adjourn 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 12—The Northern Municipalities 
Amendment Act, 1999 

 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As the 
member opposite so astutely observes that the amendments to 
the urban . . . northern rural which have already been read and 



March 25, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 269 

The Northern Municipalities Act do have many similarities. 
 
However, particularly in the case of The Northern 
Municipalities Act, while the members opposite will notice 
some similarities because of the uniqueness of the northern part 
of our province, there are some significant differences in the 
northern one. So I would ask the members opposite to listen 
very intently for those changes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 12 amends The Northern Municipalities 
Act. Bill 12 introduces amendments to adjust the property 
assessment and assessment appeals to make Saskatchewan’s 
system more equitable and more effective. As well, it raises . . . 
or addresses a number of concerns raised by appellants and 
others over the past two years. 
 
We bring these amendments forward, Mr. Speaker, because we 
believe in our northern communities and we want to ensure that 
northern communities are provided with the same legislative 
updates and tools as are available to municipalities in the 
southern part of the province. 
 
Believing in the future of our northern communities, Mr. 
Speaker, means that my department is working on extending 
911 emergency telephone service to northern communities to 
ensure that northern people have reliable access to vital services 
in an emergency. 
 
Mr. Speaker, believing in our northern communities means that 
this government cares about the water and sewer systems in our 
northern communities. These are services that we in the south 
have taken for granted. To start the process toward the 
development of adequate water and sewer for northern 
communities, this government, in partnership with the New 
North, has contracted for a study to develop a long-term 
program for the development and improvement of water and 
sewer systems in northern communities. 
 
The road toward adequate and reliable water and sewer service 
may prove to be a challenging one but my department, together 
with New North — some of the representatives of whom were 
visitors in our Chamber today — has taken the first important 
step, a step which clearly demonstrates our commitment to the 
people of northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Believing in the North means my department has responded to 
the needs of the northern communities by establishing, last 
session, the Northern Revenue Sharing Trust Account 
Management Board. This management board reflects the 
interests and skills of Northerners and is yet another sign of 
government’s commitment to our northern communities. It will 
provide recommendations for northern funding. 
 
A review of the 1997 reassessment experience has been 
completed as well as a review of statutory tax exemptions. 
Through these processes and consultations with stakeholders 
such as New North, the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association, the Saskatchewan School Trustees Association, the 
Department of Education, and the Saskatchewan Municipal 
Board — you can see we’ve had extensive consultations — the 
government will be introducing further amendments to The 
Northern Municipalities Act in a subsequent session of the 
legislature. 

Mr. Speaker, the changes proposed in this Bill are ones that 
need to proceed now and include adjustments in new provisions 
that will streamline the process for assessment appeals. These 
amendments come as a result of government’s ongoing 
commitment to ensure that our systems work for people as well 
as their northern municipalities. We are pleased to provide a 
number of improvements to the existing system. 
 
Each year administrative and operational issues are brought to 
our attention by municipal administrations, local government 
associations, other stakeholders, and my own department staff. 
We do get letters, Mr. Speaker. The amendments proposed in 
this Bill contain changes to some administrative procedures and 
are in keeping with our ongoing efforts to ensure that 
Saskatchewan citizens have user-friendly legislation and 
municipal administrative practices. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to now briefly describe some of the key 
provisions of this Bill. The addition of a new provision allowing 
assessment appeals on like properties in multiple jurisdictions 
to be consolidated, heard directly by the appeal board, will 
allow for more expedient and consistent appeal decisions. The 
addition of new provisions allowing complex commercial or 
industrial appeals, including appeals regarding major mines or 
industrial plants, to be heard directly by the appeal board when 
the appellant, the board of revision, and the municipality agree, 
will remove some of the burden from boards of revision and 
streamline the administrative process. These types of appeals 
can be particularly complex in the North, given some of the 
types of industry and some of the distances and so forth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill also clarifies the acceptable methods for 
delivery of a notice of appeal available to an appellant and 
provides several reasonable alternatives for delivery of notice, 
again an issue particularly in northern Saskatchewan where 
there is not reliance on the daily paper and so forth. 
 
The addition of provisions requiring fair and just assessments 
for lands and improvements within school divisions, as well as 
within municipalities, addresses an important equity issue. 
 
The existing Act provides that the value at which any lands and 
improvements are assessed must be their fair value. The 1997 
reassessment demonstrated that equity within both 
municipalities and school divisions is important, with 
proportion of property taxes collected for school purposes being 
what it is. 
 
The Assessment Management Agency Act requires the 
Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency to prepare 
assessments in accordance with the Act. The fundamental 
principle of equity among assessments applies equally for 
municipal and school taxes. 
 
This amendment addresses first and foremost a fundamental 
equity issue and establishes a principle which is in the overall 
interest of taxpayers, municipalities, and school divisions. 
These changes call for changes to northern municipal systems 
and new co-operative approaches to preparing assessments. For 
this reason we proposed that these provisions not come into 
effect until the date of the next reassessment, January 1, 2001. 
They will have no effect on appeals currently in process. 
 



270 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1999 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill includes, as the urban and rural Acts do, a 
provision that removes all potential perceptions of bias in the 
constitution of local boards of revision. The committee 
examining the 1997 reassessment experience identified a 
concern that appellants to local boards of revision had a 
perception of bias when members of the council or school board 
were also members of the board of revision. 
 
This Bill recognizes there is no statutory requirement for 
council to be represented on the board of revision and that to 
eliminate any possible bias or perception of bias, council or 
school board members should not be eligible to sit as members. 
This provision is also consistent with the Supreme Court 
decision which called into question the institutional 
independence of boards of revision when council members 
serve on the board. 
 
Another amendment proposed in this Bill clarifies that all 
parties to an appeal, including the Saskatchewan Assessment 
Management Agency, have equal duty to file written materials 
10 days prior to a board of revision hearing. 
 
This Bill, Mr. Speaker, among other things, responds to three 
significant concerns of northerners: first, equitable assessment 
of similar properties within both municipalities and school 
divisions; secondly, the appeal process regarding appeals of 
assessment on like properties in multiple jurisdictions and 
regarding complex commercial or industrial appeals; and finally 
and thirdly, the accessibility and transparency both of the 
information and process regarding assessment and appeals, 
helping to make the appeal process easier to use. 
 
The provisions of this Bill, Mr. Speaker, address all of these 
concerns. These provisions ensure that property owners, 
municipalities, and school divisions receive fair treatment and 
are a part of a transparent and equitable process in order that all 
may have confidence in the system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these amendments should be supported by all 
members of the legislature. They are in the best interests of 
northern municipalities, their communities, and all 
Saskatchewan residents. Mr. Speaker, I think that the provisions 
of these Bills are so good and positive that they bear much 
repetition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 12, The 
Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 1999. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1645) 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, in a rare movement or moment of agreement with the 
government, I would like to agree with the minister insofar as 
her comments about the North being very unique and having 
very special circumstances that require special consideration is 
a very appropriate statement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that this proposed amendment to the 
legislation has the similarities to the urban and rural 
municipality insofar as saying that assessment and appeal 
processes and things learned out of that reassessment process 

are made more transparent, fairer, apply equally to northern 
residents as they do to urban and rural residents in this 
province. 
 
And certainly those parts of the Bill that talk about studying 
special needs in terms of water and sewer requirements and 
things of that nature for the North are appropriate because very 
often communities in the North don’t enjoy, as a matter of fact 
and of course, the same levels of municipal services and 
infrastructure that we do in the South. And certainly the people 
of the North are very much deserved of those same services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that there are other unique dimensions to 
the North that have been acknowledged by the minister’s 
statements in terms of distance and communication. And any 
process of reassessment, of appeal, and things of that nature in 
regard to property have to be given special consideration given 
those challenges in the North. 
 
The minister indicated that there has been extensive 
consultation . . . has occurred in the preparation of these 
amendments in this legislation and certainly we in the official 
opposition in the Saskatchewan Party have undertaken and do 
undertake to have extensive consultations as well. That 
information is forthcoming and while we wait it with eager 
anticipation, I would like to adjourn debate at this time. I move 
that we adjourn debate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
Bill No. 16 — The Mineral Taxation Amendment Act, 1999 

 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I’m pleased to rise in this Assembly today to move 
second reading of The Mineral Taxation Amendment Act, 
1999. This amendment allows potash producers to pay 
production taxes on a consolidated company basis beginning in 
2002. In February 1998, a number of tax changes in the potash 
tax system were announced to encourage an investment by 
potash producers in Saskatchewan operations, to improve 
Saskatchewan’s ability to compete for capital throughout the 
world, and to ensure the long-term health and growth of the 
Saskatchewan potash industry. 
 
One of the specific changes announced at that time was that 
beginning in the year 2002 potash producers would be able to 
pay taxes on a consolidated company basis rather than the 
current mine-by-mine basis. All of the potash changes that were 
announced are beginning to be implemented through regulated 
amendments. As a result of the tax changes, IMC Kalium 
announced expansion projects at its Colonsay and Belle Plaine 
mines. 
 
While the Colonsay expansion has been temporarily delayed 
due to uncertainty in the potash market, the expansion at Belle 
Plaine is continuing, and the two expansions are still expected 
to be completed within the three-to-five-year time frame 
initially established by IMC Kalium — an investment of some 
$481 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amendment of this Act also includes 
housekeeping amendments. The prescribed form for waivers of 
the four-year assessment period is changed to a form acceptable 



March 25, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 271 

to the minister. This will permit more flexibility when a waiver 
form is required. This legislation also eliminates the deduction 
from the base payment that is the Act in error . . . that is in the 
Act in error and has never been applied in practice. So basically 
it’s housekeeping. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, this amendment is supported by industry 
and is part of a tax package of changes supported by the 
government. 
 
With these brief comments, Mr. Speaker, I move second 
reading of The Mineral Taxation Amendment Act, 1999. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 
seems like a great part of this is housekeeping and very 
straightforward, but at the same time we would like to check 
with stakeholders concerned. So therefore at this time I would 
adjourn . . . I move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 17—The Local Government Election 
Amendment Act, 1999 

 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Bill No. 17, 
an Act respecting local government elections introduces a 
number of improvements that will make voting during local 
government elections more convenient and accessible. As well, 
this Bill proposes to eliminate legal and administrative barriers 
experienced by school boards during the period of transition 
after a school division has decided to restructure. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before each round of local elections a review of 
the Act is conducted and amendments, if necessary, are 
identified. Local governments have requested many of these 
amendments. At the proposal stage, the amendments were 
circulated to stakeholder groups including the Saskatchewan 
School Trustees Association, the Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association, the city clerks’ association, and 
local government administrators. 
 
The changes and improvements included in this Bill illustrate 
our commitment to strengthening communities and protecting 
our democratic system of government. 
 
Our first proposal responds to problems existing school boards 
have during the transitional phase when school divisions are 
restructured around the time of regular general elections. To 
provide for an effective transition, school boards will be able to 
remain in place during the transitional phase of school division 
restructuring. The most convenient time for school division 
restructuring to occur is January 1 of any year since the fiscal 
year of school divisions is the calendar year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to accommodate an effective transition, it is 
helpful for existing boards of education to be able to remain in 
office for a short period of time after a new board has been 
elected for the new division. School divisions that restructured 
in the fall of 1997 incurred additional costs and administrative 
disruption because the restructuring had to take effect partway 
through a fiscal year. 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill proposes to waive the requirement for an 
election in school divisions that are restructuring and allow 
existing board members to remain in office until the 
restructuring process is completed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a second major reform in this Bill is to clarify the 
advertising requirements for election notices. Local 
governments have indicated that the present advertising 
requirements are too costly and administratively inconvenient. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re proposing new provisions to reduce election 
costs for local governments while still ensuring adequate public 
notice is given. To enable this, we have expanded the types of 
publications in which election notices may be advertised. We 
have also streamlined the advertising process and provided for 
additional methods of notifying voters of the election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a third amendment proposes to provide local 
governments with an additional method of ordering candidates’ 
names on a ballot. Local governments will now be able to 
arrange the names of candidates on the ballot in a random order 
in addition to the other methods available. Local governments 
may choose between a variety of methods that ensure that 
candidates have a fair opportunity to be elected. 
 
Mr. Speaker, during the last session we provided curbside 
voting for disabled people who could not enter a polling place 
because it was not conveniently accessible. Accessibility for all 
eligible voters is a key factor in ensuring the integrity of the 
local government election process is maintained. We have 
expanded this provision to permit disabled people to vote at any 
polling place in the ward or municipality that has the most 
convenient access. 
 
These new provisions will permit people with disabilities to 
choose the polling place that is the most convenient for them to 
cast their vote. As well, those voters that are in a hospital or a 
nursing home and unable to go to a polling place will be 
permitted to vote at their bedside. For our democratic system to 
work effectively, all people must be afforded an equitable 
opportunity to vote. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill also proposes new provisions that will 
prevent temporarily displaced voters to vote at an advance poll 
established outside a municipality or a school division. For 
example, this means that if voters are called to fight a forest fire 
during an election, they will be able to conveniently exercise 
their democratic right to vote. 
 
Mr. Speaker, making the election process simple and easy to 
understand, and protecting our democratic system of 
government, is essential to our goal of ensuring community 
members participate in the process of fairly determining their 
local government representatives. Situations such as the 
Manitoba flood, the Quebec ice storm, or even — dare we think 
it — Y2K (Year 2000) make it necessary for us to consider 
innovative methods of ensuring natural disasters or special 
circumstances do not interfere with local government elections. 
 
In view of this, local governments will now have the authority 
to postpone an election in a ward, municipality, or school 
division for up to 60 days. This will permit municipalities to 
deal with an emergency and then proceed with their local 



272 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1999 

election when a majority of the voters are able to cast their 
ballots. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with a foundation built upon the integrity of our 
democratic election process, this Bill will make the election 
process convenient and accessible to more people. It will ensure 
the administration of the election process is simplified and 
easily understood. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of this Bill, Bill No. 17, an 
Act respecting local government elections. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
rise to speak briefly about The Local Government Election Act 
proposal, Bill 17. 
 
I think the minister’s statement that the objective of this Act is 
to have simple and easy to understand regulations and rules 
regarding local administration elections is noteworthy and a 
valuable objective. And it would seem that the proposals as 
outlined have found favour with the member agencies, the 
SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees Association), the urban 
and rural governments. 
 
We are in the process of consulting with these bodies to see if 
these proposed amendments meet the requirements of these 
agencies as they’ve been proposed, and we look forward to 
receiving their feedback. 
 
And with that in mind, Mr. Speaker, at this time I would like to 
move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:58 p.m. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 


