





























































Hansard: April 19, 1999


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 623 
 April 19, 1999 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have 
petitions to present today. The prayer reads: 
 

Whereas your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reduce royalty taxes on new drilling in Saskatchewan to 
stop job loss and create new employment in this sector. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

These petitions come from the Carievale, Bellegarde, Bienfait, 
Carnduff, Estevan — across the southeast, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As well to present a 
petition, and reading the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
finally show a serious commitment to roads and highways 
in Saskatchewan by urging it to increase its highways and 
road construction and maintenance budget by $300 million 
over the next five years as called for in the Saskatchewan 
Party’s election platform. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And this petition is signed by individuals from the big city of 
Regina. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have a 
petition on behalf of people of the province who are concerned 
with the exploitation of children in the sex trade, and although 
the government has addressed this issue in part, there are still 
outstanding issues. And so I present this petition on their behalf. 
The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to enact 
provincial legislation that would inject a stay-away order 
restraining anyone who interferes with the healing process 
of victims of child prostitution — anyone who threatens in 
any way the healing while it is taking place should be 
subject to a large fine — and provide the police with the 
authority to search a place where they believe a child is 
being held by pimps or perpetrators of this crime for the 
purpose of engaging in child prostitution activities. 
 

And the signatures on these petitions, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Montmartre, Denzil, Cactus Lake, and other places throughout 
Saskatchewan. 

I so present. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise and 
present a petition on behalf of citizens concerned about the state 
of our highways. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call on federal and provincial 
governments to dedicate a significantly greater portion of 
fuel tax revenues toward road maintenance and 
construction so Saskatchewan residents may have a safe 
highway system that meets their needs. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The signatures on these petitions, Mr. Speaker, are from one 
end of the province to the other — from Maple Creek, Piapot, 
to Meadow Lake, Pinehouse. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I again this afternoon 
bring petitions on behalf of residents of the northwest 
requesting: 
 

That the confusing and dangerous entrance to the city of 
North Battleford be redrawn and particularly that the 
Highway 40 intersection with the Yellowhead be changed. 

 
Your petitioners this afternoon come from Battleford, North 
Battleford, Cochin, Delmas, and — as the member for 
Athabasca used to say when he was bringing petitions — all 
across the land. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
an honour once again to present petitions on behalf of people 
concerned about children with specific learning needs in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I’ll read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide essential funding and ensure the delivery of 
scientifically proven, diagnostic assessment and 
programming for children with learning disabilities in 
order that they have access to an education that meets their 
needs and allows them to reach their full potential. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The people who have signed the petition for today, Mr. 
Speaker, are from Pakwaw Lake, Red Earth, Shoal Lake, and 
Prince Albert. 
 
And I present it with great pleasure on their behalf. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the petitions presented at the last 
sitting have been reviewed and found to be in order, and 
pursuant to rule 12(7) these petitions are hereby received. 



624 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 1999 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
Standing Committee on Public Accounts 

 
Deputy Clerk: — Mr. Gantefoer, Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Public Accounts presents the committee’s third 
report which is hereby tabled. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
with great pleasure on behalf of the Standing Committee on 
Public Accounts that we present our third report. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it would be remiss of me at this time if I did not 
give credit to not only those members who worked so diligently 
in preparing this, the third report, but also to all those members 
who have served in this term on the Standing Committee on 
Public Accounts. 
 
The committee has worked very diligently over the last four 
years catching up on outstanding issues, bringing the matters 
under review up to a very current basis. And I think that every 
committee member that has served over this past term deserves 
a great deal of credit. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, I think that it’s important to acknowledge 
the people that have chaired this committee over the past 
because I think under the chairmanship that has been exhibited 
in the past, we have seen the committee move to what I 
consider a very professional way of dealing with the 
departments’ accounts. And by and large I have to say, have 
done so in a very non-partisan way which I think speaks well of 
the status of this committee and the fact that it holds the affairs 
of this province in high esteem. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure to move, 
seconded by the member from Regina Northeast: 
 

That the third report of the Standing Committee on Public 
Accounts be now concurred in. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Concerning 
negotiations with David Milgaard regarding the issue of 
compensation, I give notice that I shall, on day no. 28 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Justice: how much has been paid and 
incurred for negotiators in salaries and expenses since 
negotiations for compensation were opened with Mr. 
Milgaard; has a final offer of settlement been made to Mr. 
Milgaard; if no final offer has been made, when does the 
department anticipate making such an offer? 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

The Speaker: — Before proceeding to introduction of guests 
by other members of the House, with the support of the 
members, the Chair would like to introduce to you a large 
delegation who are currently seated in the Speaker’s gallery. 

There are 28 in total — 26 social sciences teachers and a couple 
from the Department of Education — who are gathered together 
in Regina these days for Saskatchewan’s first Social Sciences 
Teachers’ Institute on Parliamentary Democracy and they come 
from in excess of 20 of your constituencies from around the 
province. 
 
Now these are those who teach the future leaders of 
Saskatchewan, the youth of Saskatchewan, and are here 
specifically for professional development to assist in their 
knowledge and their enthusiasm for the system of parliamentary 
democracy as we practise it here in Saskatchewan, and as many 
of you will know because many of you are scheduled to have 
direct contact with them over the next couple of days as they 
meet with you face to face to discuss the practice of the 
institution and how you apply it. 
 
They have already met with the Lieutenant Governor, the 
Speaker, and clerks among others, and will be meeting with 
House leaders, chairs, whips, administrators, among others in 
the next two and a half days. Before leaving to return to the 
classroom, they will be involving themselves in commitments 
to add to the resources in the teaching of parliamentary 
democracy in our province to enhance the teaching of it for the 
future leaders of our province. 
 
Hon. members of the House, ladies and gentlemen of the 
House, I ask you to show your appreciation for their efforts by 
extending them a warm welcome from the members of the 
House. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
introduce to you and through you to members of the House, 
someone who doesn’t need much of an introduction in this 
legislature, but our good friend and former colleague Ken Kluz, 
who was the member for Kelvington-Wadena from 1991 to ’95 
is seated behind the bar here today. I ask all members to 
welcome Ken as he pays a visit to us this day. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Social Studies Teachers’ Institute on Parliamentary 
Democracy 

 
Ms. Stanger: — Mr. Speaker, today marks the first day of the 
Saskatchewan Social Studies Teachers’ Institute on 
Parliamentary Democracy. This week our social studies 
teachers from across the province will be visiting the 
legislature. They are here to get a better understanding of 
provincial . . . democratic system by watching us work. 
 
Teachers hope to increase their knowledge of the system so that 
their teaching will be more accurate and up to date. And myself, 
being part of the profession, I understand what professionals 
teachers are. They will also take this time to discuss and 
develop new educational materials on democracy. 
 
This teachers’ institute will be an excellent opportunity for our 
educators to have first-hand discussions with government and 



April 19, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 625 

opposition members. It is also a chance for teachers to discuss 
teaching methods with each other. 
 
Lastly, the teachers will be able to contrast how what they saw 
and the events of the legislature with how they are portrayed in 
the media. 
 
I’d like to add that the Speaker supports the teachers’ institute 
and his office has done much work and sees it as a local 
extension of the Speaker’s parliamentary outreach program. 
 
Please join me in welcoming our teachers to the legislature this 
week and wishing them all the best with their classes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to join with the member for Lloydminster in welcoming the 
teachers here today. And on behalf of the official opposition, I 
would like to welcome all of them participating in the SSTI 
(Saskatchewan Social Sciences Teachers’ Institute on 
Parliamentary Democracy) and thank them for their continued 
commitment to broadening the education of parliamentary 
procedures to the youth of our province. 
 
The SSTI program is an exceptional way for social science 
teachers to gain a better understanding about the realities of 
democracy and its importance in our society. 
 
The program also allows teachers to obtain first-hand 
knowledge of parliamentary procedures and democracy at its 
finest. The information they will take back to their classrooms 
is vital to the youth of Saskatchewan as they are our future 
leaders. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I also would like to mention a face that 
might be familiar to people in the gallery, my Co-Chair from 
the Calgary Declaration, also from Esterhazy, is again a 
member. And if all teachers in Saskatchewan are as dedicated to 
the parliamentary system as this teacher, our children are well 
served. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Appreciation of Registered Nurses 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. From time to time 
several of the MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly ) 
have risen to tell us of their pride of their offspring. 
 
Well today I want to tell this House that my son is a RN 
(Registered Nurse) presently working in the oncology unit of 
Royal University Hospital in Saskatoon. He’s glad to be back at 
work serving his patients. Like many other younger nurses, he 
has had to survive with casual shifts here and there, as new 
permanent positions are all but non-existent. 
 
Hopefully that will now change with the new agreement, and 
people entering the profession will be offered permanent, 
full-time positions that will allow them to build a career here in 
Saskatchewan and not in Texas or Ontario. 

We do not want them leaving the province as so many nurses 
had to do a few years ago because of the cutbacks. 
 
I ask all members to join with me in expressing our 
appreciation, not only of my son, but of all the 8,400 registered 
nurses in Saskatchewan who are back caring for the sick of this 
province. Their efforts are deeply appreciated. We are grateful 
for them and are proud of them all, whether we are related or 
not. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hudson Bay Snowmobile Club Wins Excellence Award 
 
Mr. Renaud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As winter draws to a 
close I would like to bring the work of one important club to 
everyone’s attention. In my home riding of Carrot River Valley, 
the Hudson Bay Trail Riders Snowmobile Club has had another 
outstanding year. The club has been boosting the town’s 
tourism industry by holding snowmobile rallies. It has 
entertained the constituency by providing safe and 
well-groomed trails. The club is run entirely by volunteers and 
paid for through fundraising. 
 
This past summer the snowmobile club was recognized for its 
efforts. They were invited to Michigan to receive the 1998 
Snowmobile Excellence Award for outstanding promotion and 
development of snowmobiling — an international award, Mr. 
Speaker, and a wonderful achievement. The club was 
commended for showcasing the sport of snowmobiling and 
promoting safe and responsible riding. 
 
And I know that I probably shouldn’t be mentioning winter. It 
is after all a few months away, but winter in Hudson Bay, the 
moose capital of Saskatchewan, the snowmobile trail capital of 
Saskatchewan, is wonderful. Come and visit us this winter and 
enjoy the trails and hospitality. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Thanks to Volunteers During Health Care Crisis 
 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
wish to bring to your attention today the number of volunteers 
who have come forward during this very difficult time for 
health care in our province. In the North Central Health District 
alone we have seen volunteers from all over the province and as 
far away as from Alberta. They’re there to look after their 
families and friends. They’re there to assist in any way they can 
in the acute care, and in particular the long-term care facilities. 
And it’s especially important with the withdrawal of services 
from the support staff. 
 
I want to take this opportunity to commend these volunteers 
who continue diligently to assist in our health facilities. We 
cannot express our appreciation enough to these people who 
have taken time from their own jobs and travelled many miles 
to pitch in at this time of crisis for health care brought on by 
this government in Saskatchewan. Please join me in expressing 
our sincere appreciation to the volunteers of the entire province 
who have put their shoulders to the wheel when the government 
has failed them. 
 



626 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 1999 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Regina Food for Learning Week 
 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, Mayor Doug Archer 
last week proclaimed Regina Food for Learning Week in 
recognition of the program’s tenth anniversary. There was an 
anniversary celebration on Saturday to honour the non-profit 
corporation and its 115 volunteers and staff. 
 
Regina Food for Learning was started in 1988, 10 years prior to 
now, to oversee the development of a child food service 
program for Regina’s schools and their neighbourhoods. Since 
then the program, Mr. Speaker, has provided over 344,000 
meals and snacks to hungry children throughout Regina at 19 
different locations actually. The children are also taught about 
nutrition and how to prepare basic low-cost meals. 
 
The program, Mr. Speaker, receives department funding 
through the REACH (Regina Education and Action on Child 
Hunger) program and it’s only a small part of the Saskatchewan 
Action Plan for Children. 
 
The president of the Regina Food for Learning, Judy Tilling, 
and the rest of the staff deserve huge credit for the way they 
have successfully run this program and I wish to thank them for 
their hard work and dedication throughout the years, their 
dedication to helping young people who are less fortunate, and 
indeed, Mr. Speaker, for fuelling education. So thank you to 
them all. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Wayne Gretzky Retires 
 

Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I think, Mr. Speaker, I’m doing this 
statement because I’ve been told many times I look like him, 
not play like him — look like him. As we are all aware that 
after 21 glorious seasons in the NHL (National Hockey 
League), Wayne Gretzky officially retired from the NHL 
yesterday. 
 
Gretzky has simply been the most dominant and compelling 
hockey player in history. He holds over 61 NHL records 
including ones that will never be broken. These include highs of 
92 goals and 215 points in a single season. A mark likely that 
will also never be broken. 
 
Gretzky has accumulated an amazing 894 goals, 1,963 assists, 
and 2,857 points over his career. He has averaged 1.92 points 
per game since entering the NHL as an 18-year-old. 
 
In fact, Gretzky has been a superstar almost all of his life. When 
he was 10 years old, he scored 378 goals for his atom league 
team in Brantford, Ontario. Another record that still holds. 
 
But what makes Gretzky such a Canadian icon isn’t just the 
records he holds, it was also his off-ice presence. Always polite, 
charming, unselfish, and humble — maybe that’s where we 
have a similarity — he was someone all Canadians were proud 
to call their own. 
 
Gretzky is truly a Canadian legend. It has been said that he 

represents all that is right about Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to wish Wayne Gretzky a wonderful 
retirement and thank him for enriching all of our lives. Thank 
you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Small Business Loans Association Program 
 
Ms. Murrell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The small business 
loans association program can be held responsible today for the 
creation of many jobs in rural areas. In Wilkie alone, 26 new 
full-time jobs and five part-time jobs were created by the 
Wilkie Development Corporation with the help of SBLA (small 
business loans association). 
 
Our government provides funding to the various small business 
loans association programs as a way of investing at the local 
level. Small businesses such as hair salons, grocery stores, and 
hardwares have used the help of SBLA. The program can now 
make loans of up to $10,000 to help create and maintain jobs. 
 
The track record of the small business loans association is 
looking very good. During 1998 the SBLA program created 
more than 360 jobs and maintained 565 more, mostly in rural 
communities. Since it began, the SBLA has created and 
maintained over 12,800 jobs — an outstanding 
accomplishment. I’d like to commend the SBLA and the Wilkie 
Development Corporation for their hard work and efforts in 
rural Saskatchewan. 
 
It was a pleasure for me on Thursday to recognize Wilkie 
Development Corporation achievements and to congratulate 
Eugene Boucher, the Chair, on their accomplishments and I 
wish them continued success. 
 
Thank you. 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Management of Health Care 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
for the Premier. Mr. Premier, it took almost eight years of NDP 
(New Democratic Party) mismanagement but you finally 
succeeded in bringing the health care system to its knees and 
every family in the province is going to pay the price for the 
NDP’s spectacular health care failure — 8,400 nurses on strike 
for 10 days, 1,800 surgeries cancelled, 185 sick people airlifted 
out of the province, and the lives of thousands of families 
thrown into chaos. 
 
Mr. Premier, your government’s cancerous management of the 
health care system has got to stop. Mr. Premier, have you 
learned anything from this disaster? What are you going to do 
to address the serious health care problems that are forcing 
nurses onto the picket line? What actions will you take to fix 
eight years of failed NDP health care mismanagement? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, you’d swear 



April 19, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 627 

by listening to the member that the health system in this 
province doesn’t really do a lot each and every day. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, each and every day 35,000 people come in contact 
with the system. Every day, Mr. Speaker, people go to see their 
physicians, they see specialists, they get tests done, they have 
operations in the hospital, they receive services from home care, 
they receive services from ambulance care. Mr. Speaker, the 
amount of services that our health system provides is absolutely 
phenomenal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this year’s budget we have added an additional 
$195 million and we are now spending $1.9 billion per year or 
40 per cent of overall provincial spending on our health system, 
Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, our health system does work — it 
does work. It does provide services to the people of this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the strike is behind us, and, Mr. Speaker, I’m 
looking forward with getting on with the business of providing 
health services to the people of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, 
all we get from your Minister of Health is tired, old NDP 
sloganeering. But all your worn-out NDP slogans in the world 
can’t hide your government’s brutal record. The longest waiting 
lists in the country; doctors driven out of the province by high 
taxes; nurses driven out by intolerable working conditions; and 
closed hospitals — that’s your record, sir. No amount of NDP 
double-talk is going to change that. 
 
Mr. Premier, there is a crisis of public confidence in the NDP’s 
ability to manage health services. Instead of taking the nurses to 
court, you should be focusing on a cure for a very sick health 
care system. 
 
Mr. Premier, what commitment can you give nurses today that 
the intolerable working conditions you have inflicted upon them 
will improve? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you. Well obviously, Mr. 
Speaker, the member opposite just can’t stand good news. Mr. 
Speaker, 8,400 registered nurses in this province are now back 
at work. Mr. Speaker, this particular collective agreement has 
given nurses what they’ve been asking for for over a decade, as 
I understand it, even while his predecessors, the Conservative 
Party, were in office in the late ’80s and early 1990s. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this collective agreement nurses have a way to 
address nursing practice issues, Mr. Speaker. They’re going to 
see the movement from casual jobs to more full-time jobs. 
Nurses now will have across the system seniority provisions. 
We think, in this collective agreement, there are many 
provisions, Mr. Speaker, that will address nurses’ workplace 
and workload issues. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Apparently the 
minister hasn’t learned a thing from the health care disaster. 
People don’t want more useless rhetoric, they want solutions. 
They want leadership, not NDP political fixes. 

Mr. Premier, how much has this health care crisis cost us? How 
much did the NDP spend on airlifting sick people out of the 
province? How much did taxpayers spend on your NDP 
newspaper propaganda campaign? How much will it cost to 
deal with 1,800 cancelled surgeries? 
 
Mr. Premier, how much did it cost taxpayers for your temper 
tantrum? What is the price tag going to be for the nurses’ 
strike? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, you know, I can’t 
imagine the position of the member opposite. There are now 
8,400 registered nurses that have returned to work. We have a 
situation where we have a memorandum of understanding, Mr. 
Speaker, where that memorandum of understanding addresses 
the kind of issues that my colleague, the Associate Minister of 
Health, has been fighting for since she became president of the 
Saskatchewan Union of Nurses in the ’90s and before, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We have in this collective agreement . . . we are going to see the 
conversion of permanent and part-time jobs to full-time jobs, as 
the member from North Battleford has referred to. That is in the 
memorandum of understanding. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are going to have binding, independent 
assessments where nurses’ workload and nursing practice issues 
can be addressed if they can’t be addressed by the employer. 
And we’re going to have system-wide seniority. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the nurses in this province have been fighting for 
these issues for over a decade — long before our government 
came to office. Mr. Speaker, this collective agreement gives 
them the right to address the workplace issues that they’ve been 
fighting for. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, 
after bringing the health care system to a complete halt for 
almost two weeks, you still haven’t solved a thing and clearly 
you haven’t learned a thing. 
 
The nurses still don’t have a contract. The nurses are still 
overworked. And binding agreements, we remember those with 
the judges — when the government didn’t agree with it so they 
just broke the law. The nurses are still leaving Saskatchewan at 
an alarming rate, and there’s still a massive shortage of nurses 
in our hospital, hospitals. And the cancer clinic employees are 
still on strike, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And yet the Minister of Health says she wouldn’t change a 
thing about how the NDP handled the nurses’ strike. First you 
say you heard the nurses loud and clear. And then you say you 
weren’t concerned about legislating nurses back to work and 
imposing a settlement. Nothing the NDP did this week 
improved the mode or working conditions of nurses. 
 
Mr. Premier, what new solutions do you have for nurses who 
are calling the moving company today because they can’t stand 
to work another day under the NDP’s health care plan? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’d just like to 



628 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 1999 

remind the member what his party has said about health care. 
Mr. Speaker, what they have said is that they are basically 
going to freeze health spending at the rate of inflation. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, that’s about $18 million. 
 
In this budget, Mr. Speaker, we have added an additional $195 
million. Let me remind the member that there is additional 
funding to deal with waiting times in the province of 
Saskatchewan. Let me remind the member — and I know he 
loves to look at his computers and the Internet and so on — go 
across the country and see what’s happening all across the 
country in the area of recruitment and retention, not only for 
RNs, Mr. Speaker, but other health professionals, physicians, 
and specialists. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you would think by listening to that member that 
Saskatchewan is the only province that is addressing this issue. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, go across the land and there are problems 
everywhere, Mr. Speaker. And I will say to the people of this 
province that we have a collective agreement — or we have the 
framework for a collective agreement — and we think that 
we’re going to address the issues that nurses have spoken about 
so eloquently in the last 10 or 11 days. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Call for Election  
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
questions this afternoon are for the Premier. Mr. Speaker, over 
the past 10 years the Premier took mismanagement of the health 
care system to a new low level. He almost single-handedly 
destroyed the health care system in this province and now he’s 
getting cold feet about calling an election. 
 
The Premier is already making excuses to weasel out of the 
June election. Mr. Premier, your four years are up in June. It’s 
time for the people of Saskatchewan to pass judgment on your 
dismal record — the highest taxes, the worst roads, the worst 
job-creation record, and a total disaster of the health care 
system. 
 
Mr. Premier, it’s time for an election. Will you commit to a 
June election now? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
member opposite that obviously the election will come soon 
enough, and I want to say to the member opposite that it will 
probably be too soon for that rump of a Tory Party sitting on 
that side of the House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the members opposite that Tories 
wishing for an early election is like a turkey wishing for an 
early Christmas. And it will come soon enough. Relax. June is 
the first option the Premier has coming forward to call the 
election. And I say to the members opposite: be prepared, the 
election will come in due course. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Premier, I know you 

don’t get to call the election; the Premier does. For very good 
reason you don’t get to call the election. You are completely 
and your government is completely out of new ideas and your 
record is one of complete failure. 
 
I have a copy of your 1991 platform. This is what you are going 
to do for the people of Saskatchewan. You’re going to negotiate 
improvements to GRIP (gross revenue insurance program); you 
cancelled GRIP. You are going to have better health care; 
you’ve destroyed health care. You’re going to eliminate the 
need for food banks. And there are more people on welfare in 
this province than ever before. And here’s one more promise 
that you, Mr. Premier, made and that was to hold general 
elections every four years. 
 
You’ve broken every other promise that you made in the ’91 
election campaign and now I think you’re getting ready to break 
this one as well. 
 
Mr. Premier, what are you afraid of? Why don’t you just call 
the election today and let the people of Saskatchewan decide 
who’s going to be the next government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, when we call the 
election, when the Premier calls the election, we will remind the 
people of Saskatchewan of the record of that Tory 
administration when they were in government. And if you go 
through, one by one, of the members sitting on that side of the 
House they were either members — as the member from 
Moosomin — of the Devine government or they went to 
conventions and supported Devine and the administration that 
led this province, that led this province to the brink of disaster 
in terms of the economy. 
 
The highest per capita debt in the country at $15 billion in total, 
high taxes, record numbers of young people leaving the 
province. I say to that member opposite, when you talk about 
their record, they yell and holler because they try to pretend that 
they’re not Tories. 
 
We will remind the people over and over again that you’re 
Tories and we will remind them of your record. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, we have a new health care crisis in 
the House today. This is a government that’s suffering from 
cold feet and no backbone. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Your mismanagement of the health care system 
is not a reason to delay the election — it’s an excuse. And that’s 
all it is. 
 
If we have to wait for you to fix all the problems that the NDP 
have created, we’ll never have an election in this province. And 
that’s exactly the reason why we need an election in 
Saskatchewan — so we can start cleaning up the mess of the 
NDP record. But instead we have the Premier acting like Lucien 
Bouchard waiting for the winning conditions to be put in place 
before he calls an election. 
 



April 19, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 629 

Mr. Premier, your commitment was to hold a general election 
every four years. Your four years are up. Stop making an 
excuse . . . making excuses. Call the election and let the people 
decide. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, that 
member from Kindersley, it’s laughable to think about what 
he’s saying. He represents the seat, he represents the seat and 
was elected as a Tory where Bob Andrew, where Bob Andrew, 
when he resigned, the seat was left open for how long? For two 
years, two years, Grant Devine failed to call a by-election in 
Kindersley. And he has the audacity to come here and say, as a 
Tory, that we should call the election today, in April. That’s 
nonsense. 
 
I say to the member opposite: open your eyes, look at your 
record, look at your record on taxation, on debt, on sale of 
assets. And I say to you, you should not want an election too 
soon because you may be just transferred back to the private 
sector. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Status of Negotiations with Nurses 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
injunction against the nurses has been put off for a week. Both 
sides asked the judge to postpone it. What surprises us the most 
is why the NDP would still go ahead with these outrageous 
fines. Grudgingly the nurses are back at work. 
 
Mr. Premier, you already put a gun to the nurses’ heads to force 
them back to work. Why are you still intent on public mugging? 
Rather than poison the waters completely for collective 
bargaining in this province, we ask the Premier to call off the 
dogs and stop the court injunction now. Will you do that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, this matter is before the 
courts and so I can’t comment on this specifically. 
 
But what I would say is that in our constitution, in how we’ve 
organized our society in Canada, the judges have a role to play 
in how the system works. And I think it’s incumbent upon us to 
allow the process to work and deal with the issues and the laws 
and the courts and the respect for the courts. 
 
And I would beg all hon. members of this Assembly to 
recognize your role to uphold the laws of our country and to 
respect the respective roles of our Legislative Assembly, our 
executive branch, and of our judiciary. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier isn’t a negotiator or a 
conciliator — he’s a terminator. He terminated the nurses’ right 
to strike, he terminated their right to bargain, and now he has 
terminated their future in Saskatchewan. 
 
Nurses on the picket line in Davidson, Prince Albert, and 
Saskatoon have said that after the way they’ve been treated by 
this NDP, they’re out of here. In other words, because of this 

NDP terminator, they won’t be back. Mr. Speaker, I ask the 
Premier to tell us part two of his plan. Is there some magic 
solution that he has, or are we just going to have to wait for 
Terminator 2: Judgment Day, when the nurses terminate him 
and this NDP government? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
as the people of the province will know, there is a memorandum 
of understanding that has been arrived at between the employer, 
the province of Saskatchewan, and SUN (Saskatchewan Union 
of Nurses). 
 
Mr. Speaker, the SUN leadership returns to the bargaining table 
to bargain the collective agreement in the days ahead, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in this memorandum of understanding, 
there are significant gains for registered nurses in this province 
in terms of addressing their workplace and workload issues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that people want those issues addressed 
— overtime, workload, nursing practice, the need to make more 
full-time jobs. Mr. Speaker, I’m confident that once the 
collective agreement is implemented, that we will have nurses 
coming to the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, in the nine days the NDP kept the 
nurses on the picket line, the government didn’t have to pay 
millions in salaries. Now it looks like the nurses are able to go 
back to work, albeit after a gun being held to their head. Mr. 
Speaker, I ask the minister: with all the millions the NDP did 
not pay out in salaries during the strike, will you promise that 
that money, those millions, in addition to the agreement, will go 
into the recruitment and retention of nurses in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, any time there is a 
withdrawal of labour by a group of working people who go on 
strike, one of the ramifications of that is that you do not receive 
your normal salary for the hours and days that you work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this province spends $1.9 billion on health care. I 
can assure the member that next year, when Public Accounts are 
released, all $1.9 billion will have been spent on health services 
for the people of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, at the start of the year, the NDP 
government said its priority would be to recruit nurses, 
especially after the Regina Health District was forced to close 
64 beds because of a lack of nurses. In the NDP budget, they 
said health care would be taken care of because of restored 
federal government funding and the money would go to 
front-line nurses. Now the NDP offers less money than what 
Alberta and Manitoba nurses are getting, after legislating nurses 
back to work and threatening them with fines and jail. 
 
Does the Premier think his NDP tactics are an effective way of 
attracting nurses to this great province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, what I can say to the 
member is that if you look at nurses’ beginning salaries in this 
province — that’s their entry-level salary — they have, I 



630 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 1999 

believe, the third or fourth highest entry-level salary in the 
country. Mr. Speaker, if you look at the top salary before this 
collective agreement, we were about sixth in the country — 
ahead of Manitoba. Those are the facts, member. 
 
With this collective agreement, Mr. Speaker, I am confident 
that we will see significant improvement in the workplace for 
registered nurses. I’m also confident, Mr. Speaker, that we have 
addressed the issues of pay, particularly our commitment to 
implement pay equity in 2001. I’m not aware of any other 
registered nurse in Canada that will have that kind of pay equity 
implemented in their collective agreement. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, this question is for the 
government’s chief labour negotiator once again — the 
Premier. The Premier has shown himself to be a man willing to 
trample the rights of workers at a moment’s notice. The Premier 
has shown himself to be a man willing to stick his nose into 
bargaining when it’s not going his way. By imposing 
settlements, the Premier has made the collective bargaining 
process a farce in this province. Why should anyone else bother 
to negotiate when they know 2, 2, and 2 is going to be shoved 
down their throats. And if that’s too hard to swallow, maybe the 
Premier will offer a toothbrush. 
 
I ask the Premier if his take-it-or-leave-it offer is the best that 
can be expected by any other union? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, what I can tell or share 
with the member is that all of the Crown corporations and the 
civil service and I understand also third parties, about 98 per 
cent of the collective agreements have been agreed to in the 
public sector and all have agreed to the mandate of 2, 2, and 2 
plus 1. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the province of Saskatchewan only has a limited 
amount of fiscal capacity, Mr. Speaker. There’s only so much 
that the people of this province can pay for. 
 
Mr. Speaker, inflation in this province today is less that 1.4 per 
cent, and yet in fairness to working people in this province who 
have certainly assisted the province deal with debt and deficit, 
we have a collective agreement that . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order. The hon. 
members will recognize that the Chair is having some difficulty 
being able to hear the answer being provided by the minister, 
and I’ll ask for the co-operation from members on both sides of 
the House. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — What I was saying, Mr. Speaker, is the 
people of this province pay, you know, taxes for the revenues of 
this province. This is all we can afford, Mr. Speaker. Now if we 
had to sort of take their advice, I’m not sure that we wouldn’t 
be back in a deficit position and adding to the provincial debt. 
I’m not interested in going there, Mr. Speaker, and I don’t think 
any citizen in this province is as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Policing in Southwest Saskatchewan 
 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question is for the Minister of Justice. Mr. Minister, people in 
southwest Saskatchewan are again expressing serious concerns 
about government plans to cut policing services. Southwest 
Saskatchewan is thinly populated and has been policed for 
decades with one- and two-officer detachments. 
 
Now the towns of Eastend, Climax, Val Marie, and Consul have 
reason to believe they are about to lose their police officers. Mr. 
Speaker, that means the entire southwest corner of the province 
would be policed out of detachments in Maple Creek, 
Shaunavon, and Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you assure the people of Climax, Eastend, 
Val Marie, and Consul that their communities will continue to 
be policed by RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) officers 
who live there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, our policy in this 
government is to provide policing throughout the whole 
province in a way that’s sustainable and affordable for all of us 
and that provides safe communities for everyone. 
 
The RCMP have been working with the communities in 
southwest Saskatchewan and they have told the Consul and 
Eastend people and I think Climax as well, that they’re not 
planning to leave that area. But they want to work with those 
people to figure out some of the ways that some of the costs can 
be shared. 
 
And practically, I know and I’ve been receiving regular reports 
as these discussions have continued, that they’re continuing to 
talk with the people in those areas. But there is no plan to have 
the police officers leave those communities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 25  The Education Amendment Act, 1999/Loi de 
1999 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 

 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I move that Bill 25, The Education 
Amendment Act, 1999 be introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 241 — The Resumption of Services 
(Nurses - SUN) Amendment Act, 1999 

 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move first 
reading of Bill No. 241, The Resumption of Services (Nurses - 
SUN) Amendment Act, 1999. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Leave of Absence of Members 
 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the 
day I ask leave to propose a motion on the absence of members. 



April 19, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 631 

Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I move seconded by the member from Cannington: 
 

That leave of absence be granted to the members for 
Saskatoon Mount Royal, Saskatoon Southeast, and 
Rosthern for Monday, April 19, 1999 and Tuesday, April 
20, 1999 to attend the Midwestern Legislative Exchange at 
St. Paul, Minnesota on behalf of this Assembly. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Ward: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to convert question 53 to 
motions for returns (debatable). 
 
The Speaker: — Item no. 1, question 53 is converted to notice 
of motions for returns (debatable). 
 
Mr. Ward: — I’d like to table the answer to question 54, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The answer to item no. 2, question 54 is 
tabled. 
 
Mr. Ward: — Yes, I’d like to convert question no. 55 to 
motions for returns (debatable), Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Item no. 3, question 55 is converted to notice 
of motions for returns (debatable). 
 
Mr. Ward: — In the spirit of open and accountable 
government, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to table the answer to 
question 56. 
 
The Speaker: — The answer to item no. 4, question 56 is 
provided. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 21 — The Coroners Act, 1999 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second 
reading of The Coroners Act, 1999. The legislation governing 
coroners sets out the rules respecting those deaths which must 
be reported; the rules how investigations of the circumstances 
surrounding the death will occur; and the rules respecting 
inquests. 
 
The Coroners Act has not been amended since 1980 and most 
of the current provisions result from a reform of coroners’ 
legislation in 1936. The Coroners Act provides a framework for 
the coroner system. That system requires that unnatural deaths 
be investigated for the following purposes: to determine the 
facts surrounding a death; to determine the identity of the 
deceased; to determine the time, place, and medical cause of 
death; to identify health and safety hazards; to make 

recommendations to prevent deaths in the future; and to 
maintain public confidence that due attention and concern is 
afforded deaths that occur under unusual circumstances. 
 
The Coroners Act, 1999 requires that deaths must be reported to 
a coroner where anyone has reason to believe a death has 
occurred as a result of violence, misadventure, from a cause 
other than disease or sickness, or as a result of negligence or 
misconduct or malpractice on the part of others. 
 
The coroner must make inquiries and examine the 
circumstances surrounding the death. The coroner may order 
that a post-mortem examination of the body be conducted. If it 
is necessary to satisfy public concern and to provide a public 
airing of the circumstances, the coroner will hold an inquest. 
 
The proposed amendments to this Act include provisions to 
update the Act and make it more relevant to the issues faced by 
coroners in the late 1990s in Saskatchewan. Many of the 
changes give rules and procedures for situations where the 
current Act is now silent. 
 
For example, the new Act will give guidance to the Chief 
Coroner, other coroners, and those people dealing with the 
coroners in investigating unusual deaths. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while the current Act has proved very flexible 
over the years, the lack of clarify in certain areas has made it 
difficult at times to determine what rules and procedures apply 
to specific situations. 
 
Provisions in this new Act expand the instances where a death 
must be reported to a coroner. Presently unnatural and 
unexplained deaths and all deaths of inmates in penitentiaries 
and correctional facilities must be reported. 
 
The new Act will also require deaths to be reported where the 
death occurred in the course of the deceased’s employment; the 
deceased was a child under care pursuant to The Child and 
Family Services Act; the deceased was an involuntary resident 
of a mental health facility; or the death resulted from the actions 
of a police officer. 
 
The coroner’s powers of investigation are specified in the new 
Act. In an investigation the coroner may take possession of the 
body; cordon off for 48 hours the area where a death occurred; 
take charge of objects that are the personal property of the 
deceased and are found near the body; remove objects that 
might be required to establish the identity of the deceased and 
the cause and manner of death; order a post-mortem 
examination; and require the assistance of police officers during 
the course of an investigation. 
 
The Act also establishes, Mr. Speaker, the criteria that the 
coroner shall apply to determine whether an inquest is 
necessary. These criteria are: to ascertain the identity of the 
deceased and determine how, when, where, and by what means 
the death occurred; to inform the public of the circumstances 
surrounding a death where it is necessary to do so; to bring 
dangerous practices or conditions in order to make 
recommendations which will prevent deaths; and to educate the 
public as to dangerous practices or conditions in order to 
prevent deaths. 



632 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 1999 

With respect to a coroner’s inquest, Mr. Speaker, the inquest 
will continue to require a jury of six persons. The new Act will 
use the random jury selection process specified in The Jury Act, 
1998. However, there are two exceptions to a totally random 
jury selection process. 
 
They are: in employment-related deaths, the coroner will be 
able to include someone on the jury who has expertise with 
respect to the type of employment involved; and where the 
deceased was an Aboriginal person, the coroner will be able to 
include on the jury one or more persons of Aboriginal ancestry 
who are chosen from sources specified in the regulations 
pursuant to the Act. 
 
The new Act specifies circumstances surrounding holding an 
inquest. These are: inquests will be held in public unless the 
coroner believes that there is a possibility of serious harm or 
injury to any person as a result of the hearing being made 
public; the coroner is required to give notice of an inquest to 
any person who requests to be advised if an inquest is to be 
held, to the next of kin of the deceased, to persons who the 
coroner thinks have a substantial interest in the inquest, and to 
persons whose conduct may be called into question by the 
inquest. 
 
As with many of the procedural provisions relating to inquests, 
this is already done as a matter of practice by coroners. 
 
Currently if a person has been charged with a criminal offence 
arising out of the death, the inquest cannot be held or must be 
discontinued until the criminal charge has been dealt with by 
the courts. These rules will continue to apply, but the new Act 
also allows the Chief Coroner to apply these provisions to 
provincial offences as well as criminal offences. 
 
In addition to adjourning the inquest after a charge has been 
laid, the coroner will be able to order a ban on publication of 
evidence to ensure that a person who may undergo a trial is not 
subjected to publicity arising from evidence at the inquest that 
may prejudice his or her right to a fair trial. 
 
The coroner is given power to ban publication of evidence at an 
inquest which results in a finding of self-inflicted death. Thus 
release of information could be limited to the name, address, 
and occupation of the deceased, plus the fact the death was 
found to be self-inflicted. This could be done to avoid 
embarrassment for the family of the deceased or to prevent 
copycat situations. 
 
(1430) 
 
There are several new procedural provisions respecting inquests 
that deal with the rights of parties withstanding, summoning 
witnesses, taking evidence, admitting of documents, 
adjournment of proceedings, recording evidence, and contempt 
proceedings. Many of these provide legislative authority for 
what is already occurring as a matter of practice. As is now the 
case, the jury is directed to determine the name of the deceased; 
the time, place, and cause of death; and to make any 
recommendations that it considers appropriate in order to avoid 
similar deaths. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, an effective coroner’s investigation 

system reflects the value our society places on human life and 
promotes accountability and public assurance that the 
government is concerned about preventing deaths. An effective 
coroner’s system results in enhanced credibility and public 
confidence in our justice system. Mr. Speaker, I believe that the 
changes being made in this Act contribute to the continued 
effectiveness of our coroner’s system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act respecting 
Coroners. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am very 
pleased to be able to speak to the second reading of The 
Coroners Act, 1999, and I’m pleased — very pleased — to see 
this Act brought forward because in 1996, 1997, and 1998, I 
brought to the attention of the ministers of Justice and Social 
Services and to the members of the legislature the need to have 
more thorough and extensive investigations into the 
circumstances surrounding deaths, especially the deaths of 
children. 
 
At that time I discovered there were an inordinate number of 
children under the age of one dying in Saskatchewan. And I 
also discovered that there was no mechanism in place for 
thoroughly investigating the circumstances surrounding those 
deaths. Without this, it is virtually impossible to identify ways 
to prevent these deaths. So I believe this Act is way past due; 
but I’m very relieved that it has finally come about, Mr. 
Speaker, and I will be looking forward to further discussion 
with the minister on this Bill in Committee of the Whole. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 27 — The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 1999 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second 
reading of The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 1999. 
 
In October, 1998 the Supreme Court of Canada ruled in Re 
Eurig Estate that probate fees in Ontario were invalid because 
they were enacted without proper authority. The effect of the 
decision was suspended for six months until April 22, 1999 to 
allow time for governments to amend their legislation to 
provide proper authority. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Act responds to that decision. The amount 
payable on an application for letters probate or letters of 
administration has in the past been set out in Queen’s Bench 
regulations. This Bill puts those amounts into the Act itself. The 
amount payable remains the same. 
 
All of the provinces are required to take steps in light of the 
Supreme Court decision. Similar Acts have already been passed 
in Ontario, Newfoundland, and New Brunswick; the other 
provinces are preparing to follow suit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of an Act to amend The 
Queen’s Bench Act. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 



April 19, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 633 

as the Minister of Justice just explained, the reason this Bill is 
coming forward is because of a Supreme Court decision. And in 
layman’s terms what happened in that Supreme Court decision, 
Mr. Speaker, was that they made the decision that because there 
was no services being provided, these were not actually fees for 
service but rather were a form of taxation — a taxation of .7 per 
cent on the value of the estate being probated, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The court determined that because there was no service 
involved in the collection of these fees, that it then had to be 
placed under statute to make it legal to collect this kind of 
taxation, Mr. Speaker. And that’s why this particular Bill is 
coming forward today. 
 
I have to ask the minister — and I hope he will explain it when 
this Bill goes to Committee of the Whole — why does this 
particular fee or tax, why is it in place when there is actually no 
service provided for it? It’s simply an estate tax. It’s a tax on 
dying, Mr. Speaker, pure and simple. The collection of a 
taxation on the total value of an estate being probated simply is 
a tax grab by this government — and by previous governments, 
Mr. Speaker because this is not a new tax, this tax has been in 
place for a number of years now — and it’s simply a tax grab 
by the government on dying. It takes the money away from the 
heirs and places it in the hand of the government. 
 
And why, Mr. Speaker, is the amount established as $7 on 
1,000? Does this Act give the minister the authority to change 
that at any point in time without coming to the House? Does the 
minister have to come to the House if he wants to make an 
adjustment in it, Mr. Speaker? 
 
We believe that estate taxes are not the thing that we should be 
doing, Mr. Speaker. The taxes should be upfront where people 
can see them and not on the dying. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s one other thing on this particular Act that 
is very NDP — very NDP. Because again, Mr. Speaker, they’re 
deeming something to have happened. They go back, Mr. 
Speaker, into the past and deem that this Act was in place 
before today. That all the things that were done previously 
under the legislation that was in place, that the Supreme Court 
ruled was invalid, now becomes legal. 
 
We remember that, Mr. Speaker, when the member from 
Rosetown did it to farmers. He deemed that the GRIP contract 
was in place before the deadline ran out. We all know, Mr. 
Speaker, that that was not the case. Every farmer in this 
province knows it, and the NDP in this piece of legislation are 
doing it again, Mr. Speaker. They’re deeming something to 
have happened when in reality it did not. 
 
The same thing happened, Mr. Speaker, with the judges, with 
the judges. They deemed a settlement to have been in place 
when in actual fact they broke the law, Mr. Speaker, in settling 
the labour negotiations with the judges. When they had binding 
arbitration . . . they had binding arbitration in place, Mr. 
Speaker, that this government had introduced; they broke it and 
deemed a settlement to have been in place. That’s what this 
government does — they deem everything to have happened 
some time in the past and make what was illegal, legal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe there are a number of people around this 

province that have some interest in this particular piece of Bill 
. . . this Bill. So therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would move that we 
adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 28 — The Administration of Estates Amendment 
Act, 1999/Loi de 1999 modifiant la Loi sur 

l’administration des successions 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second 
reading of The Administration of Estates Amendment Act, 
1999. This Bill proposes the same change as that outlined in 
The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 1999. 
 
In 1998, a new Act was passed which divided The Queen’s 
Bench Act into The Queen’s Bench Act and The Administration 
of Estates Act. These Acts have not yet been proclaimed. When 
they are proclaimed, the new system of setting out in the Act 
the amount payable on an application for letters probate or 
letters of administration will continue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of an Act to amend The 
Administration of Estates Act. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This Act, like 
the previous one, deals with the issues of probate that were 
brought forward by the Supreme Court in the settlement of the 
issue that was before them, where it was determined that the 
probate fees being charged were not legal, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And this is an attempt to do exactly that, to make what was 
happening in the past, legal today. There is no deeming in this 
particular piece of legislation though, Mr. Speaker, because it’s 
dealt with under Bill No. 27. 
 
The same issues arise though, Mr. Speaker, with this piece of 
legislation and there are a number of people across this 
province who are interested in it. Therefore I would move that 
we adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 8 — The Assessment Management Agency 
Amendment Act, 1999 

 
The Chair: — I would ask the minister to introduce her 
officials, please. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 
To my left is John Edwards, the acting assistant deputy 
minister. Behind him is Ken Kolb, senior policy analyst. And 
behind me is Keith Comstock, acting executive director. All 
from the Department of Municipal Affairs, Culture and 
Housing, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I’d like to take the opportunity to welcome the 
minister’s officials once again today. 



634 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 1999 

And on the assessment Bill amendment we are talking about 
today, I think we’ve fully answered our questions and we’ll let 
this Bill proceed at this time, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 
 
(1445) 
 
Clause 9 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, on clause 9, a 
proposed House amendment, a copy of which has been 
distributed to the members opposite. It was noticed in 
discussion the other day that in the printed Bill that we were 
using, there was an amendment required to: 
 

clause 12(1)(f) of The Assessment Management Agency 
Act, as being enacted by Clause 9 of the printed Bill, by 
striking out “pursuant” in the fourth line and substituting 
“pursuit”. 

 
I so move. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Madame 
Minister, all I would ask in this case is, what does this change 
. . . or what are the intentions of this change, or was this an 
oversight in the original amendment? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, this is simply, if you 
might say, a typo. If you will check the record of Hansard, I am 
so eagle-eyed that in reading this clause in response to a 
question from the member opposite, I did read “in pursuit of 
that objective” but the text reads “in pursuant” which doesn’t 
make sense, so we’re just changing the typo. Thank you. 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 9 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 10 to 19 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 
 

Bill No. 14 — The Urban Municipality 
Amendment Act, 1999 

 
The Chair: — It is the same minister, same officials. 
 
Clauses 1 to 19 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 13 — The Rural Municipality 
Amendment Act, 1999 

 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to ask 
the minister, we are getting a fair number of calls on the issue 
of principal residence, which is leading to certain inequities that 
I know the minister is familiar with, and I would like to ask her 

if the department has proposals for dealing with those 
situations. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, the member opposite is 
most likely aware, if he was here during the committee 
discussion the other day, that the department set up following 
the last reassessment, a review committee — two review 
committees actually — one on the assessment experience and 
one on exemptions province-wide, all exemptions. 
 
At this moment, the conclusions and reports of that very 
broad-based committee, those committees are being circulated 
back to the members of the committees and the various 
stakeholder organizations for their feedback and discussion. 
And when that is received by the government we will then, as a 
minister and department forward some proposals to the 
government for action. But obviously given the time of the 
legislative cycle, those proposals will not likely take the form of 
legislation until the next session in 2000. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Also I know the 
minister has on many occasions explained that our property tax 
is an ad valorem system; nonetheless, it is the expectation of 
most taxpayers that in one way or another taxes are related to 
services. 
 
With reassessment, people living — especially in some of the 
resort areas at the lakes — find themselves now paying 
basically city taxes with no services or very minimal services I 
should say. This is partly because of the view tax which of 
course is not related to anything that the municipality has given 
them. 
 
But it seems to me we want to encourage people — the trend 
that is occurring right now of people retiring by building 
permanent homes at our lakes rather than leaving the province 
— we want to encourage that. But they are being discouraged 
when they find themselves paying city taxes without city 
services. And even on an ad valorem system there seems to be 
something not quite right about that, and I would ask the 
minister to please address us on that. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, the review committees 
did examine issues related to the ad valorem system that we and 
every taxing authority in North America at least uses for local 
taxation purposes. 
 
And I can only assure the member that we recognize that resort 
property and second residences are very important. A lot of 
people don’t realize that 1 out of 20 or 5 per cent of the 
residences in this province are secondary or cottage, if you like, 
lake residences. So we recognize it as an important issue and I 
can assure the member that membership of the resort 
communities organizations were stakeholders that were 
included in the review committees. So the many issues that the 
member raises on behalf of his constituents have been taken 
into account in those discussions, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 20 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 



April 19, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 635 

Bill No. 12 — The Northern Municipalities 
Amendment Act, 1999 

 
Clauses 1 to 22 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
(1500) 
 

Bill No. 17 — The Local Government Election 
Amendment Act, 1999 

 
Clause 1 
 
The Chair: — I see that the minister has one change in 
officials. I would ask her to introduce him. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Yes, 
behind me is Michael Littlewood, the executive director of 
legislation and school administration from the Department of 
Education, has joined us for the purposes of this discussion. 
And on my left, who has moved from behind me to the front, is 
Keith Comstock. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Madam 
Minister, we can only be so agreeable for so long and then it 
wears thin; we have to put an end to it. Madam Minister, I’d 
like to welcome your new official that’s here today, that’s 
joined you now. And we just have a few questions on this Bill, 
Madam Minister, because the changes I believe are fairly mild 
changes. 
 
Madam Minister, you say the municipalities have been asking 
for a change in rules regarding how and where they must 
advertise notice of elections. Could you actually just explain 
how you’ve loosened these rules up? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, it’s the definition of 
newspaper that is changing. And as the member will be aware, 
it is usually . . . Just take, for example, the Saskatoon region — 
I’ll give the one that I’m most familiar with — there used to be 
a requirement the way that it was worded, that an ad would 
have to run regarding elections in the newspaper in the area that 
had the greatest circulation. 
 
Well it costs a great deal more to advertise, for example, in the 
Star-Phoenix than it does, for example, in the Rosthern Valley 
News or The Village Press which circulate in the rural areas. 
 
So this is designed to allow municipalities to advertise 
requirements for election in a local periodical that is distributed 
at least weekly and in a publication other than that used 
exclusively for advertising. So it must meet the definition of 
newspaper but it’s more flexible and allows municipalities to 
cover the area where they need to inform people but at their 
discretion at a lesser cost. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I agree with that change. I think it will be a 
cost-saving measure for the municipality involved. 
 
You still though do not allow these notices to be placed in 
advertising supplements even though these types of papers 

probably have a wider circulation than the paid subscription 
papers. Was that even a consideration this time in the changes 
that you’ve made? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, we would respond that 
it was considered. But given actually the importance of these 
and given that sometimes advertising supplements have a fairly 
sporadic distribution — for example, I receive mail on a rural 
route myself — and just depending on the distributor of the 
advertising supplement, certain areas might be covered and 
certain areas might not. 
 
So the subscription list for a local weekly is likely to be more 
representative of the population. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, you’ve changed the rules regarding the ordering of 
names on the ballot. Are they currently listed strictly in 
alphabetical and was this seen as an advantage to those with 
names beginning with an early letter in the alphabet? And I 
guess that’s always the way we’ve done it. I’ve never really 
thought about it being an advantage to everybody, but because 
my name begins with B I kind of like the old system better. 
Was that why this change was actually made? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, a number of issues 
were considered in this. Of course as the member opposite 
knows, I’m not running for re-election so I don’t care if my 
name starts with T and is at the bottom of the ballot. I was able 
to get elected in spite of that considerable handicap. 
 
I think it’s . . . it’s more than mythology that the first name on 
the ballot in alphabetical order has some kind of a perceptual 
advantage. And municipalities have actually been asking for 
this change so that they could use, for example, a rotation or the 
method of a draw to determine in what order the names would 
come on. Because you know what might happen, if the 
candidates . . . if the real candidates’ names started with, say, S 
and T and then there was Fido . . . was first, this could pose a 
problem. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, I may have missed this earlier, you may have 
answered this already, but will this strictly be up to the 
municipality involved? Will the municipality decide which 
name goes on first and by what method? Can they decide by 
any method they so wish? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, this is enabling 
legislation. A municipality can decide whether it wishes to avail 
itself of this option and by what means. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I believe also 
in this legislation you’re going to begin allowing voting at 
bedside, which I think is a good thing. But how will the 
scrutinizing work in this case? Is there any kind of scrutinizing 
that will ensure secrecy, fairness of vote, and so on? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, this has been done in a 
limited way in the past, and the ballot box and the agent will 
actually be taken to the person who requests to vote in this 
manner and style. 
 



636 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 1999 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. You’re 
putting in also provisions to account for displaced voters similar 
to the changes we saw recently in The Elections Act, 1996. Can 
you tell us how this will work in a practical sense? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, the provisions are 
being provided for this kind of situation — like an evacuation in 
a forest fire, for example, or the potential for an impending 
flood situation. So it allows for a postponement and we think it 
will provide more flexibility in these kind of situations. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Last year, Madam Minister, in Regina we 
saw a circumstance where a school board trustee resigned, 
causing a by-election. This by-election cost thousands and 
thousands of dollars to run and about 5 per cent of the voters 
turned out to vote. 
 
Many people thought you might address this situation during 
this session by putting forward some alternatives to holding 
by-elections in cases like this. Was this considered this time 
around and if not, like it hasn’t been, why would you not look at 
that in this case? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, I’m advised that a 
number of options were looked at but that paramount there is a 
number of issues that would have to be looked at. 
 
First of all it was, there was, a desire to consult with the whole 
SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees Association) and perhaps 
be supported by the resolution of a convention which the timing 
of the consultations didn’t allow. 
 
And the other issue that complicates it is that there is a move 
and a desire in some quarters to move to the ward system for 
school board elections and . . . which it already is in rural areas 
but in urban areas. And this then would become less of an issue 
because it would be much more cost effective to hold a 
by-election in a ward than it would in a city at large. So I’m not 
to say that we would preclude ever looking at that, but in light 
of the new circumstances there would have to be an, you know, 
another round of consultations. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I think that answers all the questions we have on this 
Bill. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 22 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Schedules 1 and 2 agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, I would move that Bill 
No. 17, The Local Government Election Amendment Act, 1999 
be moved without amendment. 
 
And, Mr. Chairman, I would also like to add that during the 
discussion and question and answer that we had, I referred 
mainly to municipalities, but in all cases, school boards could 
be interchanged because it applies to both. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No 10 — The Boiler and Pressure Vessel Act, 1999 
 

The Chair: — With the indulgence of the committee, this Act 
has 63 clauses but it is broke into 11 parts. Can we go part by 
part? 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman of 
committees. Madam Minister, I’d like to thank you and your 
officials for coming in today. The last time I believe that this 
Act was changed was in 1978. And I expect that there have 
been a number of amendments that have dealt with various 
issues up until now. 
 
I wonder if you could give us an explanation on why you felt it 
was important to rewrite the Act at this time. Basically what 
kind of changes have you done to it? And who did you consult 
before making these changes? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, before I respond to the 
questions, I’d just like to introduce on my left Nick Surtees, 
who is the executive director of protective services . . . 
protection services. We had another change in officials here. 
 
The member opposite is correct in his observation that it’s quite 
some time since any amendments have occurred to this Act. 
There have been a number, a large number of changes you 
might say since the last amendments, in the design, in the 
technology of equipment itself and in the kind of workplaces 
and settings that high and low pressure vessels are used. And in 
response to many industry concerns, we have undertaken very 
extensive consultations respecting the potential changes to this 
Act, and that is why and how the changes have been 
undertaken, Mr. Chairman. 
 
(1515) 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I wonder 
if you could supply us with a list of those people that you 
consulted with and the times and locations where those 
consultations took place. 
 
This Bill is in a lot of cases, about the safety issues involved 
with pressure vessels and pressure piping. What new safety 
issues are you dealing with here and how are you dealing with 
those safety issues? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Well, Mr. Chairman, first of all we’ll 
be pleased to provide members opposite with a copy of a list of 
the industry associations and stakeholders that were consulted, 
which would include manufacturers, major industrial users, 
business organizations, third-party users, trade-related 
organizations, and unions. 
 
The reasons, as I understood the member opposite asked, that 
these were undertaken is the need to move technical and 
administrative requirements to facilitate flexibility in response 
to technological change. 
 
And I guess one issue could be that there are a number of small 
manufacturers particularly in the growing food-processing 
industry in the province who feel . . . these might be located in 



April 19, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 637 

rural areas. And while the procedures they use might be quite 
sophisticated, in some cases they are using low-pressure vessels 
which require less stringent standards for operators and so forth, 
because they feel that some of our regulations for the high 
pressure vessels are too onerous for them to afford. Having to 
move to the other option restricts their capacity. So we’ve been 
asked . . . there are a number of issues. That’s just one that I 
give by example. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, perhaps you 
could give a clarification of what you mean by low pressure 
versus high pressure. Where is the cut-off? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, the member opposite 
will have, I believe, a copy of the Bill. And the definitions of a 
high pressure vessel will appear under the definitions under (j); 
and the low pressure vessel is defined under (l) of the 
definitions. And these differences relate to the working 
pressure, the number of kilopascals, and the pressure at which 
. . . the pressure and temperature at which the equipment is 
operated. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I won’t 
ask you to translate that into pounds of pressure. Seven times is 
what the number is, roughly. 
 
Madam Minister, in this Bill what you have done is removed a 
fair amount of the meat that was in the previous Bill dealing 
with standards, and have put those into regulations. Are those 
regulations presently available, and if they’re not, how soon 
will they be available? Since they were laid out previously in 
the Act, what was the reason for withdrawing them from the 
Act itself and putting the standards into regulation? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Again, Mr. Chairman, the regulations 
. . . the parts that the member refers to that would be moved into 
regulations are currently the subject of further consultations as 
to the specifics. And so the Bill would be proclaimed at the time 
that the regulations have been agreed on through the 
consultative process. And that timing would be, I guess, in the 
near future. 
 
And the reason that that would be done is to provide, in the 
changing . . . the rapidly changing technology that we have in 
this field, to be able to be more flexible by having to change a 
regulation rather than to come for an amendment in the House 
to the legislation. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. You have 
definitions in here for low and high pressure. I also know that 
there’s other legislation on the statute books of Saskatchewan 
dealing with other pressure units such as used in the oil field, 
the pipelines, etc. Will this Act pertain to those, or will those 
remain under separate Acts? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, in section 3 of the Act 
entitled application of the Act, it provides that in clause (c) and 
(d) oil and gas as defined in The Pipe Lines Act and The Gas 
Licensing Act are specifically exempt from this legislation. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister, it doesn’t 
make any sense to make something redundant when it’s already 
in place in one place. One of the things that this Act does 

introduce that’s new is a Boiler and Pressure Vessel Safety 
Board. 
 
Madam Minister, I wonder if you can explain to us exactly what 
you envision this particular board doing? Who will be on this 
board? Will they be representatives from industry or will they 
be someone else? And what will their qualifications be? 
 
I note in the Act that you have outlined requirements of 
qualifications for inspectors but no place does it talk about the 
requirements for qualifications of the people who are sitting on 
the board. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, I thank the member for 
the question. It’s proposed that there would be an 11-member 
board that would consist of people who would be nominated . . . 
whose names would be placed forward by the sectors that I’ve 
previously mentioned being manufacturers, major industrial 
users, business organizations, trade-related organizations, that 
sort of people. And so I think it would be . . . it’s more than safe 
to assume that the personnel or the nominations that would 
come forward to serve on this kind of a board would carry with 
them the qualifications and technical expertise required to make 
the judgments that will be called upon to make. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Madam Minister, these people will be 
placed on the board by order in council — meaning by cabinet. 
You’re saying they’ll be nominated from industry. I don’t see 
that in the Act, that nomination process is in place. If it is, 
perhaps you can point it out to me. 
 
Will the government be appointing any representatives to that 
board, or will they all be coming from nominations from 
industry? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, the very first 
interpretation in the definitions, in section 2(a) of the Act, sets 
out that any reference to board means the Boiler and Pressure 
Vessel Safety Board established pursuant to section 44 of the 
Act. And then the board would actually be prescribed in the 
regulations, and all of the members would be nominees from 
the kind of organizations previously mentioned and confirmed 
by order in council. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — But, Madam Minister, that nomination 
process is not set out in the Act. You’re talking about putting it 
into regulations. That means at any point in time, if it does 
become part of the regulations, it can be removed from 
regulations. It doesn’t outline that the nomination process will 
be from industry. It simply says — to my reading — that it will 
be appointed by the Lieutenant Governor in Council in 
accordance with any criteria or procedures for appointment that 
are prescribed in regulations. 
 
So, Madam Minister, would it be possible to include in the Act 
the inclusion that the nominations would come from industry 
for appointment by the Lieutenant Governor in Council? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, well that’s actually a 
standard procedure. Any criteria or procedure that is prescribed 
. . . for appointment will be prescribed in the regulations and 
then, as any other board, when the nominations come forward 
from the various stakeholders then they’re confirmed by order 



638 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 1999 

in council. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well unfortunately, Madam Minister, 
we’ve seen too many times in the past that the major 
qualification was an NDP membership card. If it was included 
in the Act that it would be nominated from the various sectors 
of the industry, then that requirement wouldn’t be the 
predominant one. And it would . . . If it was there, it would be a 
secondary one and not the predominant one. 
 
We believe that it would be better if it was included in the Act 
that the nominations for the safety board come indeed from 
industry rather than not being included — being silent on it in 
the Act — because it allows too much interpretation, Madam 
Minister. 
 
I’m sure that, knowing you, you would appoint someone 
nominated from industry but we also know that you have 
tendered your . . . you’ve given notice that you will not be 
seeking reelection. Therefore if your party should have the 
misfortune to again become government, there would be 
another minister on that side of the House and they may not be 
as diligent as you are in ensuring that somebody from industry 
was represented on there. So, Madam Minister, I would think it 
would be very worthwhile if included in this Act — rather than 
in regulations — was an outline for the nomination process. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the procedure of 
nominating people to boards and commissions and a 
membership card in a particular party may have been the vogue 
when the members opposite held government, but we have 
many examples where we have boards of . . . for instance the 
Fire Service Council that was recently set up consists of 
nominees entirely from the professional and volunteer fire 
service in the province, with no nominations from us. 
 
And I’m sure that for this kind of a board — where the kind of 
expertise is subject to strict regulation, any aberration from the 
regulations could have serious consequences for employees or 
the public — that industry itself would be very upset and make 
it clearly known publicly if they felt that there were people 
being appointed to this board who were not competent to rule 
on appeals and to make decisions for this highly sensitive 
industry, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I agree 
that when industry came before the board on an appeal process 
and they felt that the people hearing the appeal were not 
knowledgeable, they would have a serious concern. And that’s 
why I raise this very issue, Madam Minister, because we have 
seen too many government appointments that, when appointed, 
perhaps don’t have the total grasp of the field in which they 
have been appointed. 
 
Therefore it is incumbent on the government to ensure that the 
people being appointed to the position such as this — which is a 
very technical position — actually have a grounding in the 
industry that they’re being asked to judge, Madam Minister. 
 
Madam Minister, you’re also in this Act appointing special 
inspectors which is a new category, I believe. Under what 
circumstances would these special inspectors be appointed, and 
how would those duties vary from that of chief inspector? 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, the member opposite 
asks about special inspectors as set out in section 4 and this is 
meant to be for a certain . . . a special circumstance like, for 
example, you might have one inspector who inspects wells only 
as an area of expertise, and so they could be designated a 
special inspector for one area of the industry only and not a 
general inspector. So in that sense, the two kinds are designated 
differently for that purpose. 
 
(1530) 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. So what 
you’re talking about is a sort of a one-off situation where they 
would be limited in what they could inspect. Would those 
limitations be clearly spelled out in the licence that they were 
given so if a person contacted them for some other area of 
inspection that they could turn it over to another individual in 
the department or to the chief inspector? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, there will be again in 
the regulations, specifications described for the various kinds of 
inspectors. But if I can read between the lines in the member’s 
question, I think what he means is, you know, would there be 
special inspectors that are qualified in one area only and not in 
others? And I think it’s more likely to be the opposite. A special 
inspector might be qualified as a general inspector but have, in 
addition to that, some qualifications which give him some 
particular expertise in a particular field. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Then 
you’re seeing special inspectors being able to carry out all kinds 
of inspections but they would focus in one particular area. 
Would that be a correct assumption? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, I think the 
qualifications may be broad but the focus of their duties may be 
limited, so there might be more of a demand in one certain field 
of inspection. And so an inspector would be focused more on 
that but the qualifications would be broader, could be broader. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Not only 
do you license pressure vessels or pressure piping under this, 
but you also license the operators of those under this particular 
Act, Madam Minister. What changes are in place on that and 
will you continue to recognize or will they be grandfathered for 
the people who held the old steam tickets in the past? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, I’m advised that the 
new provisions will reflect the current provisions and so there 
won’t be a change except that — and I wouldn’t refer to it as 
grandfathering — but instead of a licence there will now be a 
certificate. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Will there 
be a cost for upgrading to the new certificate for those people 
who held the steam tickets in the past? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, I’m advised that there 
haven’t been any fee changes since 1991, and that the system 
will continue to operate and there’ll simply be a conversion 
upon the renewal. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I’m sorry 



April 19, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 639 

I brought that up because now that you know that it hasn’t 
changed since ’91, I’m sure that the government, the Minister 
of Finance, will be rushing out to change that one. 
 
I understand that boilers and pressure vessels have to be 
registered with the government. Will there be any additional 
costs under the new system compared to the previous 
registrations? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, of course things are 
always subject to change, but there are no changes in those 
costs contemplated in this legislation or the regulations pursuant 
to it. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. You’ve 
added a new section dealing with accidents or explosions of a 
vessel licensed under this Act. Can you tell how this is changed 
and why? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, I’m advised that the 
provisions haven’t really changed; that the language has 
changed somewhat to reflect the reality of today’s technology 
and so forth. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. As the 
investigative powers of the chief inspectors changed, have you 
changed the Act to allow access to private property in any 
manner? I know that in the past dealing with some of the 
environmental issues, the Acts have changed considerably to 
allow access by department people to all properties without a 
warrant, except for domiciles. Has that been included in this 
Act? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, on page 19 of the Act 
there is a section relating to enforcement. This section of the 
Act provides that in order to have access to the premises to 
inspect, that a warrant is necessary, and this is a provision that 
was not included in the old legislation. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Minister, are you saying that the 
provisions of entry with a warrant were not included in the 
previous Act? 
 
I read in here that there are conditions in which an inspector can 
enter: 
 

. . . without a warrant if: 
 

(a) the conditions for obtaining a warrant exist; and 
 

(b) the inspector has reasonable grounds to believe that 
the delay necessary to obtain a warrant would result in: 

 
(i) danger to human life or safety; or 

 
(ii) the loss, removal or destruction of evidence. 

 
If the inspector was to exercise that particular judgment, does 
he have to provide with evidence to substantiate his belief that 
evidence was going to be removed or destroyed or lost if entry 
wasn’t made immediately? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, I am advised that there 

. . . where a warrant would be required, the Act is quite specific 
on that. Then the powers that could be exercised described by 
the member opposite in section (3), in the event that, for 
instance there may be damage to life or property or whatever, in 
the absence of a warrant, the inspector deems it necessary to 
have access he must . . . it is . . . The onus is on the inspector to 
make sure that all of the conditions that would have allowed 
him to obtain a warrant exist. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well maybe the onus is on the inspector, 
Madam Minister, but I don’t see any place in here where the 
inspector has to provide evidence of that condition. He has to 
have reasonable grounds. He is the one who interprets what 
reasonable grounds are to access the property without a warrant. 
 
Surely he should be able to — after the fact if he does enter the 
grounds — be able to substantiate here’s the reason why I 
entered the grounds without a warrant. No place in here does it 
say he has to be able to do that, Madam Minister, and again I 
believe that would be incumbent on the government to insist 
that that kind of reasonable grounds be in place. That that kind 
of evidence be available for the inspector to provide, after the 
fact, if he does enter grounds without a warrant. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I guess I may be 
reading the section differently than the member opposite but I 
believe that the first part of the section sets out the conditions 
that are required in order to obtain a warrant. Section 3 is very 
specific about: 
 

an inspector may exercise all or any of the powers 
mentioned in subsection (2) without a warrant if: 
 

(a) the conditions for obtaining a warrant exist; and 
 
(b) (if) the inspector has reasonable grounds to believe 
that the delay necessary to obtain a warrant would result 
in 
 

(i) danger to human life or safety; or 
 
(ii) the loss, removal, or destruction of evidence. 

 
And then it goes on to talk about: 
 

. . . shall not enter any premises that are a private dwelling 
without the consent of the occupant or a warrant . . . 

 
And so obviously if an inspector did not use due diligence to 
make sure that the circumstances for a warrant existed based on 
this . . . if it happened to me, I would read this and I would say I 
can sue and I can claim for damages and I can be successful 
based on this. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, it would be nice 
to believe that we could actually turn around and sue if they 
entered the property without reasonable grounds, but you also 
have clause no. 60 in here — non-liability — which says: 
 

No action or proceedings lie or shall be commenced 
against the minister, the department, an inspector, an 
employee or agent of the department . . . 
 



640 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 1999 

And so on and so forth. And I think that would do a pretty good 
job of limiting a person’s access to the court system in the case 
where the property owner believed that reasonable grounds 
were not there for immediate access, Madam Minister. 
 
When we look at the appeal process on this, and it deals with — 
or doesn’t deal with — court action, as the case may be, what 
grounds would a person have for appeal and would the decision 
of the board be . . . would you be able to take a decision of the 
board and challenge it in the court system? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, on page 19, section 52 
states that the decision of the board is final and there shall be no 
further appeal. And section 44 sets out the grounds for recourse 
to appeal — being licenses, registration of designs, inspections, 
quality management systems, and certificates of qualification. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. So you’re 
saying in this particular Act that a decision by the board is not 
therefore challengeable by the court system? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, that is correct. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, I find that very 
concerning that the government would put in place a board that 
can make the decisions unilaterally with no appeal to their 
decision. Not even the court judges in Saskatchewan, Madam 
Minister, have that power. You can appeal up to the very top 
court, to the Supreme Court of Canada. 
 
And indeed the Minister of Justice was bringing in legislation 
today to make amendments to the legislation in Saskatchewan, 
just as every other justice minister across this country is doing, 
to make corrections to legislation that was flawed because the 
Supreme Court ruled it as such. 
 
And here you’re introducing legislation, Madam Minister, that 
doesn’t even allow the citizens of this province to have access 
to the court system who are, under our system, the final arbiters 
of the written law. And, Madam Minister, I find it appalling that 
you would introduce this kind of legislation which would 
restrict the access of people of this province to their court 
system. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Oh, I gather the minister wants to 
answer. 
 
(1545) 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, the member shouldn’t 
let his blood pressure get raised over this issue because this is 
actually, this is actually a fairly standard disclaimer, and in fact 
it’s a very standard disclaimer and it does not rule out a court 
action. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, you just stood 
up and said here two minutes ago, that it did rule out a court 
action. So can you appeal to the courts or can you not appeal to 
the courts? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, I’m not sure whether I 
misspoke myself or whether the member opposite 
misunderstood me. What I meant to say and what I believe I 

said, but anyways to put it on the record, that for the purposes 
of this Act, the appeal is limited to the board and the board’s 
decision is final. If someone is aggrieved by the decision, they 
always have recourse to the courts. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister, for 
clearing that up because there are numbers of pieces of 
legislation that have been presented by your government that do 
limit people’s access to the court systems, such as the SGI 
(Saskatchewan Government Insurance) no-fault insurance. 
 
Madam Minister, the chief inspector and the general inspectors, 
the special inspectors that you may have employed within your 
department, are these people bonded? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, they certainly have 
specific sets of qualifications and so forth. But in the sense of 
. . . I’m not sure whether the member opposite means financial 
liability bonding, they’re not, as other public servants are not 
required to be bonded. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — But, Madam Minister, these have access 
under reasonable grounds to confidential information. They 
have access to private property without warrants under those 
reasonable grounds. They have access to things that the normal 
civil servant does not have access to. 
 
And I think, Madam Minister, it would be of value both to the 
individuals working in your department and to the people with 
whom they work in the general public if they were indeed 
bonded, Madam Chair. And I would ask that you give serious 
consideration to providing bonding for them. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, again, I think that the 
member opposite is getting really, really excited. We’ve had on 
our farm low pressure vessels for about 30 years and they’ve 
been periodically inspected. They have never blown up. They’re 
periodically inspected. 
 
And I would say that the inspectors that come to look at our 
boiler don’t have access to any more, in terms of our property, 
than insurance agents and appraisers, boiler insurance agents 
and appraisers, utility meter readers — just a variety of service 
people that come into your premises in the course of business. 
And I’ve never noticed anything missing after any of their 
visits, Mr. Chairman, so I think it might be an anxiety that the 
member opposite could relax about. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, Madam Chair, I am certainly 
making sure my blood pressure is under control given the state 
of health care in Saskatchewan. 
 
But, Madam Chair, we’re not talking about your general 
inspections. We’re talking about the case where the inspector 
would be entering onto the grounds with a warrant, or with 
reasonable grounds without a warrant. So something has 
happened there. 
 
The only thing they’re excluded from is your residence. They 
can enter your place of business for evidence; they can enter 
your work sites. They can enter everything except your home. 



April 19, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 641 

So there is opportunities there for them to have access to 
confidential information, to industrial sensitive information, 
Madam Chair, not just whether or not they’re looking inside 
your chicken house. 
 
So, Madam Chair, I think indeed it would be of value if these 
people were bonded when they’re carrying out those kind of 
duties. When they’re carrying out their normal inspections, 
that’s a different matter. But when they’re carrying out the 
investigations, when they’re carrying out investigations in 
people’s place of businesses related to some of the items — the 
pressure vessels and piping, etc., under this Act — I think for 
their own protection they would benefit from being bonded, 
Madam Chair. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we can certainly 
take that suggestion under advisement. But I think given that 
the consequences of a failure of one of these installations can be 
extremely serious, that the member opposite think about that. 
And I’m not sure whether he’s under high pressure or low 
pressure, but I think he should relax a little. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, I am so relaxed 
I’m enjoying this. And I have indeed worked with both low and 
high pressure vessels in my career although they didn’t come 
under this particular Act. They came under the pipelines and 
flow lines Act, Madam Minister. 
 
When we look at the provisions of this Act and the standards of 
this Act, does this bring us in line with other provinces? Is this 
Act, in regulation standards, more onerous than other 
provinces? Are the penalties in line with other provinces or are 
they more or less onerous than other provinces? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, that’s a very good 
question on the part of the member opposite because certainly 
that was one of the serious issues that was taken under 
consideration, is not only other provinces but in a North 
American context in order for industry and manufacturing and 
the kind of workplaces that would employ boiler and pressure 
vessels, that being competitive is a very important 
consideration. And so we have tried to take into account of all 
of the provisions, penalties, and circumstances that surround 
these issues in a number of jurisdictions in North America and 
we’ve tried to conform on average as closely as possible. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Under the 
provisions of this Act, even if a corporation were not prosecuted 
for breaking the law, individuals sitting on the boards of 
directors of the corporation could be prosecuted. Under what 
kind of circumstances could that happen? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the provision is a 
fairly standard provision and becoming more so actually as I’ve 
noticed, and similar sections exist in The Occupational Health 
and Safety Act, 1993 and The Environmental Management and 
Protection Act. And the reason for such a provision is to 
provide an additional and more effective deterrent against 
failure to comply. 
 
In certain cases, a corporation may be willing or able to absorb 
fines for offences whereas a director in an individual capacity 
may not. In some cases, a corporation may no longer exist and 

no longer have any assets with which to pay the fine, and 
recourse against directors is the only option. 
 
In a prosecution against the director, a judge would have to 
make a determination that the corporation would have been 
guilty of an offence but no actual prosecution or a conviction of 
the corporation would have to have taken place in a separate 
proceeding. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Two more questions, Madam Minister. 
Under section 8 of the Act, (1)(b)(ii), it talks about: 
 

(ii) the chief inspector has reason to believe that it is not in 
the interest of public safety to issue the licence. 

 
In reading that, Madam Minister, it seems to me that what it’s 
saying is that the person applying for the licence actually meets 
the standards necessary, but for some reason the chief inspector 
believes that it’s not in the public safety to issue a licence. 
 
Under what circumstances would that happen? And is that a 
correct interpretation? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Well, Mr. Chairman, certainly this 
Act is specific enough that it wouldn’t be a matter of the whim 
of the chief inspector whether or not a licence would be granted. 
But he may refuse to issue a licence if the applicant does not 
meet all the requirements, for example, can’t pass the required 
examinations and so forth. 
 
And if the section (b)(ii) that “the chief inspector has reason to 
believe that it is not in the interest of public safety to issue the 
licence,” it may be a question of character. He has some 
problem with references or past work history for example. The 
reasons that the member opposite, who’s operated in a 
commercial sense, would understand. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, it does seem a 
little strange though if the person is establishing a business or 
an industry meets the requirements of the Act, but the inspector 
for some reason believes that this person should not have a 
licence to operate a pressure vessel. If for some reason their 
character is not of sound enough nature, then I guess you would 
have to question some of the other things that were issued to 
them, such as a business licence to operate. And why is the 
inspector of pressure vessels being the one to make the 
determination whether or not this person should actually be in 
business? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Well, Mr. Chairman, this is different 
from business licences in that these issues have consequences 
for public safety. But this is another example of a decision — 
for instance, an applicant does not receive a licence based on 
the chief inspector’s decision. This decision also is appealable 
to the board, the Boiler and Pressure Vessel Safety Board that 
we discussed earlier. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. What kind 
of training or what kind of qualifications are in place for the 
chief inspector to allow him to make these kind of judgments? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, the public service and 
the department that the chief inspector is employed by would 



642 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 1999 

set the criteria and the qualifications that would be required to 
carry out the functions as would be set out in the job 
description. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Will the 
chief inspectors be given any special training on how to judge 
character or business qualifications of people applying for 
pressure vessels and piping? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, since I got myself into 
this, I’ll try to get myself out of it. I simply use the, you know, 
the issue of character as an example. I’m quite certain that the 
criteria for and the qualifications for a chief inspector would be 
generally in the area of technical expertise. But also in such a 
senior position in the department with the kind of 
responsibilities that would accrue to that position, it would be 
assumed that this person would also have some other skills, 
some interpersonal skills, and superior judgment skills as well. 
I’ll use character just as an example. 
 
The Chair: — The committee . . . I asked earlier but didn’t get 
total agreement. Seeing as it’s 60-some clauses, can we go 
parts? Is that agreed? 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 63 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
(1600) 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — I thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like 
to thank the minister and her officials coming in today and 
especially her special assistant from Shellbrook for the work 
she did today on — I guess it’s Saskatchewan River, sorry 
about that — with the municipal Acts and The Boiler and 
Pressure Vessel Act. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, I too wanted to express 
my gratitude for the assistance of my officials and the diligent 
questioning from members opposite this afternoon. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 8 — The Assessment Management Agency 
Amendment Act, 1999 

 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the 
amendments be now read the first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the 
Assembly, I move that Bill No. 8 be now read the third time and 
passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 
third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 14 — The Urban Municipality 
Amendment Act, 1999 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 13 — The Rural Municipality 
Amendment Act, 1999 

 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 12 — The Northern Municipalities 
Amendment Act, 1999 

 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 17 — The Local Government Election 
Amendment Act, 1999 

 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill No. 
17, The Local Government Election Amendment Act, 1999 be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 10 — The Boiler and Pressure Vessel Act, 1999 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Environment and Resource Management 

Vote 26 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I’ll invite the minister to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I have with us today 
Stuart Kramer, deputy minister of SERM (Saskatchewan 
Environment and Resource Management). And behind me, 
Dave Phillips, assistant deputy minister of operations. And next 
to him is Dave Tulloch, team leader of corporate development 
unit. 
 
Subvote (ER01) 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And welcome to the 
minister this afternoon, and to his officials. 
 



April 19, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 643 

Mr. Minister, there are a number of areas that I’d like to address 
during these estimates in regards to SERM. But today I want to 
spend this time — I think until the clock runs out — going over 
some issues that are of great concern to SARRC (Saskatchewan 
Association for Resource Recovery Corporation) and SARCAN 
as it relates to the drink container recycling program here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And I understand that SARCAN has recently signed a new 
10-year contract with your department. Can you please outline 
the main points of this contract? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Mr. Chair, thank you very much for the 
question. The main point of the long-term 10-year contract is 
there will be adequate funding for SARCAN to continue to 
operate in Saskatchewan. There will be opportunities to collect 
new items such as the juice boxes which was recently added as 
well as the plastic milk containers, and there’s also opportunity 
for SARCAN to expand. 
 
I just recently attended expansion of new facilities in Kamsack 
and Canora, and SARCAN is alive and well and doing a great 
job here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, can you 
tell me about how much money will your department pay to 
SARCAN in each of those 10 years, and how much will it pay 
in total? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Mr. Chair, for this year we’re paying $8.1 
million to SARCAN. And I can at this time assume that levels 
of funding will be somewhat similar in the coming years and 
perhaps expanded if need be. 
 
(1615) 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you. Eight point one million dollars to 
SARCAN through those deposits. How much will actually be 
collected by government? 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Why is the member for Humboldt on 
her feet? 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Chair, just to clarify the question put to the 
minister a bit, if I could. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’m wondering how much the provincial 
government takes in through the deposits on cans and drink 
containers, and the environmental surcharge that you place on 
cans and drink containers in whole . . . in total. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Mr. Chair, it looks as though we do not 
readily have that figure available. If we find it, we’ll report it 
later this day. And failing that, we’ll certainly get a specific 
response to the hon. member. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And, Mr. Minister, 
when you get your response, I want to know what it is over the 
10-year period of time, what is expected by your government. 
 
Mr. Minister, in talking to SARCAN, I understand the return 
rate of pop cans in Saskatchewan is actually over 100 per cent, 
okay. As I understand it, much of this is due to containers 

coming in from Manitoba because Saskatchewan provides a 
higher refund than Manitoba does. Are you aware of this 
problem, Mr. Minister, and what are you proposing to do to 
combat this type of smuggling from other provinces? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I appreciate the 
question . . . and few programs you can boast about over 100 
per cent success. And the hon. member correctly identifies the 
issue being is that we are receiving containers mostly from 
Manitoba. 
 
We’ve worked with SARCAN very effectively in reducing this 
flow of containers in from Manitoba by limiting the number of 
containers an individual can take to a depot at any particular 
time. We also recognize that this is still a problem and we are 
looking at options, again in co-operation with SARCAN, in a 
way of dealing with this ongoing problem. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, the 
limitation I guess is a good thing but I think it . . . this problem 
is really quite a serious problem. We have a bootlegging 
problem here and in fact SARCAN estimates that about one and 
a half million dollars is lost from the provincial treasury here 
from our taxpayers’ money every year due to these 
out-of-province cans coming in in that number. Is that number, 
that amount of money, accurate in your estimation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Your information is the same that we have, 
Mr. Chair, inasmuch as we are paying out a lot of money to 
people bringing in containers from Manitoba and we are 
looking at ways, continual ways of dealing with this. In 
co-operation with SARCAN, we hope to have some ideas in 
place fairly soon. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, have you 
discussed this problem with your counterparts in Manitoba? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Yes, I have, inasmuch . . . I invited the 
Minister of Environment from Manitoba to come to 
Saskatchewan last year and in fact took him on a tour of the 
Regina SARCAN depot and they were very impressed. But the 
province of Manitoba is looking at recycling and reducing 
waste in a different program so they have chosen not to follow 
Saskatchewan’s example. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, you 
mentioned that you were talking with SARCAN to deal with 
this problem, and I’m wondering what proposals your 
government is looking at to curb this situation? It’s a serious 
situation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Well we certainly have ongoing 
discussions. As I have identified, we’ve limited the number of 
containers. We’ve identified individual people who continually 
bring containers in and the depots have the option of refusing 
the containers. So we will continue to work with SARCAN to 
do whatever is necessary to stop this flow of cans into 
Saskatchewan and, at the same time, reduce the money going 
out of the province. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Minister, I just wanting to put forth a bit of a 
suggestion here. And I think it might be incumbent upon your 
government and a good idea to talk about interprovincial 



644 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 1999 

relationships dealing with the exchange of these containers 
throughout the provinces here, especially our neighbouring 
provinces. Because we are told that there are, as far as the 
limitations go right now, there are certain people who conspire 
to get around SARCAN’s weekly limit of $50. And how 
seriously do you view that problem — you know, the 
conspiracy to get around that weekly limit? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Well you correctly identify the issue and 
we realize that it’s certainly not totally resolved. We will 
continue discussions with Manitoba and Alberta. And also, as 
you may be aware of the individual in the Yorkton area who 
was fined for failing to pay income tax on a lot of money which 
he obtained through recycling of cans. So from various . . . from 
the legal, from the co-operative, from the educational aspect we 
will continue to work at this problem. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, can you 
briefly describe your department’s work on regional waste 
minimization plans? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Mr. Chair, the whole issue of regional 
waste disposal recycling is certainly a very important issue here 
in Saskatchewan. Identifying this, we set up a pilot project 
based out of Humboldt area called REACT (Regional Authority 
of Carlton Trail) and this is the final year of that project. 
 
This project is a pilot project, I might reiterate, in as much as 
we will be doing an analysis to see how we can improve 
recycling on a regional basis. We certainly want to point out the 
pitfalls. We want to point out the things that worked well. And 
when other communities and areas come together to form a 
regional waste disposal site, we can learn from what we learned 
at the REACT pilot project. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m very well aware of 
the REACT program in Humboldt and area. But I also have 
some concerns coming to me from those people that are 
responsible to make sure that people with disabilities also 
continue with their recycling programs. 
 
And so I have to ask you, can you tell me whether SARRC’s 
. . . there is participation by SARRC in those REACT 
programs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — There certainly is some co-operation and 
collaboration between SARRC and waste reduction on a 
regional basis. I can assure you that SARCAN . . . SARRC 
operations provide a very important role. It’s been very 
successful in helping the environment, creating jobs for those 
who most need them. And this will certainly be something that 
we will maintain here in Saskatchewan and dovetail the 
recycling, the co-operation, in future regional waste disposal 
projects. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, SARRC 
members operate extended recycling services as you well know, 
for their communities. And they recycle approximately 26,500 
tonnes of paper and cardboard. 
 
And I think there is some concern that, you know, with the 
expansion of minimalization plans, waste minimalization plans, 
that in fact they won’t have that volume in the future. 

Do you see that SARRC will lose any work or jobs through 
these waste minimalization plans? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — As I said earlier, Mr. Chair, SARCAN and 
SARRC are very important here in Saskatchewan, very unique 
to our province. And we will ensure that any expansion in 
regional waste disposal projects will include SARCAN . . . 
SARRC so that there’s not competition, so that there’s not 
winners and losers. We want everybody to win as we proceed 
down the road of waste reduction and recycling and recovery. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I have to 
ask you if that statement is a commitment today, that SARRC in 
fact will have input into any further and ongoing regional waste 
minimalization plans. Will they get your commitment to that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Certainly SARRC will have a role to play 
and their input will be very much appreciated. Can I guarantee 
that they may not lose some paper or cardboard here and there? 
I cannot, but they will have a very prominent and important role 
in the whole issue of recycling as we expand on the waste 
reduction recycling programs. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, can 
you tell us how many SARCAN recycling sites there are in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — About 70, give or take a few. And there’s 
more sites opening all the time. And these sites employ around 
300 people, and many of them with disabilities. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. If you could be a little 
bit more precise, do you know how many other communities 
have applied to have one of those sites but they’re still on a 
waiting list? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — There often are communities that would 
like a site. And the SARCAN board would determine if two 
communities were too close together, they would probably not 
give each community a site because they want to make sure that 
the one community that has a site is successful. But it’s a 
SARCAN board decision but I do know that wherever possible, 
the SARCAN board does fulfil the wishes of the community 
wishing to obtain a site. And the numbers of the sites are 
continuing to increase. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, are there 
presently at this time any plans to put in place any more of these 
recycling centres? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — We’re not aware of any community waiting 
for a site at this time, Mr. Chair, but we can certainly check 
with SARCAN to see if they have some new sites which will be 
opening up this year, and we can let the hon. member know. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I’d 
like to turn to a couple of other recycling initiatives in 
Saskatchewan. First off, tire recycling. I understand that the 
industry body set up to deal with used tires in Saskatchewan is 
at an arm’s length to government. But as legislative authority, 
you must have some information on this program. 
 
I understand that up until only recently the surcharge on all tires 



April 19, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 645 

was voluntary, and it no longer is. Can you tell us when this 
change was made and why this was done at that particular time? 
 
(1630) 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I appreciate the 
question on the whole issue of tires. You are correct. Scrap tire 
recycling is industry driven. We are at arm’s-length of the 
project. And you are correct in that the project was voluntary to 
begin with. 
 
And what we found last summer, a year ago now actually, the 
number of tires, the number of dealers participating started to 
decline. We were losing ground. The Scrap Tire Corporation 
came to us and asked us to legislate, make it mandatory for 
dealers to participate and pay for the tires. And what we also 
had found was that some dealers were simply pocketing the 
$3.50 and it was not going to where it was supposed to. 
 
So at the request of the Scrap Tire Corporation through 
legislation last fall, September or so, we did make it mandatory 
for dealers to participate. And as a result, the Scrap Tire 
Corporation is now economically viable. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Through that program, 
can you tell us how many tires are being recycled in 
Saskatchewan currently? And what percentage of used tires 
does this reflect in total? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — We currently recycle about 700,000 tires a 
year. Roughly 1 million tires are sold in the province each year. 
And since we made the program mandatory, we’ve had several 
hundred other dealers sign up. And I think the industry has 
realized that this is good for the environment and they need to 
take on the responsibility of getting tires out of the landfill. 
 
Once the program is firmly established, stockpiled tires, tires 
out on farms, will be recycled, and this will be a great service to 
people who have tires laying around. And we certainly look 
forward to getting them out of the environment as well. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Minister, the surcharge on tires is not 
refundable, as it is with pop cans. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — That is correct. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Minister, you partially answered my question 
that I have right now, but I’m afraid that the fact that the 
surcharge is not refundable will hinder efforts to recover these 
old tires, and so what incentive do people really have to bring 
them into a recycling centre? I’ve heard of people talking about 
this and saying that there are a few disincentives in place, and 
certainly one of them is the lack of the surcharge not being 
refundable. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Unfortunately the cost of running this 
program — trucks coming out, picking up old tires — we just 
need that much money to make the program viable. So I guess 
it’s a cost that society is prepared to bear in order to keep the 
tires out of landfill sites. But the tires are being recycled in 
various ways and forms and we want to ensure that this 
continues. 
 

Ms. Julé: — Mr. Minister, for people who do want to recycle 
tires, there are many other tires that are out there that are not 
taken to these recycling places, so there are a great number of 
these tires. 
 
Where people need to have some commitment I guess from 
government that there’s going to be a longer term goal for this 
program in terms of the numbers of tires to be recycled and 
places to take them, a lot of people, Mr. Minister, don’t even 
know where they should be taking them. 
 
Has there been enough communication with consumers? 
Because many simply don’t have a clue that there is any 
recycling occurring and they view the surcharge as simply 
another tax. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Mr. Chair, as I pointed out, we just made it 
mandatory about six months ago that dealers participate and the 
program is still in its infancy. 
 
As it stands now, 700 to 800,000 tires are recycled each year. 
When you get your tires changed in a garage, the old tires are 
left there. You don’t have to worry about taking them home. 
 
And as the program . . . as the corporation becomes more 
sustainable, gets a little bit more money in its account, then we 
will go back and work on the stockpiles — the tires you refer to 
out on the farm, at landfill sites, at dealers who in the past 
haven’t been able to recycle tires. 
 
And actually to Manitoba’s credit they have gone back and 
they’ve been able to pick up a lot of tires from stockpiles. 
 
So because of the infancy of the program here, we are basically 
recycling tires which are currently being used. And certainly 
stockpiled tires, old tires, are next on the list. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I had a 
call from some farmers who are obviously taking their used 
tires to a depot that has been set up for recycling; and it’s a 
matter of about, I guess, 40, 50 miles for them to transport their 
tires. They were a little disconcerted with some of the 
regulations that were attached to the transport of these vehicles. 
 
Now they did mention to me that there was a limited number of 
tires that could be transported in a vehicle that did not 
appropriate signage on it. And there’s a number of tires that 
they’re only allowed to take before there’s a covered vehicle or 
something to that extent. Do you have . . . Can you tell me what 
regulations regarding the transport of tires by farmers or dealers 
to these sites are in place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Certainly under our legislation and 
department, there is no regulations or legislations regarding the 
number of tires that can be hauled other than that the loads must 
be secure. We can certainly check with the Highways 
department to see if there are restrictions there. But this is news 
to me here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Ms. Julé: — All right, Mr. Minister, I want to go on to another 
environmental issue but before I do that my colleague from 
Kelvington-Wadena has a couple of questions to pose to you. 
 



646 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 1999 

Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Minister, 
the tire recycling issue is one that’s very important out in our 
area and I noticed you said that now it’s been taken over by the 
government, or looked after by the government, it’s now 
considered economically viable. What do you mean by 
economically viable? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — I wish to, Mr. Chair, correct the hon. 
member. We have not taken over the Scrap Tire Corporation; 
it’s still industry-driven at arm’s-length. What we did merely 
was do a regulation . . . legislation to allow the corporation to 
make it mandatory for everybody to participate in the program 
to make it successful. And by doing that the corporation will be 
economically viable. In other words, they will be able to 
operate, pick up tires, and eventually go to the stockpiles. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Is it what you 
consider to be economically viable at this time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — A year ago, Mr. Chair, the corporation had 
a debt of tens of thousand of dollars simply because they did 
not have enough tires, enough volume, and enough people 
participating. And at this time they are economically viable. It 
means that they’re getting out of debt. And the program is 
expanding and we’re getting more tires recycled. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you again. Then if it’s working on 
volume; if what you’re needing to make this whole system 
work . . . then why aren’t you looking at the farms right now? 
So many farms have old tires sitting around. There are other 
places that are waiting to get them picked up. How soon is this 
going to be part of the issue? And if it’s going to mean 
economic viability, then it should . . . then the sooner you get it 
on board the better it should be. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — The hon. member makes a very good point, 
Mr. Chair, and as I pointed out, it’s just been about six months 
since we’ve made it mandatory for all dealers to participate, and 
as a result we’ve had several hundred dealers come on-board in 
the last few months. And the industry is growing very quickly 
here and it’s just a matter of time. 
 
I hope within a year that farmers will be able to get rid of their 
tires out on the farm, and as soon as the system gets geared up 
to accommodate the tires, a million or so tires which are used 
every year, and then we can go back to the stockpiles, either 
dealerships or on the farm. So you make a good observation. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Again, Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, then if . . . Do 
you have trucks on the road? Are they paid for by the scrap tire 
association, or is the government helping to put more vehicles 
on the road to do the pickups? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Yes, there are trucks on the road. There’s 
about 60 jobs associated with the Sask Scrap Tire Corporation, 
and again there’s no government money into it. The $3.50 
which you pay to change your tire helps to cover the cost of 
getting that tire from the shop, getting it trucked down the road 
to a recycling operation. 
 
So it’s industry-driven, it’s a non-profit organization, and it’s 
working successfully and we look forward to greater success. 
We’ve recycled about one and a half million tires in the last two 

to three years since the program was brought in. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you. Mr. Minister, do the neighbouring 
provinces, like Alberta and Manitoba, have recycling programs 
in place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Yes, they do. The three Prairie provinces 
have similar programs; their fees are similar, and their programs 
are similar, and we certainly work with each other to pick up 
the ideas which are working and some of the pitfalls as well. 
 
Ms. Draude: — I just have one last question on this issue then. 
Do we have any incidents, like we do with the pop cans, of tires 
coming in from other provinces? Is there any reason that it 
would be more viable for somebody to bring it in or out of 
Saskatchewan into another province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — There is no noticeable problem. All three 
provinces have mandatory programs and their fees are much the 
same so there’s no advantage to hauling them from one place to 
the other. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, you 
mentioned that the dealers, rather the trucks that are being used 
for the transporting of tires between a dealer and the recycling 
depot are vehicles that are being supplied by the industry. Are 
there instances where a recycling depot and those people 
manning that depot would be using their own vehicles to go and 
pick up tires? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Other than an individual bringing an old 
tire in from the farm or something, Mr. Chair, this is a 
corporation. The corporation hires carriers, licensed drivers, and 
so we see very few if any tires being transported by a private 
individual. So the contracts are with trucking companies to 
move these tires and it’s through the corporation. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I need to 
get back for a moment to some of these detriments or deterrents 
rather to having this program work well. I again have to 
mention to you that — and I will talk with you a little bit later 
about this after the House is closed — about a recycling depot 
indicating to me that they can only go out to farms or dealers 
and pick up a limited number of tires unless they, in fact, they 
have got a hazardous vehicle or hazardous load stop . . . or not 
stop sign, but sign on their vehicle. It seems to pose a problem 
in that it’s a little costly. 
 
But it’s also the idea of having to attach this sign and to 
continually go out. If they don’t have this kind of thing or, I 
guess, a bigger vehicle covered in, they then have to go to pick 
up these tires and get six or eight at a time, or whatever it is, 
and then go another 40, 50 miles back again to pick up another 
six or eight. And it gets to be a very tedious and costly journey 
simply because of some of the regulations in place. 
 
I’d like you to comment on that, and I’d like your commitment 
to discussing this with some of the recycling depots to further 
get input from them on how maybe the system can be made 
simpler and more cost effective for them. 
 
(1645) 
 



April 19, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 647 

Hon. Mr. Scott: — Well, Mr. Chair, the hon. member raises a 
very important issue, and to my knowledge, certainly tires are 
not considered hazardous waste. Used oil, car batteries, things 
like that, I know there are restrictions on the amount. 
 
But I’d be very happy to discuss with the hon. member 
following the session here with more particulars so that we can 
check into this and see indeed what the problem is. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Yes, Mr. Minister, if I mentioned hazardous 
waste, I retract that statement. I meant it was an indication that 
there’s a road hazard. This kind of a sign apparently was 
required of the depot managers to have on their trucks. 
 
Mr. Minister, we have about 15 minutes left or so, and I want to 
spend a few of those minutes on oil recycling, also being done 
through an arm’s-length organization known as SARC 
(Saskatchewan Association of Rehabilitation Centres), and 
that’s not to be confused with SARRC recycling. Again though 
you as the legislative authority, I am assuming that you do keep 
yourself informed on these issues and would know that. 
 
First, can you tell us how many of the ecocentres have now 
been set up by SARRC? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Mr. Chair, thus far five centres are fully up 
and established in the province. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I believe their goal is to 
have 30 of them set up. Is that correct? And over what period of 
time is that expected to be accomplished? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Yes, Mr. Chair, the goal is to have 30, 31 
depots set up within the next couple of years as part of the oil 
recycling program. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. How many of those 
centres have been set up in the past year since the last time we 
had this conversation in estimates? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — There have been two depots set up, opened 
in the past year. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, we’ve had 
a number of complaints from those people in the province who 
have been collecting used oil for some time, and they’re 
complaining that SARRC will not designate them as official 
ecocentres because they don’t meet requirements set down by 
SARRC having to do with simple things like the appearances of 
their buildings. Is this something that you’re hearing, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Mr. Chair, certainly the ecocentres being 
established by SARRC, the used oil people, is just one part, one 
chapter of the oil recycling program. There are over 140 other 
businesses which will collect oil, and this provides an 
opportunity too for these people to get rid of the used oil. We 
can no way expect 31 or 30 depots in the province to cover 
everybody. So the depots are one part. 
 
And certainly we’re working with industry, with RMs (rural 
municipality), with businesses, depots, garages, to assist the 
public in getting rid of their used oil. 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. But, Mr. Minister, the 
focal point of my question was that there are people that are 
upset, there are complaints coming from people that they don’t 
meet requirements set down by SARRC simply because they 
don’t have . . . they’re not meeting the requirements, their place 
is not — excuse me — meeting the requirements like the 
appearance of a building. 
 
Is something that simple preventing more of these from being 
set up? And wouldn’t you agree that if that is so, it is more 
important to get these ecocentres in place than to worry about 
the colour the buildings are or some sort of frontage on the 
buildings? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — A full-fledged recycling depot must be 
manned, it must be in a position to take containers, and have 
proper storage, and also filters. So the full-fledged SARRC 
depot which we are familiar with is a very . . . I guess the 
full-meal deal. And we have certainly . . . SARRC, including 
ourselves, are working with local communities. If there’s a 
problem in having somebody getting used oil, certainly we are 
not worried about the colour of the building. The main thing is 
to get the oil into a container and have it picked up by a 
recycling group of people or truck, whatever. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Minister, we in fact have had some 
complaints from specific industries that are telling us that your 
department has absolutely mentioned that they cannot have 
these places in . . . or these ecocentres in place simply because 
the appearance of their building does not meet the requirements, 
and that comes down to the colour of a building. Have you in 
fact heard from these industries presenting that very problem to 
you? And I’d like to know if you have, what their comments to 
you have been? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — I guess we have had complaints, Mr. Chair, 
inasmuch as people have come to us and said, we’re paying us 
10 cents a litre, we have no place to take our oil. We’re not 
worried about the colour of the building, we’re not worried 
about if it’s a SARRC ecocentre, we’re worried about getting a 
place in the community for people to take the oil. 
 
We do not need full-fledged, manned, brand-new recycling 
centres in each community. We would never be able to afford 
that. The community doesn’t need to pay that either. If there’s a 
garage that has a tank and is prepared to take used oil in and get 
paid for that used oil from the truck that comes and picks it up, 
that’s what we are interested in doing. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, are you aware of the facility at 
Mallard Industries in Wadena? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Not in any detail. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, Mallard Industries actually has a 
collection depot there and they have been trying to work with 
your department in order to become part of this system. And 
they’ve been told that their set-up doesn’t meet the physical 
layout that you require to actually allow them to be part of the 
system — things like the colour of the building and that type of 
thing. 
 
There is a number of people employed there. It’s a handicapped 



648 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 1999 

centre where people are allowed to gain some independence by 
working in a facility where they are productive. And the people 
that are working there are very frustrated with the fact that their 
facility cannot be seen as a centre right now. 
 
So can you give me some information on where they are on the 
list of a centre that would be approved? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Mr. Chair, I’m not familiar with the site but 
I would welcome the opportunity to discuss with the member 
details on this specific site. And we would certainly do 
whatever we can to help the community and the business out in 
its recycling efforts. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’ll look forward to 
the exchange then because it’s something that’s very important 
to this industry. They are doing a lot of work in this area. 
 
Mr. Minister, there was some costs involved or some recycling 
fees involved before the government actually got involved in 
collecting oil and filters. Can you give me an idea of how much 
money the government collected before the system was actually 
put in place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Just a point of clarification, Mr. Chair. The 
government did not see a penny of the used oil fee. It was all 
industry driven, the same as the tire industry. 
 
And I know that SARRC has an annual report. We just cannot 
recall what they took in in the first year. But we can get that 
annual report for the member, and in there it will show how 
much money was collected on a fee for selling oil and their 
containers and the filters as well. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, to the minister. Then the money 
that was previously collected all went into SARRC and the 
government never saw any of it? Is that the same answer for the 
filters as well? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — That is correct. This is again industry 
driven, the same as the scrap tires. We do not receive a penny of 
that money. It all goes to the SARRC organization and that 
applies to the filters as well as the oil. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:57 p.m. 
 



 

 


