





























































Hansard: April 27, 1999


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 799 
 April 27, 1999 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I have a petition to present on behalf of the 
Saskatchewan’s disenfranchised widows group. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to have the Workers’ 
Compensation Board Act amended whereby benefits and 
pensions are reinstated to disenfranchised widows and 
whereby all revoked pensions are reimbursed to them 
retroactively with interest to April 17, 1985. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition come from the 
communities of Moosomin, Kenosee Lake, Manor, Arcola, 
Broadview. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions today to present on behalf of Saskatchewan’s 
disenfranchised widows. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to have the Workers’ 
Compensation Board Act amended whereby benefits and 
pensions are reinstated to disenfranchised widows and 
whereby all revoked pensions are reimbursed to them 
retroactively with interest to April 17, 1985. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from the Arcola, Carlyle, 
Storthoaks, Manor, Saskatoon, Redvers, Carnduff areas, and 
Carlyle, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
demand the federal government work with Saskatchewan 
to put in place a farm aid package that provides real relief 
to those who need it, and that the provincial government 
develop a long-term farm safety net program as it promised 
to do when it cancelled GRIP against the wishes of 
farmers. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

The petitioners, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of 

Tantallon and Rhein. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As well to present a 
petition and reading the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to have the Workers’ 
Compensation Board Act amended whereby benefits and 
pensions are reinstated to disenfranchised widows and 
whereby all revoked pensions are reimbursed to them 
retroactively with interest to April 17, 1985. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the petition I present is signed by individuals from 
the Manor and Carlyle areas of the province. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise with my 
colleagues to present petitions in support of Saskatchewan’s 
disenfranchised widows. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to have the Workers’ 
Compensation Board Act amended whereby benefits and 
pensions are reinstated to disenfranchised widows and 
whereby all revoked pensions are reimbursed to them 
retroactively with interest to April 17, 1985. 
 

Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the Weyburn 
area of the province. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with pleasure 
that I today present a petition on behalf of Saskatchewan’s 
disenfranchised widows. The petition prays: 
 

That your Hon. Assembly may be pleased to have the 
Workers’ Compensation Board Act amended whereby 
benefits and pensions are reinstated to disenfranchised 
widows and whereby all revoked pensions are reimbursed 
to them retroactively with interest to April 17, 1985. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
People that have signed this petition are also from Carlyle and 
Manor. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
a petition, and I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to have the Workers’ 
Compensation Board Act amended whereby benefits and 
pensions are reinstated to disenfranchised widows and 
whereby all revoked pensions are reimbursed to them 
retroactively with interest to April 17, 1985. 
 



800 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 1999 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
And these are signed by people from Fillmore, Regina, 
Stoughton, and Zehner. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to rise in 
this House again today to present a petition on behalf of the 
people of Saskatchewan. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call on federal and provincial 
governments to dedicate a greater portion of the fuel tax 
revenues toward road maintenance and construction so that 
Saskatchewan residents may have a safe highway system 
that meets their needs. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition has been signed by the good folks 
from the communities of Hague, Hepburn, Warman, and 
several other communities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 
petitions on behalf of citizens that are concerned about the 
state of our highway system in the province. The prayer reads 
as follows. Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call on federal and provincial 
governments to dedicate a significantly greater portion of 
the fuel tax revenues toward road maintenance and 
construction so Saskatchewan residents may have a safe 
highway system that meets their needs. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Those who signed these petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from a 
number of communities in the Thunder Creek constituency, 
as well as from west of there, Fox Valley, Sceptre, 
Richmound area. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present petitions 
this afternoon from residents of the northwest concerned 
about the eastern entrance to the city of North Battleford and 
praying that the junction of Highways 40 and 16 will be 
removed and corrected in order to give us a safe and less 
confusing and less congested entrance to the city. 
 
The petitioners this afternoon come from North Battleford, 
Gallivan, 
Medstead, and Whitkow. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I join my colleagues in 
presenting a petition on behalf of concerned citizens of 
Saskatchewan with respect to safety and travel on our 
highways: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call on federal and provincial 

governments to dedicate a greater portion of fuel tax 
revenues toward road maintenance and construction so that 
Saskatchewan residents may have a safe, reliable, and 
effective highway system. 

 
And the signatures on this petition are from Bangor, Yorkton, 
and Melville. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
honoured once again to present petitions on behalf of people 
who are concerned about some of the most vulnerable in our 
province. And I’ll read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide essential funding and ensure the delivery of 
scientifically proven, diagnostic assessment and 
programming for children with learning disabilities in 
order that they have an access to an education that meets 
their needs and allows them to reach their full potential. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The people who have signed this petition today, Mr. Speaker, 
are from Birch Hills and Prince Albert. And I’m pleased to 
present this on their behalf. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the petitions presented at the last 
sitting have been reviewed and found to be in order. Pursuant to 
rule 12(7) these petitions are hereby received. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 34 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Justice: how much has been paid by the 
Department of Justice to Howard Morton, Q.C. in the fiscal 
year 1996-97, with subsequent questions for the fiscal 
years ’97-98 and ’98-99. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you, and of course to my 
colleagues in the House, a very, very special guest who is 
seated in your gallery, and that is His Excellency Hang Kyung 
Kim, the ambassador of Korea to Canada. I’ll just ask the 
ambassador to remain seated for a moment until I finish. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the ambassador has a very long and distinguished 
career of public service in the Korean government and the 
diplomatic corps — as director of the Asian affairs bureau of 
the foreign affairs ministry; as senior protocol secretary to the 
Prime Minister; as deputy consul general in New York and 
consul general in Los Angeles; as the ministry’s public 
information office and spokesperson; as director general of the 
consular and overseas residence affairs bureau; as Korea’s 
ambassador to Mynamar; as deputy minister for planning and 
management; and as Korea’s ambassador to Canada since 1996. 
 



April 27, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 801 

Mr. Speaker, the people and the nation of Korea have long been 
our friends and our allies. And I’m pleased to say that our 
relationship with Korea is strong, and getting stronger, and 
growing. Korea is Canada’s seventh most important global 
trading partner, with bilateral trade worth more than $5 billion 
in 1998. Korea is also our third largest trading partner in the 
very important Asian Pacific Rim. And we have significant 
investments in each other’s nations. 
 
Saskatchewan exports to Korea, Mr. Speaker, a total of $535 
million from 1995 through to 1998. And we’re confident that 
we can build on that solid foundation with Korea, expanding 
trade further in key sectors like ag-biotechnology, grains, feed 
products, pre-fab housing, and fertilizers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Korea have built a prosperous 
economy, the same way we’re trying to build a prosperous and 
diversified economy here at home, by hard work, innovation, 
and investing in value-added enterprise. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think we have much to learn from our Korean 
friends and partners, and we hope that we might also have many 
opportunities in the future to share our knowledge with them to 
the benefit mutually of our people and our nations. We look 
forward to building an even stronger relationship with Korea as 
we move forward together to meet the challenges and seize the 
opportunities of our growing, global marketplace. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Ambassador’s Kim’s visit to Saskatchewan — his 
first official visit to our province — will include meetings with 
his Honour the Lieutenant Governor, with yourself, Mr. 
Speaker, our Minister of Energy and Mines, our Minister of 
Agriculture, I believe opposition people as well, officials from 
the University of Regina, and with officials from STEP 
(Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership Inc.), the export 
agency partnership. 
 
And it’s also going to be my pleasure and honour to hold a 
meeting with Ambassador Kim in a very short, few minutes. 
 
I trust that throughout his visit to our province, His Excellency, 
Mrs. Kim who’s with him, Economic Counsellor Mr. Lee, will 
meet with a friendly welcome and that they will come to know 
the warmth and the openness of Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and all colleagues in the House, please join with 
me in welcoming a distinguished guest and his partner, His 
Excellency, Mr. Hang Kyung Kim, Korea’s ambassador to 
Canada, and Mrs. Kim. Please stand. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’d like to join with the Premier on behalf of the 
Saskatchewan Party official opposition in welcoming Mr. and 
Mrs. Kim to Saskatchewan and to the legislature. Also to you, 
Mr. Lee. 
 
I know a number of acquaintances . . . As the Premier has 
indicated Saskatchewan and Korea share a lot. And I know a 
number of my acquaintances who are in the teaching profession 
are currently teaching over in Korea and have returned year 
after year. And they are thoroughly enjoying their stay in your 

country. Welcome to Saskatchewan and I hope that your visit is 
very, very productive. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure 
indeed on behalf of the Liberal caucus to extend a welcome to 
their Honours here to this great province of ours. I hope you 
enjoy. You have come at the right time of the season when 
there’s a rebirth and a regrowth — better than a month or two 
ago when everything was covered with a white blanket. So 
welcome; enjoy your stay. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have the 
pleasure of introducing today a very distinguished visitor to our 
province and our legislature namely, Mr. Lassie Chiwayo, who 
is seated in your gallery, and I’ll ask him to stand at the 
conclusion of my remarks I think, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. 
Chiwayo is the Minister of Finance from the province of 
Mpumulanga which is a province of South Africa. 
 
And I want to say in reference to Mr. Chiwayo who I had the 
pleasure along with some of my colleagues here of having 
dinner with last night along with his deputy minister, that you 
know we in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, take a lot for granted. 
And sometimes we think politics is quite rough. But I want to 
say about Mr. Chiwayo, he was born in 1966 in Witbank’s 
Lynnville Township. And when he was about 20 years old he 
was arrested for his political involvement with the African 
National Congress, firstly under the notorious state of 
emergency of 1986. And he spent an entire year in solitary 
confinement. 
 
And in 1987 he was charged with 30 other activists from 
Witbank’s with membership in the African National Congress, 
supposedly, allegedly, terrorism and subversion. And he was 
sentenced to seven years in prison, where he completed his 
education at the same time. And today I’m happy to say he’s 
not in solitary confinement and he’s not in prison — he’s the 
Minister of Finance from Mpumulanga. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, since 1993, Saskatchewan has 
been participating in the Canada-South Africa program on 
governance. We have been twinned with the province of the 
Free State, which is a different province, since 1984. 
Mpumulanga is a neighbouring province of the Free State, and 
is twinned with Alberta. 
 
Mr. Chiwayo and his deputy director general have visited 
Alberta to examine some of their approaches to democratic 
governance and are now spending a few days here in 
Saskatchewan to examine our approaches. They’ve met with 
many officials in the Department of Finance, with officials in a 
variety of other departments and Crown corporations, and with 
several elected members. 
 
Mr. Chiwayo will be spending part of this afternoon observing 
our question period and debates, and I would ask all members 
to welcome Mr. Chiwayo to Saskatchewan and to the 
legislature. And now I’d ask him to rise. Thank you very much. 
 



802 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 1999 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
behalf of the Saskatchewan Party official opposition I’d like to 
join with the minister in welcoming Minister Chiwayo to 
Saskatchewan. Certainly over the years Canada and 
Saskatchewan and the Republic of South Africa have had a 
long-standing relationship and we welcome your visit here 
Minister. And we look forward to you visiting with us as well 
because as you know in our history soon there’ll be an election 
and we’ll be the government. You’ll be talking to us. Welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I want to take this opportunity on 
behalf of myself and my colleagues to welcome to the 
legislature the members of the Workers’ Compensation widows 
here this afternoon. The Bible tells us the story of the widow 
who continued to go at the unjust judge until he finally gave her 
justice. I hope we’ll see a re-enactment of that parable here this 
afternoon. 
 
And while I’m on my feet I also wish to welcome the minister 
from South Africa. Being married to a South African and 
having visited that beautiful country a couple of times, I want to 
say how much we all rejoice in the tremendous developments in 
that country the last few years. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes, I’d like to join with the member 
opposite in welcoming the remarried widows that are in the 
gallery today, and just to thank them for their expressions of 
condolence and their honourable conduct throughout this 
discussion. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of 
the official opposition I also would like to welcome the 
disenfranchised widows. You can certainly tell who they are, 
Mr. Speaker, because they’re the ones in the bright pink. And 
I’d like to welcome them and their families to our Assembly 
today. And there is a considerable number. They were 
expecting 43 people to attend today. So I would like to ask 
members to welcome Rose Polsom and the Saskatchewan 
disenfranchised widows who are assembled today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Renaud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce to you and through you to the Assembly 10 students 
from Hudson Bay, Saskatchewan who attend the Cumberland 
Community Regional College. In fact some say that 
Cumberland Regional College, Mr. Speaker, is probably the 
best of all regional colleges, and I think they may be right. The 
students are seated in your gallery. 
 
And I wanted to say a few words about Hudson Bay because 
Hudson Bay is the moose capital of the world. And on Saturday 
night the Hudson Bay Wildlife Federation had a supper. And 
my wife and I had our 28th anniversary, and so I took my wife 
to the Hudson Bay Wildlife Federation supper and we did enjoy 

some of that delicacy. 
 
So please welcome the guests from Hudson Bay. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker to you and through you to all the members in the 
House, this is an honour and a pleasure that I don’t . . . seldom 
have. With family members spread right across Canada, it’s not 
often that the legislature and the proceedings are visited by a 
family member. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you and to all 
the members in the House a gentleman seated in the west 
gallery, an individual from North Battleford, Saskatchewan. A 
person who’s been in North Battleford for I think about 33 
years. And if you’ve had the unfortunate need to go to the lab 
department and have some blood drawn, you may have had this 
gentleman poking a needle in your arm. 
 
Mr. Speaker this is my brother Ernie Krawetz from North 
Battleford. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There are indeed a 
great number of guests present here today. And it does give me 
a great deal of pleasure to introduce some very special guests 
later on this afternoon when we give third reading to the private 
members’ Bills, Mr. Speaker. We will have some very 
distinguished people from the field of the arts to observe us. 
 
These are members of the endowment steering committee set up 
by the Saskatchewan Arts Board. Members will be aware that 
the Saskatchewan Arts Board is the oldest board of its kind in 
North America and this year celebrated its 50th anniversary. 
 
As part of their good works, about a year ago the late Jane 
Turnbull-Evans, who tragically died in an automobile accident, 
set up a group, the endowment steering committee, to look at 
the possibility of establishing a stand-alone Act so that people 
may give gifts of art work and various things to support the arts 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
The committee, overseen by Valerie Creighton, a former 
executive director of the Arts Board, consists of Rupert James 
as the Chair, Brad Hunter, Patricia Johnston, Darlene Bessey 
and David Male and Vic Cicansky. Most of the members of the 
committee are present here today in the gallery. 
 
Darlene Bessey, I would like to single out actually for a very 
special mention because she is a new mother of a wonderful 
baby girl, Zoë. And of course all the other members have 
contributed to the birth of this Saskatchewan Foundation for the 
Arts Bill in their own various ways. 
 
I would like to ask the members present to stand and be 
recognized, and I would also note that we have present in the 
gallery, Joanne Skidmore, the CBC (Canadian Broadcasting 
Corporation) arts reporter who will be watching us make history 
this afternoon with third reading of The Saskatchewan 
Foundation for the Arts Bill. If the members of the committee 



April 27, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 803 

would please stand and be acknowledged. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, the public will be 
well aware that in addition to a government civil service, the 
Legislative Assembly also employs officers and other staff. 
They will be familiar with the Clerk and the Sergeant-at-Arms 
who are employed here in the legislature. 
 
But with us today is another officer of the Legislative 
Assembly, and I would ask all the members to join me in 
extending a warm welcome to the Children’s Advocate, Dr. 
Deborah Parker-Loewen. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Murray: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would 
also like to introduce to you and to my colleagues in the House, 
three very special guests in your gallery. They are here to watch 
the progress in the House of their Bill, The Group Medical 
Services Act, 1999, and I would ask them to stand as I 
introduce them and be recognized, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Shirley Raab is president and CEO (chief executive officer) of 
Group Medical Services; Dr. Ted Alport is the Vice-Chair of 
the board of directors; and Shawn Peters is the chief financial 
officer. 
 
Please join me in extending a warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. By process of 
elimination, there’s a group of 22 people sitting in the gallery 
who haven’t been introduced yet. I take great pleasure in 
introducing this group. They’re a group of grade 7 students who 
are joining us from St. Matthew School which is right in the 
heart of Regina South. 
 
It’s always a pleasure to have school groups join us here, 
particularly from my constituency, and I’d like to welcome 
them here today. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And further elimination, 
there are still two people in the west gallery who have not been 
introduced. And I would like to take this opportunity to 
introduce these two persons to the Assembly. 
 
We have two persons from the Credit Union Central who are 
here today to witness the third reading of a Bill to improve the 
operation of Credit Union Central, The Credit Union Central of 
Saskatchewan Act, 1999. 
 
My guests today, and I would ask them to rise as I introduce 
them, is Keith Nixon who is the director of government and 
public affairs at Credit Union Central; and next to him, Gwen 
Rupchan, the administrative assistant who does all the work. So 
I’d like you to welcome them to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — If members have completed introductions, the 
Chair would like to introduce one guest who has not been 
introduced yet and who has taken a few minutes out of his 
workday to come and watch his wife at work. He’s seated in the 
Speaker’s gallery and he’s here to watch these proceedings this 
afternoon. And I would ask him to stand and for you to 
welcome the husband of our Clerk at the Table, Ms. Gwenn 
Ronyk — her husband Reg Ronyk. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Recognition of Clerk of the Legislative Assembly 
 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, as you know, in my other life I’m a student and a 
teacher of Canadian history. Somewhere around the first hour 
of the first day of my studies, I learned that when the British 
came to this continent they brought with them their red coats, 
their love of afternoon tea, and a sense of parliamentary 
democracy that was already centuries old. 
 
All this, Mr. Speaker, by way of recognizing today a little 
acknowledged but tremendously important member of our 
Assembly, Gwenn Joyce Ronyk — our Clerk, our guide, our 
walking compilation of all that is allowed in this House and all 
that is not allowed. 
 
Today we are celebrating with Gwenn her 25 years in the 
legislature — six years as first assistant Clerk, nine as Deputy 
Clerk, and now 10 as Clerk of the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
She has spent her working life with us, given birth to three 
children between or during sessions, grown wise with or rather 
for us and the sometimes arcane but always relevant rules that 
guide our debates and proceedings. 
 
Her knowledge is astonishing, her objectivity remarkable, and 
we all hope her tenure with us is just beginning. 
 
Congratulations, Gwenn, it is our privilege to have you as our 
Clerk. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on behalf 
of the Saskatchewan Party official opposition, we too would 
like to extend our hearty congratulations to Gwenn Ronyk for 
25 years of service to this Assembly and the work she’s done at 
the Table. 
 
Certainly, Mr. Speaker, I have had the privilege of being there 
on the other side as well, and while at that time I didn’t get to 
know Ms. Ronyk as well at that time, certainly as an opposition 
member we really appreciate the work that the Clerk’s office 
has done and Ms. Ronyk in particular for opposition members 
in assisting us and understanding the way the Assembly works 
and operates and functions. 
 
And I think our Assembly has certainly . . . we’ve been served 
well and we appreciate the work and we want to just say 



804 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 1999 

Gwenn, we thank you so much for the time and effort you have 
given not only to the members of this Assembly but when you 
think about it, to the people of Saskatchewan which has served 
this Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is with a great deal 
of pleasure that I too rise today to recognize the 
accomplishments and the dedication of Gwenn Ronyk on this, 
her 25th anniversary with the Clerk’s office. 
 
It is exciting to reach such a milestone, Gwenn. I have fond 
memories of such a sojourn enduring my service with the 
RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police). Though my journey 
was from constable to corporal to sergeant and finally to staff 
sergeant and yours from first assistant Clerk to Deputy Clerk to 
Acting Clerk, and finally Clerk, in a way, I’m sure, Gwenn has 
been in the line of fire or perhaps even more often than I ever 
was in this Assembly. 
 
Gwenn has served with distinction in her tenure with the 
Clerk’s office since she started in 1974, and everyone whom 
she has served and continues to serve is very much appreciative. 
And as was mentioned by the hon. minister perhaps unnoticed 
and overlooked from time to time. 
 
Gwenn, on behalf of the Liberal caucus, congratulations. We 
look forward to working with you for many years to come. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. How pleased I 
am to be a member of this Assembly when we can honour such 
a worthy person on the occasion of 25 years of exemplary 
service. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is an individual whose photograph has 
graced the walls of this Legislative Building along the side . . . 
alongside government members past and present. And there is 
something a tad unfair that the only face that has not changed in 
25 years is Gwenn Ronyk’s. 
 
There are other things that have remained unchanged, and those 
are the outstanding qualities that characterize her. I’m among 
the many who appreciate her air of quiet confidence and her 
unflappability. 
 
When I arrived here in 1991 without a caucus, without prior 
experience, she patiently explained all of the complex and, yes, 
I must say somewhat bizarre rules and procedures of the day. 
She, Mr. Speaker, was very helpful. She is a diplomat’s 
diplomat. She has a tremendous capacity to smile or not to 
smile in the face of foolishness. And she has seen her share. 
 
I was going to try my hand at poetry to mark this very special 
day and by the time I got to, “And all the backbenchers and all 
the queen’s men couldn’t get by without our Gwenn,” I decided 
to spare everyone. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it gives me great, great pleasure to express my 
gratitude to the quintessential professional who manages to 
make it all look so very, very easy that we forget that she does 

have an other life with more responsibilities, like being a loving 
partner and a devoted mother. I thank you so much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Small Business Loans Association Program 
Creates Jobs in Rural Sector 

 
Mr. Jess: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
recognize the Blaine Lake Economic Development 
Co-operative and the Marcelin and District Small Business 
Co-operative for their job creation records through Small 
Business Loans Association program. 
 
These two organizations each have helped create over 25 jobs. 
On behalf of the government I was honoured to present job 
creation certificates to Ed Lozowchuk, chairperson of the 
Blaine Lake Economic Development Co-operative, and Wayne 
King, chairperson of the Marcelin and District Small Business 
Co-operative. 
 
During 1998 small businesses supported by the SBLA (Small 
Business Loans Association) program created more than 360 
jobs and maintained over 565 more, mostly in rural 
communities. This brought the total number of jobs created and 
maintained since the program began to almost 12,800. Mr. 
Speaker, SBLAs are an important part of the province’s focus 
on working with local communities to create opportunities and 
jobs for the people in their area. 
 
The SBLA funding has initiated significant growth in this 
province, and this growth is an example of what can be 
achieved when the government and communities work in 
partnership. The assistance SBLAs provide plays an important 
part in building our rural economy creating jobs, keeping our 
communities healthy and strong. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Porcupine Plain Citizen Inducted into Lions Hall of Fame 
 

Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Volunteers are the 
backbone of Saskatchewan, and today it gives me great pleasure 
to recognize a volunteer from the Kelvington-Wadena 
constituency who has been inducted into the Lions Hall of 
Fame, Ivan Popoff of Porcupine Plain. 
 
Mr. Popoff is a chartered member of the Porcupine Plain’s 
Lions Club which he joined in February of 1957. To date he has 
held all the club positions with the exception of secretary. He 
was treasurer of the club from 1966 to 1994 and has 41 years of 
perfect attendance. 
 
Mr. Popoff has chaired hundreds of Lions’ projects, attended 
many district conventions and many multiple district 
conventions, as well as chaired the Denver international 
convention. As well as being an exemplary Lions’ member, Mr. 
Popoff has been named Citizen of the Day and Citizen of the 
Year in Porcupine. Mr. Popoff has been actively involved in the 
teaching profession and highly involved in the student 
extracurricular activities. He has coached drama, hockey, 
curling, fastball, and baseball. 
 



April 27, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 805 

Mr. Speaker, it is a great honour to congratulate Mr. Popoff in 
his induction into the Lions Hall of Fame, and thank him for his 
commitment to his community and to the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Premier Visits Day Care in Weyburn 
 

Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to say a few 
words about a day that will be long remembered by a few of my 
young constituents. Last Wednesday the Premier visited 
Weyburn and we spent some time visiting Souris Valley Day 
Care and The Family Place. 
 
The Premier, who has a great love of sports and children, 
involved himself in a quick game of soccer, played a little 
foosball, and helped make some puppets with the children. 
 
Watching the Premier interact with these children, it was easy 
to be reminded that our Premier was instrumental in putting in 
place the child action plan and indeed the whole “building 
independence” initiative. These initiatives, the first new social 
programs in Canada in 30 years, are another first for 
Saskatchewan and are used as a model for the rest of the 
country. 
 
Terri Stocker, the director of the Souris Valley Child Care, and 
Donnita Maas and Linda Rudacek, directors of The Family 
Place, were very pleased with our visit to the facilities in 
Weyburn on Wednesday. They know the success of our child 
action plan. And they certainly should be congratulated for their 
inspiration and hard work to implement programs that are vital 
for good parenting for our children and for our youth. 
 
This is another example of a partnership of government 
working with community to brighten the future for the young 
people in our province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hudson Bay Community Loans Co-operative 
 
Mr. Renaud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday I had the 
pleasure of recognizing the Hudson Bay Community Loans 
Co-operative for their part in stimulating the economy of 
Hudson Bay and surrounding area. 
 
The Hudson Bay Community Loans Co-operative had created 
27 full-time jobs, five part-time jobs, and maintained 16 jobs to 
date. They have used the help of Small Business Loans 
Association to make this possible. 
 
I was very happy to present a job creation certification to the 
chairperson of the co-operative, Len Elliot, on behalf of our 
Economic and Co-operative Development minister. 
 
SBLAs and the co-operative such as the one in Hudson Bay are 
essential components of our focus on creating opportunities at 
the community level; 12,800 jobs have been created and 
maintained by the SBLAs thus far, and that number is growing. 
Some local businesses helped by these loans include 
bookkeeping services, vehicle repair shops, and retail outlets. 

In our recent budget, the SBLAs were given an increase in the 
revolving line of credit of up to $100,000. They can also now 
make loans of up to $10,000. 
 
I’d like to extend my congratulations to both the Small Business 
Loans Association and the Hudson Bay Community Loans 
Co-operative on their job creation effort. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Negotiations with Nurses 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
my question is for the Minister of Health. Congratulations, 
Madam Minister. It took eight years of NDP (New Democratic 
Party) incompetence, but you have finally managed to bring the 
health care system to its knees. 
 
Doctors are fleeing the province because of the crippling NDP 
taxes. Hospitals are closing everywhere. The longest surgical 
waiting lists in Canada and getting longer every day. And now 
8,400 nurses are ready to quit or leave the province because of 
the intolerable work conditions, thanks to your NDP 
government. 
 
With all this chaos, all we see from the NDP is a bunch of 
lawyers threatening nurses in court. Well now, Madam 
Minister, even the judge is saying your bully tactics are not 
going to work. The judge is saying you need to settle this 
dispute through negotiations. 
 
Madam Minister, now that the judge has held up the court 
decision, what is the government doing to get negotiations with 
the nurses going again? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
understand that the two parties, SAHO (Saskatchewan 
Association of Health Organizations) and the Saskatchewan 
Union of Nurses, have agreed to return to the bargaining table 
on Monday, May 10, 1999. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. That’s about 
five weeks after this dispute started. 
 
Madam Minister, all we get from the government is a bunch of 
hot air about how wonderful your health care system is. Well, 
Madam Minister, the nurses don’t agree with you. They say 
conditions in hospitals are bordering on the dangerous. They 
say patient safety is being jeopardized. Doctors and nurses are 
voting with their feet and leaving. 
 
Madam Minister, thanks to the judge, contract talks between the 
nurses and SAHO can now start again, barring any further 
mess-ups by the Premier. But the problem is still there, Madam 
Minister. Working conditions for nurses are abysmal and nurses 
are quitting the profession or leaving the province. 
 
Madam Minister, what is the NDP doing to address the serious 
workplace issues that nurses say are intolerable? 



806 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 1999 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, just for the information of 
the member, I’m pleased to report that Regina Health District 
which identified a shortage of nurses at the end of January 
1999, they have hired 106 nurses since that time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I’m also pleased to report, Mr. Speaker, 
that while the dispute was on, that the Regina Health District 
hired 30 nurses during that time frame. So contrary to what the 
member has to say, the sky is not falling in in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Tax Rates in Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Finance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, according to the Saskatchewan Chamber of 
Commerce, when asked what the three biggest issues facing 
business today were, they said, taxes, taxes, taxes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s only one party in this province talking 
about a long-term plan for meaningful tax relief, and that’s the 
Saskatchewan Party. The NDP have given us some of the 
highest taxes in Canada. The Liberals only seems to say that 
taxes aren’t high enough to pay for our ideas. Mr. Minister, 
when will you take the initiative and come up with a long-term 
plan of meaningful tax relief in this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well I thank the member for the question, 
Mr. Speaker. I’d like to quote from Jerry from Swift Current 
who called CBC this morning. He was responding to Mr. 
Hermanson, the leader of the Tory Party, talking about tax cuts, 
and he says this, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Good morning, Sheila, this is Jerry from Swift Current 
calling. I’m just listening to your program and the 
interview with Mr. Hermanson. And he seems to be 
suggesting that he can cut 20 per cent on income tax and 
the provincial tax down to 5 per cent — must mean sales 
tax — spend money on roads and more on health care and 
more on other things. I just don’t know where he’s going to 
get the money. 
 
It seems to me his mathematics . . . sounds to me like it’s 
all haywire. I don’t know what school he went to, but I 
can’t see how you’re going to drop your income back and 
continue to spend and then sit and try to balance the 
budget. I think it’s just not possible. It seems to me that it 
sounds like a little bit of the old Conservatives who sunk 
us in the hole, and we’re having a heck of a time to get out. 
And thank you, (says Jerry). 
 

And I think Jerry’s right, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
minister may well have incredible financial qualifications as an 
expert in this province. And certainly it would seem that you’re 

listening to people like that instead of people from agencies like 
WEFA Canada, internationally renowned economic forecasters 
who work for your own Finance department and who have said 
that our plan is doable; it’s as solid as it can be. Even the 
Deputy Premier said it’s as solid as can be, and WEFA Canada 
is as legitimate as can be. 
 
Mr. Minister, right now is an appropriate time to talk about 
these high levels of taxes because it’s near the time when 
people have to submit their income tax returns. And you know 
what, Mr. Minister? That too shows how much you’re failing. 
 
Mr. Minister, when will you address the fact that Saskatchewan 
has the highest income taxes in almost every category than any 
other province in this country? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member says we 
should not listen to Jerry, from Swift Current; he says we 
should listen to some agencies he’s talking about. Well let me 
tell the member this, Mr. Speaker. We’ve been listening to what 
the outside agencies have been saying and you know what 
they’ve said? Five credit rating upgrades in the last three years, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — That’s what they . . . that’s what the 
agencies have said. And contrast that to the record of those 
members. And I’ll tell the member this, Mr. Speaker, that if we 
weren’t digging out of the $15 billion hole of debt that they left 
this province in, and we are digging our way out of it, Mr. 
Speaker, and if we weren’t paying $750 million a year interest 
on the debt, we could eliminate the provincial sales tax or we 
could cut income tax, Mr. Speaker, by about 45 per cent. That’s 
the condition that those members left the province in, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And those members should be honest with the people, Mr. 
Speaker. They should admit that their tax policies also mean 
freezing and cutting health care and education. They should 
admit that instead of trying to talk out of both sides of their 
mouth, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
minister talks about credit upgrades, and that’s all wonderful. 
And you know where it came from? It came out of the pockets 
of Saskatchewan taxpayers. The Provincial Auditor’s report 
says that . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Now it does not serve the 
Assembly well to have members shouting across the floor, and 
the Chair is having some difficulty being able to hear the 
question being put. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in an 
auditor’s report it shows that income taxes in 1991 were $1.988 
billion; in 1998, 3.116. Mr. Minister, it’s easy to see where 
you’ve gotten the money for your upgrade. It’s out of 
Saskatchewan taxpayers’ pockets. 



April 27, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 807 

And if you do the calculations across this province . . . or across 
this country, in almost every category of taxpayer, 
Saskatchewan taxpayers pay more than anywhere else. So thank 
the people of this province for your credit upgrades, Mr. 
Minister, because they’re the ones who really deserve the credit 
and not your pocket-picking government. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I have a little bit of news for 
the member opposite which apparently he doesn’t understand. 
And that is when you borrow money you have to pay it back. 
Okay? When you borrow money you have to pay it back. 
 
But I want to say, Mr. Speaker, we have been paying it back 
and we’ve been cutting taxes in this province since 1995 which 
is a far cry from the record of the Conservative Party. And don’t 
listen to what they say; look at what they do. 
 
What did they do in office? Tax on used cars, Mr. Speaker, tax 
on restaurant meals, tax on children’s clothing, tax on reading 
materials, and harmonization of the GST (goods and services 
tax) and PST (provincial sales tax). 
 
Their record in office, Mr. Speaker, is deficit, debt, and tax, tax, 
tax. That’s the Tory way, Mr. Speaker, but it’s not our way. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Call for Election 
 

Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Premier. 
Mr. Speaker, before he was elected in 1991, the Premier 
promised set election dates every four years. Mr. Premier, your 
four years are almost up. You are clearly out of new ideas. We 
need an election now. 
 
Immediately following question period I will be introducing a 
private members’ Bill calling for a set election date every four 
years. We will also be holding a special 75-minute debate 
calling for an election in June. Mr. Speaker, that’s June of 1999, 
not June of 2000. 
 
Mr. Premier, we’re ready for an election. The voters are ready 
for an election. Are you ready for an election? Will you support 
our motion calling for an election this June? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the members of the 
Saskatchewan Party opposite are putting on a face of false 
bravado. And I want to say to the . . . and I want . . . I know you 
can’t hear me because I can’t hear myself talk either. 
 
Just tell your members to quieten down a bit. Putting on a face 
of . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . well if anything proves it, it’s 
the yattering from the Saskatchewan Party members there. It’s 
false bravado. And I have another piece of advice for the Leader 
of the Opposition: be careful about what you are wishing for, 
you may just get it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — We’re hopeful, Mr. Speaker. We’re very 
hopeful that indeed we will get our request, Mr. Speaker. 
Yesterday the Saskatchewan Party started running some 
pre-writ advertising. The Saskatchewan Party is the only party 

with an affordable, sustainable plan to cut taxes, redirect money 
to patient care, and fix the roads now. 
 
The NDP doesn’t want to talk about its dismal record. The 
Liberals don’t want to talk about their loopy platform. But we 
want to talk about our plan, Mr. Premier. That’s why we’re 
advertising our platform. That’s why we’re advertising our 
party. And that’s why we want an election now. 
 
Mr. Premier, we are ready to stack the Saskatchewan Party plan 
against the NDP’s failing record. Are you ready? Will you call 
an election this June? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the truth of the matter is 
that the Saskatchewan Party’s ads, running as they are now, are 
not because they are ready for an election. They are running 
now because they are afraid of an election. They know what’s 
happened to them in the public opinion polling, and that their 
issues respecting the so-called problem at Highways, the 
so-called problem with taxes, the so-called other problems, 
simply don’t add up and don’t work. 
 
And in the result they continue to fall in support and letting 
them . . . knowing that they’re falling in support, their only 
hope of recapturing it is to pump this money into its advertising. 
 
Do you know what I want to do? I want to challenge you to 
keep on putting out those advertising bucks — day after day 
after day after day. And I have a little bet, Mr. Speaker, they 
won’t run beyond Saturday of this weekend. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Negotiations with Nurses 
 

Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Premier has managed, the Premier has managed to get 
negotiations postponed until May 10 with the injunction not 
being heard again until May 27. Mr. Speaker, the delay until the 
10th is supposed to allow cooler heads to prevail when 
negotiations start up again. With the injunction still in place it’s 
hard for cooler heads to prevail, while the nurses still have a 
gun pointed at their head by the NDP, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Premier admit that a delay to allow for 
cooler heads to prevail will work only if there’s act of good 
faith on your part? And that’s lift the injunction and repeal Bill 
23. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I understand 
that the reason why bargaining is not going to resume until 
Monday, May 10, is because the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses 
— beginning this weekend many of their representatives are 
going to be attending the Canadian Labour Congress 
convention in Toronto — which is a meeting that happens 
biennually I understand. In addition this week I understand that 
Mr. Kelleher, who is the mediator, is only available one day. 
 
And so the SAHO and SUN (Saskatchewan Union of Nurses) 
decided, independent of government, that they would return to 
the table on May 10, 1999. 
 
What I can also tell the member, in the memorandum of 



808 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 1999 

understanding signed between the Premier and SAHO and 
SUN, there are provisions that go beyond Bill 23. And we have 
indicated in writing to SUN that we will amend Bill 23 once the 
collective agreement is agreed to by the two parties. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier thinks that by 
hanging million dollar fines over the heads of the nurses that 
somehow goodwill will be restored at the bargaining table. He 
thinks that the threat of jail time and huge fines will make the 
nurses see the light and agree to whatever the Premier offers. 
With the Premier, instead of walk softly and carry a big stick, 
it’s barely bargain and threaten everyone with fines. 
 
Mr. Premier, how do you feel nurses will trust you with the 
million dollar fines you’re dangling over their heads when you 
go back to the table? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I know that the Liberal member would 
like to escalate this situation, Mr. Speaker. Just once again to 
say to the member, the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses and 
SAHO are returning to the bargaining table on May 10, 1999. 
 
I understand that SUN this morning acknowledged in writing a 
position that indicates that they are going to take no job action 
between now and, I believe it is, May 27, 1999. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that Mr. Kelleher was wise to indicate that 
the parties should take some time to reflect upon their positions. 
The parties are doing that. The parties have, particularly SUN, 
have a CLC (Canadian Labour Congress) convention that they 
wish to attend and they are returning to the bargaining table on 
May 10, 1999. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Well, Mr. Speaker, while the NDP Premier in 
Saskatchewan likes to negotiate using the courts and the threats 
of fines, another province with a Tory Premier seems to be able 
to get results with good old-fashioned negotiation. 
 
Manitoba Tories were able to get results with their nurses by 
negotiating fairly. Rather than order them back to work, 
threaten with fines and jail, and jail them like the NDP would 
here, the nurses and government were able to come to terms. 
It’s a stark contrast, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Premier, how come a Conservative Premier can negotiate 
fairly and get results but you could only bully the nurses right 
into court? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I understand from 
speaking to Manitoba this morning that in Manitoba . . . I 
understand that they had over 50 days of bargaining. In 
addition, they had over 26 days, I think, of mediation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s fair to say that all eyes were on 
Saskatchewan, and we do have a memorandum of 
understanding that addresses workplace issues, recruitment and 
retention. And our package for all health care workers amounts 

to 13.7 per cent over the next three years. In the case of 
Manitoba, I understand that their package amounts to a little 
over 13 per cent. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would say that while Manitoba has a 
tentative agreement, I think it’s clear that the province and the 
nurses are watching very carefully what happened here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Mr. Speaker, I guess that’s exactly my point. 
Unfortunately the Premier doesn’t seem to understand how the 
negotiation process should work. 
 
In other provinces there seems to be this crazy notion that one 
party offers one thing, the other party offers another. Eventually 
the two parties meet somewhere in the middle. How unique. 
 
However, our Premier seems to think negotiations mean that 
one party offers something. Then the NDP says no, refuses to 
budge, and offers something with the special NDP clause that 
says take it or leave it. 
 
Mr. Premier, how come other areas can negotiate without 
threatening their nurses with jail time and million dollar fines, 
but you can’t? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, what the Minister of 
Health did not say about the Manitoba settlement — and I think 
this is perhaps out of professional courtesy; I’ll say it in any 
event. In Manitoba, in the past, the government under the health 
sector rolled back vacation for one week and daily shifts were 
reduced for a period of time, for the periods of 1997 and 1998 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, but just listen; that is what 
happened. 
 
And you’re advocating that we follow the Manitoba model. We 
do not want to follow the Manitoba model. We wish them well. 
They’ve got a negotiated settlement. That’s fair enough. 
 
We’re not for rollbacks. We’re for getting fairly bargained 
negotiated deals, which at 13.7, or roughly that amount that the 
Minister of Health has indicated, is very comparable to that in 
Manitoba. 
 
The memorandum of understanding is the basis of a good 
settlement. I’m looking forward to May 10. I’m looking 
forward to the parties getting back into collective bargaining 
and achieving an agreement as soon as possible. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Land Information Services Corporation 
 

Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 
the Minister of Justice. Mr. Minister, today you are introducing 
legislation to set up a new NDP Crown corporation. The Land 
Information Services Corporation is supposed to run the 
province’s new computerized land titles system. 
 
Now we support computerizing the land titles system. In fact it 
should have happened years ago. But why does it require a 
whole new Crown corporation? 
 



April 27, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 809 

Mr. Minister, why are you setting up this new Crown 
corporation? Can you confirm that you’re creating this new 
Crown to cover the severe cost overruns in the land titles 
computer project? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The answer to 
that is very simply no. There’s no purpose like that at all. What 
we do know is that as we’ve looked at this very carefully, this 
whole area of information as it relates to land is an area that 
includes many expanded opportunities. And as we looked at 
how we could do this, we realized that the SaskGeomatics 
division of the Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation and of the land titles system could work in a much 
better fashion if we joined them together in a Crown 
corporation. 
 
(1430) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Minister, in 1997 the total budget for this 
project was $20 million. That’s according to your associate 
deputy minister of Justice. In 1998 the project had jumped to 
31.5 million. And now we’ve been told the cost has swelled to 
$45.5 half million dollars. Of course none of this shows up in 
the bottom line of the budget, does it, because you’re creating a 
new Crown corporation to hide these cost overruns. 
 
Mr. Minister, isn’t that why you’re creating this new Crown 
corporation, to hide the millions of dollars of cost overruns in 
your land titles project? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The simple 
answer is no. We are doing this because we have looked at this 
whole situation very carefully and we realize that by going and 
working with a Crown corporation we can provide service over 
the longer term. 
 
What we want to do is make sure that we have a situation 
whereby the capital required to develop the system can be 
arranged in an appropriate way and after very careful review 
and work we have decided that this is the best way to do that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Again to the Minister of Justice. If you 
listened to question period today you heard your Finance 
minister say, if you borrow it you have to pay it back. Now, 
you’re spending $45.5 million on this particular project. $45.5 
million! That’s more than twice what it was when it started. 
 
Now where is that money all coming from and how do you plan 
on paying back the debt that’s being incurred by this Crown 
corporation? How are you going to tax and gouge the public on 
this one? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — This whole project is being designed in a 
way that will pay for itself and all of those plans are clear. What 
we have decided, that a Crown corporation is the best way to 
deal with this as far as setting up a system, and that’s why we 
plan to do it this way. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Heppner: — Minister of Justice, two questions. How 
much debt is this corporation going to be incurring to bring in 
your new project, and how much are you going to be raising the 
fees at land titles to cover the debt that you are incurring 
because, as the Finance minister said, if you borrow it, you’ve 
got to pay it back. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well one thing I will say for sure is that 
we are not going to follow any of the examples that have been 
provided by the predecessors to our friends across the way. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — We know that to provide proper service 
for the public as it relates to the land titles system and the broad 
array of geographical information that’s very important for the 
businesses of our province, then we need to make sure that we 
do it in a way that all of these costs are clearly set out and 
accountable. And what we don’t want to get into is any kind of 
a situation where once we’re involved in this whole process, we 
have things that are not explainable. 
 
Now practically, what we’re going to do as we work on this 
project is we’re going to continue to work with the people who 
have been helping us design the project. This is going to be a 
project that’s of benefit to all Saskatchewan people, and it’s 
going to be a Crown corporation of which we all can be proud. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 11  The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital 
Corporations Amendment Act, 1999 

 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
11, The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital Corporations 
Amendment Act, 1999, be now introduced and read the first 
time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 209 — The Legislative Assembly and Executive 
Council Amendment Act, 1999 

 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I give notice . . . I move first reading of Bill No. 209, 
The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Amendment 
Act, 1999. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 210 — The Vehicle Administration 
Amendment Act, 1999 

 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of Bill No. 
210, The Vehicle Administration Amendment Act, 1999. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 



810 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 1999 

read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 212 — The Recall of Members Act, 1999 
 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I move first reading of Bill No. 212, The Recall of 
Members Act, 1999. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 32 — The Corporation Capital Tax 
Amendment Act, 1999 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 32, The 
Corporation Capital Tax Amendment Act, 1999 be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 33 — The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 1999 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 33, The 
Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 1999 be now introduced and 
read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 34 — The Education and Health Tax 
Amendment Act, 1999 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 34, The 
Education and Health Tax Amendment Act, 1999 be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 36 — The Animal Protection Act, 1999 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 36, 
The Animal Protection Act, 1999 be read . . . introduced and 
read for the very first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 37 — The Snowmobile Amendment Act, 1999 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 37, The 
Snowmobile Amendment Act, 1999 be now introduced and 
read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 38 — The Litter Control Amendment Act, 1999 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 38, The 
Litter Control Amendment Act, 1999 be now introduced and 
read for the first time. 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 39 — The Wildlife Habitat Protection 
Amendment Act, 1999 

 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 39, The 
Wildlife Habitat Protection Amendment Act, 1999 be now 
introduced and read for the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 40 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 1999 
 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 40, The 
Income Tax Amendment Act, 1999 be now introduced and read 
the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next time. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 

Timing of Provincial Election 
 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s my pleasure to rise in the Assembly today to begin 
the debate about the future of the province of Saskatchewan. 
This is the spring of 1999 and people across this province have 
been anxiously awaiting spring knowing of course that spring 
really means rebirth and means that we’re going to be taking a 
new approach to doing what we do in Saskatchewan. 
 
One of the other things that people have been looking forward 
to, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that spring of 1999 should mean that 
the province of Saskatchewan will again be engaged in an 
electoral process and that we will have a provincial election. 
 
As the Premier campaigned, Mr. Speaker, back in 1991 one of 
the planks of the NDP platform was, at that time, to state that 
there should be set election dates on a four-year cycle. And the 
Premier was waiting for that opportunity. I note that back in 
1995, the call of the election in 1995 occurred in the month of 
June, in fact, before the four-year term as the previous election 
had occurred in the month of October in ’91. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we see happening now of course is that there 
is . . . June is approaching, and the people of this province are 
looking forward to the next provincial election. The people of 
this province want a provincial election for a number of 
reasons, Mr. Speaker. What they see is a government that is 
flailing around with no direction and no vision. All they hear on 
a daily basis is a government which is unwilling and unable to 
defend its own record. Instead they seem intent on fighting or 
re-fighting the 1991 election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we heard evidence of that today in question period 
from the Premier when he started to indicate that we may get 
what we wish as an official opposition — and of course that’s a 
provincial election. The people of Saskatchewan know that the 



April 27, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 811 

four-year term is up and that indeed there is a time to look at the 
record, the lack of accomplishments of the government over the 
last four years, and to analyze where we should move in the 
future. 
 
(1445) 
 
For the last four years, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen a number of 
things happen in this province. We’ve seen tremendous 
upheaval in the area of health care, whereby the previous 
election, 1991, this NDP government after becoming elected 
had not mentioned closure of hospitals or in fact a reform of 
health care at all. And then along came the plan to close 52 
hospitals — shocking to the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. And ever since then we’ve seen this health reform 
model that has . . . that has gripped our province and placed a 
number of people in serious jeopardy regarding health care. 
 
Tremendous concern across Saskatchewan regarding what is the 
vision for this province in terms of health care? Are we going to 
be trying to implement numbers for the number of acute care 
beds that are not possible in Saskatchewan? 
 
I think what has to be recognized, Mr. Speaker, is that to adopt 
a standard policy for all of Saskatchewan just doesn’t fit. We 
have tremendous differences in the province from one corner to 
the other — whether we’re talking about northern 
Saskatchewan or southern Saskatchewan. And to indicate that a 
particular rule must be in place doesn’t, doesn’t always fit so 
nice and neatly when you look at it from the point of view of a 
piece of paper on a desk. When you actually look at the real 
situation that’s out there, that is not always possible. 
 
What we see happening, Mr. Speaker, is that there is a 
tremendous difference of how health care is delivered in all 
parts of the province. We see situations where indeed we do 
have two-tiered health care right now. People who have the 
finances, who are able to secure health care outside of their area 
and can afford it, do so. There isn’t . . . that situation doesn’t 
apply to everybody. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the second issue that’s before us right now is the 
fact that the Premier should be calling a June election. And I 
really think that if he doesn’t call a June election, the only 
reason that he wouldn’t do that is because he would be scared to 
do that. 
 
And I say so because I’m sure that the Premier relies on the 
polls that he sees on a regular basis, and those polls are showing 
him that the NDP government’s record, that its handling of 
certain situations right now, is not doing them in good stead. 
And indeed that support for the New Democratic Party is failing 
and it is failing fast. 
 
The other situation that we have to look at, Mr. Speaker, is the 
fact that we now have no longer in this House, 58 members of 
the Legislative Assembly. We only have 55. And very clearly 
according to the provisions within the legislation that we have 
here, the two resignations that occurred, I believe, Mr. Speaker, 
on January 14 — I’ll just say mid-January — those have to be 
dealt with by mid-July. 
 
And very clearly I’m sure that the Premier is not going to be 

interested in calling a July by-election, so we now have three 
by-elections that are also pending. And I think the people of this 
province are saying well, Mr. Premier, it’s time to put the entire 
slate before the people of Saskatchewan, and let’s look at an 
election that can be held in June. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is a need to have an election to 
decide I think two very different views of this province. The 
first is provided by the NDP, and that view is telling the people 
of Saskatchewan that they should continue paying nearly the 
highest taxes in the country. That view is that we will be willing 
to live with the worst job creation record in the country. That 
view is that the Saskatchewan people’s money is better off in 
the pockets of government than in their own pockets. 
 
Over the last little while, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think what 
we’ve seen is that the Liberals are of this view to even a greater 
extent. At least the NDP offered a pathetic tax cut in the latest 
budget. The Liberal House Leader is quoted in the newspaper 
this morning as being totally opposed to any tax cuts 
whatsoever. 
 
Now as my colleague indicated in the House this afternoon, the 
Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce when asked . . . when 
polling its members and determining what the real problem in 
Saskatchewan is, when asked what the top three concerns were, 
they identified taxes, taxes, and taxes. And here we have the 
Liberal House Leader say that any tax cuts whatsoever are not 
possible. 
 
On the other side of that coin, the NDP/Liberal coin, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, we have the Saskatchewan Party. We have put 
forward a plan for a responsible and sustainable tax cut. A plan 
that’s been given the thumbs up by WEFA Canada, which the 
Deputy Premier calls as credible as can be. It’s a good plan, and 
it’s a plan that most certainly does not freeze education or 
health care spending. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s another 
NDP fantasy. 
 
In fact, last fall when the Deputy Premier of the government 
responded to the release of the platform of the Saskatchewan 
Party, he said the numbers can’t be argued with. WEFA Canada 
has analyzed and assessed the entire plan and has put forward 
their idea that says it’s a doable plan. The Deputy Premier said, 
can’t argue with those numbers; they’re indeed valid. 
 
And that’s the plan that we’re putting forward, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, before the people of this province. They need to 
determine what kind of plan is being put forward. And that’s 
why we’re in a process of right now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of 
sharing that plan with anyone. 
 
We have started a series of very small advertisements that 
indicate to the people of Saskatchewan if they want to know 
more about the platform of the Saskatchewan Party, that they 
can indeed call a particular number and ask Elwin Hermanson, 
the Leader of the Saskatchewan Party, to send that document to 
them. An open type of situation, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The members opposite in the Liberal Party say, we can’t afford 
to cut taxes. Well, as our tax base continues to shrink with more 
people leaving the province and very few people coming into 
the province we say, we can’t afford not to cut taxes. In order to 



812 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 1999 

raise taxes, you have to have a tax base, and in a few years 
we’re not going to have that. 
 
We’ve spoken many times, Mr. Deputy Speaker, about the eight 
areas in which Saskatchewan is at the bottom of the ladder — 
taxes, job creation, health, highways, crime, welfare, retail 
sales, population growth. 
 
You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are either the worst, or the 
worst in every one of those eight categories in the province of 
. . . in all of Canada. That’s where Saskatchewan is. That’s not a 
record that people of this province are proud of. And I dare say 
that when the Premier calls the next provincial election, the 
people of Saskatchewan will indicate to him that that’s not a 
record that they want to see happen in this province any longer. 
 
It is time to change this government. It is time to put forward a 
new plan that will deal with turning this province around, and in 
fact moving us into the 21st century with a vision, with a hope 
for the people of Saskatchewan that indeed we will be moving 
forward and that we will have a situation in Saskatchewan 
where people who are here right now will be able to stay 
because there will be job opportunities, and in fact we’ll be able 
to attract businesses and other people to either come back or 
locate in the province of Saskatchewan for the first time. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people of this province want an 
election now. We have put our platform on the line, and we’re 
asking the people of Saskatchewan to consider that. All we 
require is that the Premier of this province calls an election, and 
we suggest that he do that in the month of June. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, at this time I would like to move, 
seconded by the member for Kelvington-Wadena: 
 

That this Assembly urges the Premier to keep his promise 
to hold provincial elections every four years and to hold 
the next provincial election by June 1999. 

 
I so move. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
I’m delighted to second the motion brought forward today from 
the member of Canora-Pelly. He’s asked that the provincial 
government and that the Premier call an election in June of this 
year to look at some of . . . let the people of this province 
actually decide if what is happening in this province is the 
vision or is the direction that they feel should be . . . that this 
province should be taking. 
 
I think that I mentioned during the budget speech and during the 
reply to the Throne Speech that I believe and the people of my 
constituency believe that this government is operating with no 
vision, that there is no real plan for the future of the province 
and no plan for the people. So I went to my constituency office 
last night and talked to my assistant and I said, what kind of 
calls are you getting in here, Linda? What are the people of this 
constituency saying? 
 
So, for you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and for the members opposite 
. . . and I’m sure they do the same thing as I do, talk to their 
assistants and find our what’s happening in the constituency and 
deal with any problems that they can’t deal with while they’re 

here in Regina. And of course we rely on our assistants for the 
very great work that they do for all of us. And she said that the 
calls are increasing, that the number of people that are calling 
and saying that they need help is increasing every day. 
 
The Minister of Health today said in question period, the sky is 
not falling. The member opposite, she said that we tend to 
exaggerate and there is no problem. So just for her information 
and for the information of the members opposite, I want to tell 
you what happened in my office yesterday. 
 
The first phone call we had yesterday morning, early yesterday 
morning, was from a farmer who talked about the farm aid 
package. He said that he can’t qualify, the people he knows 
can’t qualify for it, and that it is doing very little good. 
 
And he remarked that the Minister of Agriculture had said, well 
fill out the form anyway, and then we can prove to the federal 
government that this isn’t working. And his comment was, we 
had a project, or a program that was working; it was called 
GRIP (gross revenue insurance program). And the farmers 
believed in it and they thought they had a chance with GRIP. 
And this government took it away. So why should we actually 
do anything the Minister of Agriculture asks for, because it’s 
not going to be of any use anyway. 
 
A few minutes later there was a phone call from an elderly 
gentleman. I think she said he was 78 years old. She gave me 
his name. She said that he had gone into the hospital and they 
said he was in a large amount of pain. And they told him he’d 
have to go home because there was no beds for him in the 
hospital. 
 
And he went home on Friday night, and during the night he 
actually passed a kidney stone at home, by himself. He of 
course commented that he was in a tremendous amount of pain, 
and he didn’t think living here in Saskatchewan, in this 
birthplace of medicare, that he would have to spend a long, 
lonely pain-ridden night by himself, waiting, because there was 
no bed for him in this province. 
 
And he asked, is our medical care system, does the government 
actually believe that it’s better now than it was 10 years ago? 
And he said no. 
 
Not too much later we had a phone call from another elderly 
gentleman who said he’d gone into the hospital, and he was told 
that he probably had a blood clot in his leg but he would have to 
go home because again there was no bed for him. And he was 
told to go home and rest calmly and they would call him as 
soon as there was an appropriate space for him in our health 
system. 
 
And then, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we had a couple of calls about 
the highways. One of them was from a school bus driver who 
said that the parents on his route were getting very upset 
because the school bus had to travel on the wrong side of the 
road for just about 3 miles because the road was in such terrible 
condition. He didn’t feel safe with the children in the bus riding 
. . . driving the way they should be driven. There was holes in 
the road that were literally dangerous to be driving your vehicle 
on. 
 



April 27, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 813 

Now I thought, well this is maybe something that I have been 
bringing up to the Minister of Highways; it’s something that 
they say they are addressing. But it’s something that is a 
concern to families and to parents every day. It’s not something 
we can just put on a list and say well, we’ll look at it sometime. 
 
And we also had a call from somebody who had an SGI 
(Saskatchewan Government Insurance) complaint. They had 
wrecked the front of their car, wheel alignment, some kind of a 
problem. They went to court, and the SGI lawyer, the person 
from SGI representing him there, he said, well if this road is 
one you’d normally travel on and you know it’s in bad shape, 
why didn’t you take another road? 
 
(1500) 
 
Now his question to me was, is this the answer to the road 
problem in this province, them telling him to take a different 
road? I think it’s an insult to the taxpayers of this province to be 
told by SGI that if the road isn’t good, the one you normally 
take, well then just take another road. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we had a call just before noon from a 
young mother who wasn’t aware that she was expecting and she 
found out . . . as soon as she found out she purchased Blue 
Cross. When the baby was to be born in rural Saskatchewan the 
doctor decided that they should transfer her into Saskatoon, in 
the ambulance, doctor’s order. And when the ambulance bill 
came for $800 she sent it in to Blue Cross and then found out 
that she’s not covered, because you have to apply 8 months 
before the baby is born, and she was 15 days short. 
 
So now in rural Saskatchewan this young mother has a $800 bill 
for an ambulance because of a regulation that she knew nothing 
about and now she’s in . . . Like my colleague is saying, we 
have two-tier health out in rural Saskatchewan. If you don’t 
know the rules and regulations, you’re going to pay extra. It’s 
not something that this young mother can afford. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the RM (rural municipality) secretary of 
our area called and talked about the grants in his area and said 
that his grants had actually gone down again this year, 17 per 
cent decrease again this year. And he said that that means 
there’s going to be a mill rate increase for the taxpayers of my 
constituency. Not just property tax, but also calls from the 
school division saying because of the decrease in education 
grants, there’s also going to be an increase in the mill rate for 
education. So again we’re going to have the taxpayers in 
Saskatchewan paying more for education and for the property 
tax. 
 
The new education Bill that was brought in by the government 
was discussed last night by one of the taxpayers, and they feel 
that this Bill is going to be taking away their freedom of choice 
about where they can be sending their children to school. And 
they’re saying this administration is limiting people’s 
opportunity for their children in lots of areas, education being 
one of them. 
 
And one of the very last phone calls I got late last night was 
from an older person who said that he’d been working for 20 
years as a labourer and now, at 73 years old, he’s retired. He 
collects the maximum supplement from the Saskatchewan plan; 

he collects CPP (Canada Pension Plan); he collects old age 
pension; and between him and his wife, he has $1,200 a month 
to live on. 
 
Now he also talked about the increase in SaskEnergy rates, the 
increase in SaskPower rates, the increase in telephone, the 
increase in property taxes, and on and on. And the $1,200, after 
you take away the direct living expenses, there’s very little left 
to live on. 
 
What he tells me is now he has a problem with his teeth. He has 
to have dentures. The cost of dentures if you don’t have some 
kind of a plan, is $3,400. Now somehow he has to pay for this 
out of the few dollars that are left after he has his basic living 
expenses. 
 
So when the members opposite talk about the election and do 
we have a plan . . . the people of the province, the gentleman 
that called me last night said, isn’t there anything different we 
can be doing? Is there no hope for this province? I’ve lived here 
all my life. I want to live here. I believe that we can have a life 
here, but every day, every year we live here, we’re falling 
further and further behind. 
 
And I guess the only thing I could say to this constituent is yes, 
there is an alternative. Yes, we can do something different. The 
Saskatchewan Party does have a plan. We can reduce the size of 
government. We can reduce the amount of taxes that are paid. 
We can let government do the real job of governing, and that is 
looking after the infrastructure and the basic necessities that 
government should be involved in, and get out of their life so 
that people can go forward in this province. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am delighted to second the motion 
from the member from Canora-Pelly and say that yes, the 
people of this province not only want, they expect and they 
deserve an election as soon as possible so they can begin a life 
in this province. 
 
Mr. Whitmore: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m very 
pleased to speak to this motion that’s been put forward today. 
At the end of my conversation today I will be putting forward 
an amendment to that resolution that I think more deals with the 
reality that is going on out there in dealing with what the people 
really want and how they feel about the province of 
Saskatchewan and how they feel about the Premier of this 
province. 
 
But you know what has taken me, Mr. Deputy Premier? I heard 
the Leader of the Opposition talk about the question of fantasy. 
Well I have just heard two speakers from the opposition party 
talk about fantasy when they referred to what they want to do 
for the people of Saskatchewan, and talk about democratic 
reform. 
 
We want to talk about democratic reform and accountability to 
the people of Saskatchewan. They need to look at their heritage 
by which they have come out of in terms of how they’ve treated 
the people of Saskatchewan. I want to talk about one of their 
parents. 
 
I want to talk about the Tory Party of Saskatchewan, which they 
certainly fit when we call them Sask Tories. That in this 



814 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 1999 

province in the 1980s there were by-elections — not one, not 
two, not three, not four, but five by-elections where people 
resigned. Gary Lane resigned, September 5, 1991. Eric 
Berntson resigned, June 19, 1990. Colin Maxwell resigned, 
1990. Graham Taylor resigned, 1990. Bob Andrew resigned, 
1989. 
 
And do you know how long those people waited for the 
opportunity to put a representative in those ridings? Do you 
know how long? They waited till 1991 — far beyond the six 
months that is now legislated in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And when I hear the opposition parties talk about the question 
of a legislated four-year mandate in terms of elections, the last 
time I checked, when I stand for a national anthem in this 
country, it is not for the Stars and Stripes, it is for O Canada 
under the parliamentary system that has gone a hundred years in 
this country and throughout the world. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Whitmore: — When we talk about what is going on . . . 
when you scratch the surface of the Saskatchewan Party, we see 
a system that is truly more Americanizing the politics of 
Saskatchewan and of Canada. And that is wrong. 
 
But let’s talk about the Sask Tories in terms of how they treated 
themselves when they formed themselves, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Here’s a party talks about it, wants an election — they want an 
election. They’ve never gone to the people yet on an election. 
They didn’t have the courage to go to the people in terms of an 
election when they formed a new party, and now they think it’s 
time for that election. It’s now time to test the people. 
 
Well it’s not the dead of night. It’s not the dead of night. We 
will have that test. We will have that test by which the people of 
Saskatchewan will guide and determine who they wish to guide 
this province. And I am confident it will be this party, the New 
Democratic Party of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Whitmore: — I’m ready to fight that election any time the 
Premier calls it. But it bothers me when I see these attacks on 
the parliamentary system, and they worry me when I see them. 
 
But let’s talk about democratic reform and what this 
government has done in the past eight years to improve the 
democratic reform in this province in terms of accountability. 
 
I’ll refer first to the election of a Speaker that has taken place in 
this province, done under this government. Beyond that, the 
opening of Board of Internal Economy for public to attend, 
which is chaired by the Speaker. 
 
The independent electoral officer in this province, done under 
this government which is chosen by an all-party committee — 
part of democratic reform. 
 
Conflict of interest legislation that the public has demanded that 
we have put forward, and at the same time put forward a 
Conflict of Interest Commissioner that deals with the openness 
and accountability of MLAs (Member of the Legislative 

Assembly) and Executive Council members in this province. 
We are opening up to what’s going on. 
 
Support of the Provincial Auditor financially at the Board of 
Internal Economy by which we’ve allowed him to conduct the 
kind of things he needs to do in terms of that openness and 
accountability for the people of Saskatchewan. The McDowell 
commission, which has led to a great deal of change regarding 
how MLAs do themselves in terms of the financial aspect and 
communication aspect that they talk to their constituency. 
 
Open and accountable government again when they’re . . . 
accountability. And one I referred to a little earlier — six 
months for a by-election. Never in this province again we will 
see the disrespect of the constituents of this province by 
instituting the six months. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think one of the most important pieces of 
legislation that we’ll be bringing forward in this session is The 
Respect for Constituents Act which deals with the question of 
when people decide that they’re moving to another party, they 
take it to their electorate to see how the electorate feel. 
 
It is important, Mr. Speaker, that we follow the traditions that 
are set down in this province, set down within the parliamentary 
system that we have in this province, and as I say in all 
Commonwealth nations across the world. These important 
principles by which to follow, and we will continue to follow. 
 
Because if we move off those principles, I see a change that I 
don’t think the public will like. And we have to deal in terms of 
elections too when we talk about public interest and all that 
sphere in terms of how we deal with things. 
 
We work as groups. We work together in terms of, as politics is, 
that of compromise and developing those systems by which best 
fit the people of Saskatchewan. And these are the things, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that are important to us as a party. It should be 
important to every member in the House. 
 
I know opposition parties love to get out and say it’s time for 
the election. It’s time for the election. But when they talk about 
every four years, I’m bothered by that. I think it’s important that 
we be very careful of that. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I am proud of the record that we’ve 
put forward in terms of democratic reform. I am proud of those 
kind of things that we are doing in terms of a government 
setting forth an agenda that is important for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
As we have done in every year we have been in government, 
laying down the foundations of where we want to be dealing 
with those difficult issues that are out there. That people respect 
us in those areas in terms of what we’re doing, and they have 
returned us to office every time we’ve gone back to them. And 
they will do it again, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They will do it again. 
 
So with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to propose an 
amendment, seconded by the member from Regina South: 
 

That all the words after “Assembly” be deleted and 
substituted with the following: 



April 27, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 815 

commend the Premier for his commitment and dedication 
to strengthen our Canadian parliamentary system which 
forms the basis of our prosperity, under which we’ve 
earned the United Nations designation as the best country 
in the world in which to live. 

 
I so move. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1515) 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
enter into this debate today because it, I think, addresses most 
of the major issues this Assembly needs to talk about. It 
addresses some fundamental differences between that particular 
opposition party and the members on this side. It addresses 
some of the major differences with the Liberal members and the 
members on this side. And it focuses I think for Saskatchewan 
people what this coming election debate will be about. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me start by saying it is amazing, absolutely 
amazing, that the two members that they have put up so far are 
the member for Canora-Pelly and the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. Two members who were afraid, afraid, to 
go to their own electorate — refused to go. In the dark of the 
night they moved over from the Liberal Party that they were 
elected to represent to go and sit with that dark cloud that hangs 
over this province, namely Saskatchewan Tory Party. 
 
That is what is so appalling about the motion moved today by 
those two members. Perhaps if it had been other members it 
would not have had the same indignation and affront to voters 
that those two members certainly bring forward. 
 
Who would think, who would think, that only a few months ago 
these members had turned their backs on their own constituents. 
These very members that refused to go to the electorate are now 
today coming forward with the audacity to say gee, it’s been 
almost four years; we should have an election. Isn’t that a nice 
idea. Where were those members when the people in their 
ridings were calling for an election to pass judgment on what 
they had done? Where were they? 
 
Mr. Speaker, they were gone. And you know what, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, soon again they will be gone. This time in a much 
more permanent way, because it is that attitude — it is that 
attitude — which shows the difference between these two 
parties. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is an affront, it is unfortunate, and it’s 
arrogant to watch these members opposite perform. I was 
particularly bothered today as the member for Melfort stood in 
this House to introduce a respected foreign visitor, and in his 
introduction, of all of the pettiness, it was a crass arrogant 
politics to stand up and say soon we’ll be the government. It’s 
one thing for us to play politics in this House, it’s one thing for 
us to fight about politics on the streets, but to be honest about it, 
there’s something called protocol; there’s something called 
decorum; and there’s something called a respect. And I’ll tell 
you that was missing today, and that is exactly — exactly — 
what we are seeing from the members opposite. 
 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s unfortunate that the members opposite 
feel that they should be bringing forward this motion today. The 
Premier may very well decide that we need an election in June 
and we should go to the polls. The Premier may have decided 
last October we should’ve gone to the polls because it was an 
appropriate time. He may decide that next month or a month 
after or this fall is the appropriate time. The fact is, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, the constitution of this country provides the members 
of this Assembly with a five-year term — the constitution of 
this country provides us with a five-year term. It’s often the 
case in most Assemblies that we go to an election between three 
and a half years and four and a half years. 
 
The only time that I know of where we have seen this actually 
pressed to the very limit was when . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Guess who? 
 
Mr. Thomson: — That’s right, guess who was in office. The 
member opposite, the member from Moosomin, I’m sure will 
remember this. I can only imagine his advice was to his Premier 
at that point. I’m sure it was hold on for dear life because we’re 
going down. Don’t go at four years, don’t go at four and a half 
years, you know in fact if you could wait a day past five years 
that’d be the day to go. And lo and behold that’s what 
happened. 
 
So for a party of that nature, for a party with those members, to 
come forward and in their most arrogant way present this 
motion that says, we have to go for an election at four years — 
says to me that really what they say is that their concern is 
simply cheap, crass, partisan politics. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve listened to the 
members opposite speak today and explain what they think they 
should be campaigning on. I watched — I thought it was public 
access television for a minute last night when I saw their leader 
on TV; it turned out it was actually just a poorly produced 
television ad. But nevertheless they are trying to put their 
agenda forward. Because their agenda has fallen off. It’s off the 
rails. 
 
They’ve got an agenda which is simply not registering with the 
public. The public looks at it and says, this is the party that’s 
promising balanced budget? Oh but wait, they never delivered a 
balanced budget. The member from Moosomin never once 
stood in this House and voted for a balanced budget — not 
once. Didn’t do it when his party was in office; has never done 
it while this party’s in office. And I think that’s unfortunate. 
 
They look at it and they say, this is a party that says we should 
cut taxes. Well this party has cut taxes. I find it interesting that 
their leader, Mr. Hermanson, stood up and said that our tax cut 
this spring was pathetic. 
 
Well now I’m not one to spend much time reading the Tory 
platform. But wasn’t it the Tory platform that was calling for a 
1 per cent cut in the PST this year? Oh, isn’t that interesting. So 
the very tax cut that they propose, we implement. And what is 
it? It’s pathetic. 
 



816 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 1999 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would argue that the thing that was 
pathetic was their response. It’s a fact that they refuse to accept 
and recognize when there’s good government. They refuse to 
represent their constituents, they hide from their constituents, 
and I think that’s unfortunate. 
 
I’ve spent a lot of time out on the doorsteps in the last several 
weeks, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I’ll tell you what people are 
telling me. They’re saying that we are headed in the right 
direction. They are telling me that this government they trust. 
And they’re telling me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that not one of 
those opposition parties would they want to see in this 
government House. Not one. 
 
Because they don’t trust the Conservative members. And they 
don’t know the Liberal members. And at the end of it, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, the argument or the discussion that we have 
with the Saskatchewan electorate is one about what this party 
should do, the approach we should take, the way we should do 
it. 
 
I understand for the members opposite that’s got to be 
frustrating. And I heard yesterday an arrogant statement from 
the member for Cannington as he stood in this House and made 
a rather personal affront I thought to the Premier of this 
province. 
 
Let me say this about 1982 and April 26. The members on this 
side of the House learned an important lesson. And I think if 
you canvassed any one of us, you would hear very personally 
and very strongly felt feelings about what we learned from that. 
 
We learned that the most important relationship that a 
government can have is with its electorate. We learned that 
what you’ve got to have is an open, honest dialogue with voters 
— not just at election time but throughout your term. And for 
eight years we’ve done that. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m reminded of the fact that our 
eighth anniversary in office is coming up this October. Our 
eighth anniversary. It’s not until October. So whether it’s four 
years now, three and a half in the first term, four and a half in 
the second term, that’s not a big problem. 
 
Let’s also remember the fact that the constitution of this country 
— which last I looked at the members on this side respected — 
said that we had a five-year mandate. When we have completed 
our agenda, the agenda we were elected with in 1995, the 
Premier should call that election. But it is irresponsible for us 
simply to go to an election because somehow or another the 
clock ticks and we hit a magic day. 
 
Once the mandate is finished, we should go. If that mandate had 
been completed in October, we should have gone back to the 
people and renewed. That was a mistake the Conservative 
government made in the 1986 period. They completed their 
mandate, they had lost the ability to govern, they had lost the 
respect of the people, and they refused to go to the public for an 
election. 
 
I would argue that it is much the same situation that we saw 
with the member for Canora, the member for Kelvington, the 
member for Saltcoats, the member for Melfort. I think I 

mentioned the member for Kelvington but she’s got her hand up 
again so I’ll recognize her one more time. 
 
Those members opposite also abandoned their platform. The 
mandate that they were given by the people was to present a 
particular sort of view. They weren’t views I subscribe to but 
that was what their constituents said they should represent. 
They abandoned that. 
 
Rather than going back to their constituents, they simply said oh 
no, they knew best and that they would simply move across the 
aisle. And I think that that’s most unfortunate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. The member’s time has 
elapsed. The debate will continue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will have to try very 
hard now to compensate in intellect what I clearly will lack in 
volume compared to our last two speakers. Fortunately that is 
not difficult to manage. I’m still of course trying to recover 
from the concept of the hon. member for Regina South teaching 
the member for Melfort-Tisdale or for anywhere else about 
decorum in the Assembly, but I guess we can all stand to learn 
something in life. 
 
I would like to say though, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I agree 
that one of the strengths of our constitution is its flexibility. 
And one of the problems that we’ve at times gotten in to by 
trying to make our constitution inflexible is that we create a 
whole new problem. Members opposite have pointed out that 
the Devine government failed to call by-elections when seats 
became vacant. This was obviously a defect and an evil in our 
system which they sought, to their credit, to correct by bringing 
in the rule about six-month by-elections. 
 
But now it’s been shown to us how very, very wrong that was 
because here we are in a situation where, if by any chance we 
don’t have a June general election, we will be stuck with the 
expense of three by-elections in order to elect members who in 
all likelihood will never take their seats in this Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — The same goes for The Respect for 
Constituents Act. While I have some sympathy for the emotion 
behind this Act, what it really says is that MLAs are not 
responsible to their conscience. They are not responsible to 
their constituents. They are not elected as individuals. They are 
responsible to the political parties for which they were 
originally nominated. 
 
I think that while I agree with much of the sentiment behind the 
Act, I think it is an unconstitutional and an unwarranted attempt 
to bind the consciences of individual members. And while I 
may not be in agreement with what my former colleagues in the 
Saskatchewan Party may have done, it seems to me that they 
will in due course, like all the rest of us, answer to their 
electorates for their work in this House and their work as 
representatives. And we are all facing that great test period and 
I am content that it should be so. 
 



April 27, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 817 

Well the election is coming up soon. I am also somewhat 
bewildered that hon. members opposite in the government now 
seem to be waffling on a long-standing commitment by the 
NDP to an election this June. And I’m just having a little bit of 
problem. 
 
I note that the motion before us does not call for automatic 
constitutional four-year elections. It simply urges the Premier to 
keep his long-standing commitment to a June election. 
 
And if members opposite and if the Premier is wavering on a 
June election I have to ask myself: why? You know they tell us, 
they tell us the polls are just great. Everybody is happy. The 
province is booming. And these polls — they can’t believe 
them. 
 
Well I can’t believe them either, Mr. Speaker. Because if they 
were so great, then why are the waffling on facing the electorate 
in June? They have oftentimes told us that’s their preference. 
Well go ahead with your preference. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many challenges facing this province 
which will face whoever is elected as the next Government of 
Saskatchewan. We all know, we all know that the infrastructure 
of our province has been let slide by this government. 
 
I congratulate them for balancing the budget. But we know they 
have balanced the budget at the expense of the infrastructure of 
this province crumbling. We know that they have balanced the 
budget by forgetting about the roads, letting literally the roof 
cave in on our school system, and need I say anything more 
than our health care system. 
 
The best health care system in the world they tell us. Well I get 
phone calls at my office each and every day from people who 
are waiting in pain and agony and health care workers who are 
stretched to the limit. And they don’t believe we have the best 
health care system in the world. 
 
And indeed to them it sounds like smugness. It sounds as if 
their problems are being ignored by this government when the 
government says, oh everything’s marvellous; there’s nothing 
to fix; there’s nothing to correct; there’s nothing to improve. 
 
(1530) 
 
When a man waits in pain for a year and a half for a hip 
replacement, and he’s told, no problem, we’ve got the best 
health care in the world. When a lady waits in the darkness for 
her cataract operation for 12 months and more, again does she 
get any sympathy from this government? No. She’s told we’ve 
got a marvellous system. Best place in the whole world. 
 
This sounds like smugness to the people out there. And we 
know what the people do to governments which become smug 
and arrogant. 
 
However, we also know that while our infrastructure has been 
allowed to crumble, we are aware that we have one of the 
highest tax regimes in the country and we’ve lived next door to 
the lowest taxed jurisdiction in Canada. If we want to hold our 
business and investor class, we are going to have to address 
that. 

I am very unhappy about the number of people who have talked 
to me in the last few months about moving to Alberta. In many 
cases, I have to say it’s been lifelong supporters of the NDP 
who are now doing the pencil work of what taxes they would 
pay if they retired out of the province versus if they retired in 
Saskatchewan, and they have found this province wanting. 
 
I hope they do decide to stay here, but we know if we want 
people to remain here, to live here, to invest here, to work here, 
to pay taxes here, we will have to offer them a tax regime which 
is fair, giving consideration to our neighbours. 
 
We also know, Mr. Speaker, that we have the highest 
percentage of senior citizens in the country. We have the second 
highest percentage of underaged juniors in the country. We 
know that maintaining a fair tax level, maintaining our 
infrastructure, is going to be a serious challenge for whatever 
government is elected. 
 
We also know that our burgeoning Aboriginal population is 
going to be the major increase and influx into the labour age in 
the next few years. And I’m distressed that this government 
doesn’t seem to have much of a plan for bringing Aboriginal 
young people into the economic mainstream and into the 
workforce, because again this is serious for all of us if this 
province is to have a future. 
 
Well the government tells us that job creation is doing just 
marvellous. We may be the last in the country but everything is 
marvellous. A government, a political party that is proud of the 
fact we have the lowest job creation in Canada is a government 
that is coming perilously close to arrogance and smugness. 
 
Well they say we’re on top. Well we’re on top of, we’re on top 
of social problems. The social indicators, the economic 
indicators, are not good. 
 
And I think we do have to address some of the issues that the 
Saskatchewan Party has brought up. But I think we are going to 
have to be careful about how much tax reduction is possible 
immediately. It seems to me we are going to have to get 
economic development and job creation going so that we will 
be able to afford to maintain our infrastructure and bring our tax 
level down to a fair level. We know that we can’t continue with 
the highest property taxes in Canada. 
 
But we also know, we also know, that an instantaneous and 
dramatic drop in the taxes would simply be a return to the 
deficit budgeting of the Devine years. And the deficit budgeting 
of the Devine years is not a prescription for prosperity, Mr. 
Speaker, and we all know that. 
 
So there is a balancing Act which I urge all members to put 
aside. There’s a balancing act which we require. We have to 
maintain the infrastructure. We have to bring our tax level to 
somewhere near that of our neighbours, and we need . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. The member’s time has 
elapsed. 
 
Mr. Ward: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to enter 
this debate. And I want to thank the members opposite for 
giving us their advice on how to govern this province. After all, 



818 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 1999 

their record is so good. It’s been stated by my fellow colleagues 
on this side what their record is in by-elections and so on. And 
they say that we should have an election because our record is 
so bad. 
 
Well that’s odd, Mr. Speaker, because I was looking at some of 
my campaign literature here from the last election which said I 
would try to bring balanced budget, lower taxes, and reduce the 
debt to help bring some stability to the economy. And I think 
we have been very successful in attaining that objective. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Ward: — In the last term we have brought in four 
balanced budgets, and six altogether. We’ve reduced income 
taxes a total of 10 per cent and lowered the PST to 6 per cent, 
giving our province the lowest provincial sales tax of any 
province that has a sales tax in Canada. 
 
We also committed to creating 30,000 jobs by the year 2000, 
and are very close to achieving that goal, Mr. Speaker. I think 
that what’s doubly important is that we have done this by 
creating a climate for investors and selling the benefits of doing 
business in Saskatchewan — not only in Canada, but around the 
world. 
 
I think the diversity of trade and the value-added programs that 
we have promoted are now showing us the benefits, especially 
this year when agricultural prices and the oil industry was not 
strong. Our economy still grew and is projected to increase 2 
per cent in ’99. 
 
This is not an easy task in light of the free publicity Alberta gets 
as the greenest grass in the land. But when you make some 
comparisons or dig into the myths, it’s not always what it’s 
cracked up to be. 
 
We hear the charge that Saskatchewan has the second highest 
tax rate in the country. Supporters of this argument cite 
Saskatchewan’s tax rate for the highest income earners. 
 
But it’s a different story when we take a broader look at total 
taxes and charges. When average taxes are compared, 
Saskatchewan is very competitive. Saskatchewan’s personal 
income tax for a two-income family of four earning either 
50,000 or 75,000 is higher than Alberta’s by 1,100 and 2,000 
respectively. In Alberta only those better off get better breaks. 
 
Alberta has no sales tax — this is true, Mr. Speaker — but it 
does charge an annual health premium of $816 per family, more 
than the yearly sales tax paid by the average Saskatchewan 
family. 
 
Automobile insurance rates in Calgary are nearly double those 
for Regina. Housing costs are significantly lower in 
Saskatchewan. The average new house in Calgary costs 
188,000; in Regina 150,000. 
 
Combined provincial sales taxes, premiums, add in housing, 
automobile, and utility rates, and for the family of four earning 
50,000, the total cost in Saskatoon is $13,243 and 13,900 in 
Calgary. For the family earning 75,000, the total in Saskatoon is 
$17,010; in Calgary it’s 16,449. The only Alberta advantage 

goes to the privileged, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Finally, corporate taxes are not out of line. Saskatchewan’s 
corporation income tax rate on manufacturing and processing 
profits is lower than Alberta’s: 10 per cent for Saskatchewan; 
fourteen and a half in Alberta. The general corporate income tax 
rate for Saskatchewan is 17 per cent compared to fifteen and a 
half in Alberta. The income tax rate for small business is 8 per 
cent here and 6 per cent in Alberta. 
 
The conclusion is that if we base our provincial comparison on 
sales tax alone, Alberta is the place to be, Mr. Speaker. If we 
base it on car and health premiums, Saskatchewan wins by a 
landslide. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Ward: — The moral is those who make claims for 
superiority should base their judgment on all the available 
evidence, Mr. Speaker, not just on selected and exaggerated bits 
like the opposition does. 
 
And as I said, we’re not a perfect government. And if I had to 
pick an issue to illustrate that, there’s probably not one in this 
room that wouldn’t say it’s health care. I guess that if you asked 
just about any of us, you would be hard pressed to find anyone 
that would say that if we had to do it over again, would we do it 
differently. 
 
But there are some things I would like you to remember when 
the other parties are telling you how bad the system is. Let’s 
remember the health budget in ’91 was on a runaway path at 
about 13 per cent a year growth rate. I believe, as did the 
government in its first term, that some actions had to be taken to 
control spending. And to do that, changes had to be made. 
 
Secondly, no one had attempted to do this. So we were breaking 
new ground. Not only in health reform, but trying to balance a 
provincial budget, turnaround an economy, and which I’m glad 
to say, this government was the first in Canada to do. 
 
The third point is that I think that we have a very high usage 
system. When you know that 35,000 people a day use the health 
system that means we are serving a million people a month in 
this province. 
 
And yes, there are some stories on the news, Mr. Speaker, and 
in the media that are not pleasant and there are some right in my 
own constituency. It’s unfortunate that these situations happen 
but when you think of the few issues that are raised in 
comparison to the number of people using the system, the 
mistakes are very few. Of course we also have a couple of 
opposition parties who like to highlight these items for their 
own political gain. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, are we near the end of health reform? I 
don’t know the answer to that. With changing technology and 
the speed at which it advances, I don’t believe we can ever be 
certain that changes won’t have to be made in the future so that 
we can provide a health system to everyone at the most 
reasonable cost. And with an aging population, Mr. Speaker, 
this will be no easy task. 
 



April 27, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 819 

This is one of the areas where the opposition parties make me 
very nervous. When I hear one of them saying they will freeze 
spending on health care and education and that the other one is 
led by a doctor, Mr. Speaker. And I think putting a doctor in 
charge of health care is sort of like letting the fox guard the 
chicken coup. And seeing as we’re on the opposition, I’ll 
maybe just point out a couple of other things that bother me. 
 
I don’t think anybody here is fooled by the old party with a new 
name. They have the same address in the phone book. They 
have the same old faces. And looking at their platform it sounds 
vaguely familiar — more spending, lower taxes. But they do 
have a new name, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now the Liberals have turned out to be a little bit interesting, 
Mr. Speaker, shifting severely to the left to bring back free 
collective bargaining or third-party arbitration, primarily to 
attract the labour vote in the province and particularly in my 
constituency. 
 
But one of the things they forget, Mr. Speaker, is that the public 
service wage Bill in our province is somewhere in the 
neighbourhood of $2 billion. To allow an unelected arbitrator to 
come in and decide what the people of this province can afford 
to pay, in my judgment, is not the way to manage a budget. If in 
his wisdom he decided that 10 per cent is totally acceptable, 
that starts a me-too campaign and would eventually cost the 
taxpayers of this province $200 million. 
 
Or they would have to cut services. And I have not run into 
anyone who does not think we should have more money for 
health, more money for education, more money for highways, 
more money for agriculture, more money for union negotiation, 
more money for infrastructure — and the list goes on, Mr. 
Speaker. And these are very real needs for very real people. 
 
And this is the question that will have to go to the voter: who do 
you want to manage your dollar and at the same time look after 
your taxes? 
 
I for one do not agree with that concept, simply because . . . oh, 
I missed a piece. Anyway I don’t believe that we can mortgage 
the future of our children and grandchildren for the wants of a 
generation that I believe has had it pretty good for the most of 
the time we’ve been alive, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And if we’re to go on — and we will go on and this government 
will be re-elected no matter when we call the election, whether 
it’s in June or October or next June — these people will 
probably not be there, most of them, because they don’t have 
any rights; they don’t believe in democracy; they switch in the 
dark of night. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think that we’ll call the election when we 
want to call it. Thank you very much. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m glad 
to have the opportunity today to talk about the reasons for 
having an election every four years, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I 
find . . . I think if the members opposite keep talking about their 
record, we should take a good look at their record over there. 
 
Probably just the treatment of Saskatchewan people. Examples 

— disenfranchised widows that we have in the gallery today. 
Nurses of Saskatchewan — the treatment that that government 
has treated our nurses in Saskatchewan; what they’ve done to 
our health care system in eight short years. And at the same 
time they’ve constantly blamed somebody else for their 
problems. 
 
(1545) 
 
The member for Saskatoon Northwest, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
talked about democratic reform. Well let’s see how democracy 
works under that regime over there. We have a Premier that’s 
probably the biggest dictator we’ve ever had in the history of 
Saskatchewan. He does what he wants, and what he wants 
alone. We saw that in the nurses’ negotiations when he threw 
that off the rail and caused a strike. And it just goes on and on 
and on. 
 
How does democracy work over there? Let’s go back to 
Channel Lake, a prime example of democracy, where the 
government under their management had lost what? In excess 
of $5 million. Now are they going to be accountable? No, they 
put it through a Crown Corporations Committee. And what do 
they do? Before that committee has had time to put out their 
final report, Brian Topp, the Premier's executive assistant, 
writes a report. 
 
That’s democracy, Mr. Deputy Speaker — democracy at its best 
on that side. And the member for Saskatoon Northwest has the 
audacity to say democracy reform. I can’t believe it, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
I’d also like to comment on the member for Regina South who 
talks about the members from the Saskatchewan Party being 
hypocritical in their actions, not responding to the constituents. 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s the same member that ran his last 
campaign on working to keep the Plains hospital open. That 
same member ran on that platform. So where is your integrity 
and where are you answering to your constituents? Are you 
going to run on that same platform, Mr. Member? 
 
You know, Mr. Member, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when 
government comes close to changing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
brown envelopes start to be slid under our door and it’s great — 
we get information. But the best source of information we have 
is by that member’s mouth leaking. 
 
One of the examples was the Channel Lake report. That came 
out of that member’s leak to his constituency. So he’s a great 
help to our party. The more he speaks, the higher we go in the 
polls. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s so many reasons we need an 
election every four years, and agriculture is a prime example of 
why that should be happening. I mean the treatment of farmers, 
another example of the way this government treats taxpayers in 
this province. 
 
We had the GRIP program when that government came to 
power, and what happened? They broke contracts that were 
signed and sealed, wiped it out, and probably cost every farmer 
in this province an average of 40 to $50,000. That 40 to $50,000 
could be keeping some of our farmers afloat. But guess what? 



820 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 1999 

They didn’t stop there. 
 
Now we’ve got an AIDA (Agricultural Income Disaster 
Assistance) program where we have an Agriculture minister 
and a Premier — a Premier that forgot to even come to the 
table. The same Premier said, the Premier in Saskatchewan 
should be . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. The normal time for 
debate is concluded and we will now start the 10-minute 
question and comment session. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
make a comment today, and it is addressed of course to the 
Tories. 
 
I was looking around the legislature and I realized that I am one 
of the four longest serving members present here right now as I 
speak. And I couldn’t help but be a little bit surprised at the gall 
of the new Tory Party calling for an election every four years. 
 
How well I remember that period leading up to 1986 where it 
took the Tory government four and one-half years to call the 
first election. Then, Mr. Speaker, five years and a day, five 
years and a day until there was a subsequent election called, 
only because the Lieutenant Governor was going to have to 
stand in. 
 
My question, Mr. Speaker, is for the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena, and I’m wondering what that member sees 
when she looks in the mirror in the morning? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. The question is really 
to be on the content of the speeches that were in the House, and 
I don’t think that would relate to anything in the content of the 
speech from the hon. member from Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Yes, I have a question for the retiring member 
for Saskatoon Northwest. You mentioned the Tories’ 
delinquency in calling by-elections, and I have to agree 
completely with you on that. It was scandalous the way they left 
seats vacant. 
 
But now when you defend the possibility that there won’t be a 
June general election, we then, now, because of this new 
legislation, will go to the expense of by-elections to elect MLAs 
who would in all likelihood never take their seats in this 
Assembly. 
 
And I would like to ask the hon. member how you justify that. 
Is it not a case that in order to correct one evil, we’ve simply 
created another one? 
 
Mr. Whitmore: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m very pleased to 
answer the question. I am ready for an election. I was ready for 
an election yesterday; I’m ready for an election today; and I’m 
ready for an election tomorrow. And I will not be retiring. 
 
I think the member from North Battleford should be prepared 
for a leadership run in the Liberal Party after the next provincial 
election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, my question is for the member from Regina 
South. If that member can convince the Premier to call an 
election now, this spring — that would be the four years that the 
Premier actually promised — will he be running on that same 
criteria they ran last time to keep the Plains hospital open or to 
reopen the Plains? Will you run on that stand, Mr. Member? 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I never did run on a 
platform to keep the Plains hospital open. As the members 
opposite, if they had been in the campaign, which they weren’t 
at 6 per cent, which is what they ended up with in my riding, 
they would understand the complexity of the debate we were in. 
They would also know that I was extremely critical of the 
decision of the health board on the Plains issue. But I welcome 
the opportunity to debate the Conservative members once we 
get into an election itself. This time I hope they run a candidate 
not quite so closely connected to Grant Devine. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a question for 
the hon. member for Kelvington-Wadena, and it is simply this. 
In light of the fact that your party’s predecessor took four and 
half years to call the first election, five years and a day to call 
the second election, how is it possible that you or any members 
of the Sask-a-Tories could stand up and with a straight face call 
for a four-year, fixed-term election? It’s just like the rest of your 
Sask-a Tory platform — it just doesn’t add up. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First of all I think we 
talked about The Respect for Constituents Act. My constituents 
. . . you’re not giving any respect to it at all. They had every 
opportunity, and on a daily basis they talked to me. And if they 
would want me to talk about this . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Yes, I would imagine they do, yes. I have not had one of them 
come to me and say that the election . . . that I should resign. 
Not one. 
 
And on the second question, you said that my previous party 
hadn’t had an election for four and a half years. Well I don’t 
know what the previous group of people did, but I’m with the 
Saskatchewan Party. It is a new party which the people of this 
province want. 
 
Because the old CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth 
Federation) party that joined with the Labour party does not 
listen to the people of this province any more. They are not in 
touch with them and they are just like any other old-line party. 
People are sick and tired of you and they want something new. 
 
So what they want is us — somebody that’s quite willing to 
listen to the electorate and not listen to the garbage that you 
spout every day. And you have no idea what the people of this 
province really want. So call the election and I’ll be delighted to 
be there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — This is for the member from Kelvington 
who’s having a drink of water because I would like her to stand 
and explain to her constituents why she turned her back on them 
and refused to allow them to vote as they . . . when she decided 



April 27, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 821 

to switch parties in the dark of night. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. First of all if 
you would read the paper you would realize that the party was 
not formed in the dark of the night. The party was formed at 2 
o’clock in the afternoon in full sight of everyone, not like you 
guys who do everything in the dark of the night. 
 
And the second thing, the people in my constituency, every 
single one of them can call me at any time, day or night, on my 
cell phone, at home, in my office. And I have never yet had one 
of them tell me they want me to resign — not one. But they 
have said they’d like you guys to resign and get a new face in 
this province so that we actually have a future, and not people 
that just stand there and spout something they don’t know what 
they’re talking about. 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I would 
invite the Leader of the Opposition, the member for Canora, to 
. . . I’m curious as to what he has to say to his constituents 
about turning his back on them and refusing to allow them to 
vote on his decision to switch parties. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have the opportunity or 
the great privilege of having my constituency meet up with the 
constituency of Canora-Pelly. I spend a lot of time in that area 
because there’s common concerns out in rural Saskatchewan. 
And the member from Canora-Pelly and I visit with farms and 
people in different businesses and address their questions and 
their problems, and take phone calls and answer their questions 
about the things that this government is and is not doing. 
 
And they are quite . . . they have yet to come to either myself or 
the member from Canora-Pelly and say, we sure wish you’d get 
out of there, let more room for these guys over here that are 
buffaloing, that are absolutely ignoring the needs of the people 
of this province. These guys over here that have not yet ever 
come forward and told people what their vision or their plan is 
because they don’t have one. And they’re delighted to come . . . 
to look at the Saskatchewan Party and say, you have a vision 
that’s right there and we’re looking at it. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, a question 
to the member from Estevan. As I was listening to the member 
from Estevan responding to the seventy-five minute debate, he 
was basically trying to give his reasons why the province 
should not give consideration to a suggestion the Premier made 
a number years ago about four-year elections . . . election calls. 
And I think he ended up by saying, we’ll call an election when 
we feel like calling an election. 
 
Well I think the people of Saskatchewan feel that it’s time to 
have set election dates, and I’m wondering why the member 
now feels that it’s important to forget about a promise to the 
people of Saskatchewan to set election dates. 
 
Mr. Ward: — Yes, Mr. Speaker. I guess had the member been 
listening to all of my comments he would’ve noticed that I 
started with saying that I wanted to thank them for their advice, 
but no thank you. They didn’t have a very good record when 
they were in government, and that member from Moosomin 
was here with Grant Devine. He was responsible for probably 
$4 billion of this debt that we’re paying 2 million a day on. 

He’s also, he’s also the member that was here for the whole 
term and now is not taking any responsibility at all. He says, I 
don’t want to be a Tory any more; I’m going to switch my 
name. 
 
Well what difference does that make? He’s still a Tory; they’re 
all still Tories. He doesn’t care when the election is; he just 
wanted to change his name, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The members 
opposite seem to have it quite much in their mind that they want 
to go to election and go to the polls in June of this year. Mr. 
Speaker, there will be some type of an election . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. The time for the seventy-five 
minute debate has elapsed. 
 

PRIVATE BILLS 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 302  The Group Medical Services Act, 1999 
 
Ms. Murray: — Oh thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
Actually I’m not sure what my role is in this. I thought we were 
to go through the Bill clause by clause before I ask that the 
committee report the Bill. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — The member is correct. And I will call 
clause by — thank you, the chairman is wrong — I will call 
clause by clause. 
 
Clauses 1 to 17 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
(1600) 
 

Bill No. 303 — The Saskatchewan Foundation 
for the Arts Act 

 
Clauses 1 to 21 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 304 — The Saskatchewan Medical 
Association Act 

 
Clauses 1 to 17 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 301 — The Credit Union Central 
of Saskatchewan Act, 1999 

 
Clauses 1 to 33 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 302  The Group Medical Services Act, 1999 
 



822 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 1999 

Ms. Murray: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that Bill No. 
302, The Group Medical Services Act, 1999 be now read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 303 — The Saskatchewan Foundation 
for the Arts Act 

 
Ms. Lorje: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 303, The 
Saskatchewan Foundation for the Arts Act, 1999 be now read a 
third time and passed under it title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 304 — The Saskatchewan Medical 
Association Act 

 
Ms. Lorje: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 304, The 
Saskatchewan Medical Association Act, 1999 be now read a 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 301 — The Credit Union Central 
of Saskatchewan Act, 1999 

 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
301, The Credit Union Central of Saskatchewan Act, 1999 be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
(1615) 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 30 — The Cemeteries Act, 1999 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
move second reading of The Cemeteries Act, 1999. A review of 
the existing Cemeteries Act which is more than 30 years old, 
has been undertaken by a committee comprised of 
representatives from consumer, industry, church, and municipal 
organizations. The committee has recommended that together 
with legislation dealing with the funeral and cremation services, 
this Act be replaced with a new one. 
 
Over the years problems have been identified that the existing 
Act does not adequately address. For example, population shifts 
have resulted in an increasing number of abandoned and 
neglected cemeteries. It is not always clear who is responsible 
for such cemeteries, and ongoing maintenance can be a 
problem. As well, consumer protection concerns are 
inadequately dealt with in the existing Act. 
 
The committee reviewing the Act has recommended that for 
consistency, regulation of cemeteries should remain with the 

provincial government. The majority of cemeteries are operated 
by municipalities. However, others are operated by church 
groups. Some are operated by commercial operators, while still 
others are on private property. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, this Bill provides that government will 
continue to regulate all cemeteries. I would also note that 
legislation governing cemeteries also applies to mausolea and 
columbaria. 
 
There are also certain concerns about prepaid cemetery 
contracts. Some of the consumer protection provisions that 
currently exist in relation to prepaid funeral contracts are 
lacking in The Cemeteries Act and in other instances are 
different than those dealing with prepaid funeral contracts. 
 
For example, under the existing Act the consumer is entitled to 
cancel a prepaid cemetery contract purchased from a 
commercial cemetery owner only if the sales person was not 
licensed as required by the Act. However, in the case of a 
prepaid funeral contract, consumers have a 10-day time period 
in which to consider cancelling the contract as well as other 
contract cancellation rights. 
 
Under this Bill, contract cancellation rights already in place for 
prepaid funeral contracts are now being applied to prepaid 
cemetery contracts. Consumers will now have the same rights 
with respect to all prepaid contracts. 
 
The Bill also provides . . . or also prohibits certain sales 
practices such as making claims about specific goods or 
services being required by law when in fact they are not. It also 
provides for regulations to prohibit sales practices that are not 
in the public interest. 
 
Other consumer protection issues this Bill addresses include: 
availability of itemized price lists for cemetery plots and 
services; specifying in contracts whether interment rights in a 
lot can be sold back to the owner — if they can, the contract 
must specify the buyback terms; permitting buyers of interment 
rights in lots to sell those rights; and allowing the installation of 
a memorial purchased from a source other than the owner of the 
cemetery if that memorial complies with the bylaws of the 
cemetery. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, at present a commercial cemetery 
owner must establish a fund to be used for cemetery care and 
maintenance. However, because of concerns respecting 
abandoned cemeteries, the new Act will require that new 
cemeteries other than those operated by municipalities will be 
also required to establish care and maintenance funds. 
 
Abandoned and neglected cemeteries have been a concern. 
Several steps are being taken in this new Act to address these 
concerns. 
 
First, the Bill distinguishes an abandoned cemetery from one 
that is merely being neglected by the owner. Regulations will be 
developed to specify when a cemetery is abandoned as opposed 
to when it is neglected. This will be done in conjunction with 
municipal and church representatives. 
 
For instance, Mr. Speaker, if a cemetery is abandoned, the 



April 27, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 823 

municipality in which it is situated will be able to assume 
ownership and responsibility for the cemetery. If a care and 
maintenance fund has already been established, it will be 
transferred to the municipality. 
 
If a cemetery is neglected, the municipality will have the ability 
to require the owner to maintain it. If the owner does not do so, 
the municipality will be able to undertake basic maintenance, 
such as dealing with fire hazards, and charge the cost back to 
the owner. 
 
This Bill also requires owners to maintain cemeteries in a 
manner that ensures public safety and is in keeping with 
community standards. If they do not, the Bill provides that any 
contravention is an offence and attracts serious penalties. 
Communities, whether they are cities, villages, or rural 
municipalities, may determine the standard of care. 
 
The Bill continues to require that the registrar approve the 
establishment of each new cemetery as well as a change to any 
existing cemetery. It also continues the requirement that 
commercial cemetery owners and their salespersons be licensed. 
 
These, Mr. Speaker, are some of the important features of this 
Bill. I believe this new Act deals with any concerns that have 
been identified by various interest groups. I also appreciate the 
extensive work undertaken by the consumer, industry, church, 
and municipal representatives on this committee. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The Cemeteries Act, 
1999. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, just a few 
comments before I move adjournment of Bill No. 30, The 
Cemeteries Act, 1999. 
 
In listening to the minister’s comments, and just having recently 
received the legislation in front of us, I’d certainly want to take 
some time to review it a little more closely. 
 
Some of the comments that the minister has made certainly are 
issues that have been brought to my attention — especially 
when it comes to abandoned cemeteries or cemeteries that 
haven’t been taken care of very well — and concerns that 
family members have or even communities because of the way 
a cemetery may appear and its appearance, especially if it’s near 
a major road, and the unsightly appearance of some. The fact 
that I think we need to certainly arrive at a common consensus, 
a common ground, to understand who is responsible to maintain 
the cemeteries that we have across our province. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, though as well we . . . if you take careful 
note, you will note around the province that it’s interesting to 
note how different areas and different groups and communities 
do look after cemeteries — places where their loved ones have 
been laid to rest — and I think we need to commend the private 
organizations or the communities or the church groups who 
have looked after the cemeteries they are responsible for. 
 
But certainly there are situations where there are cemeteries that 
need some care and in some cases private ownership. And I 

believe the piece of legislation is attempting to bring some 
common ground and purpose so that family members and 
individuals will have a sense of feeling that where their loved 
one has been buried is going to be looked after and be looking 
neat and tidy. And I think that’s appropriate, and certainly I will 
be looking at it very closely. 
 
And we compliment the minister and his staff for taking into 
consideration a number of the concerns that have been raised 
with his office. And from the comments the minister was 
making, it’s obvious that he’s talked to a number of 
stakeholders. It’s not just individuals, it’s communities, and it’s 
municipal governments, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As well, the minister made some comments about consumer 
rights in regards to prepaid funeral contracts and there’s some 
issues we’d just like to take a little closer look at as to what the 
legislation is specifically doing in those situations, and to make 
sure we’re clear in our mind exactly what the current legislation 
is attempting to do. And we trust it addresses and attempts to 
address the concerns that have been raised by consumers. 
 
So with that in mind, Mr. Speaker, I would move to adjourn 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 31 — The Funeral and Cremations Services Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second 
reading of The Funeral and Cremations Services Act. This Bill 
is the result of extensive work over the past two years to review 
the legislative framework for funeral and cremation services 
and cemeteries. This new Act will replace The Saskatchewan 
Embalmers Act and The Prepaid Funeral Services Act. 
 
The committee, comprised of representatives from consumer 
groups, churches, industry organizations, and government 
officials, worked diligently on this review. The committee 
recommended that legislation be modernized and expanded to 
improve standards of practice and consumer protection. 
 
All Saskatchewan residents will require funeral services at 
some time. We have many professionals in this industry who 
provide high-quality service to their customers. However, as in 
any profession, there are instances where the family of a 
deceased person is taken advantage of by an unscrupulous 
person. 
 
On a person’s death the family must make many decisions very 
quickly at a time when they are also grieving. It is a time when 
people are especially vulnerable. The fact is funeral homes and 
crematoria are mostly unregulated, with the exception of the 
embalmers’ professional services and prepaid funeral contracts. 
This has been of concern to many residents of the province. 
 
Another consideration in amending the existing legislation is 
that the nature of the funeral industry has changed over the 
years. There is no longer a clear separation between those 
companies which operate funeral homes, crematoria and 
cemeteries, so lines have become blurred. 
 
Also, while some owners are local, independently owned 



824 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 1999 

businesses, multinational corporations now control a large part 
of this market. The challenge with this legislative 
reorganization is to provide protection for consumers in an 
environment that promotes a fair and competitive marketplace 
while maintaining a balance between the interests of all 
concerned. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill is responsive to the needs of all involved. 
It provides the flexibility to adapt to future changes facing the 
industry as new services are developed in order to meet 
consumer demands. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there will be standards of practice and 
enforcement of those standards for people working in this 
industry for whom there are currently only voluntary standards. 
These include funeral directors and owners of funeral homes, 
crematoria, and new services such as transfer services. 
 
The committee has recommended that such standards of 
practice and their enforcement are necessary. A new funeral and 
cremation services council will be established to be responsible 
for administering the Act. 
 
This governance model ensures public accountability as four of 
its ten members will be publicly appointed. Licensees under this 
Act will elect the other six members. The Bill also limits to one 
the number of council members that may be affiliated with any 
one company owner at any one time. The council will be 
responsible for licensing embalmers, funeral directors, and 
owners of funeral homes, crematoria, and transfer services. 
 
Licensing standards and standards of practice will be 
established for all. The council will be responsible for ensuring 
that standards are met and for taking disciplinary action where 
standards are not met. 
 
I’m not supposed to get choked up at this part. In addition the 
council’s bylaws and decisions will be reviewable by a 
Superintendent of Funeral and Cremation Services. This 
structure ensures that decisions of the council will be in the 
public interest. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would now like to address some of the other 
important features of the Bill that will offer greater protection 
for consumers. Under existing legislation, consumer funds paid 
to funeral home owners under prepaid contracts are protected 
through the use of trust accounts and a prepaid contract 
assurance fund. However problems can occur where a funeral 
home operator who is not licensed to sell prepaid contracts does 
so, and subsequently cannot fulfill the contracts. 
 
Under the new Act, owners of all funeral homes, crematoria, 
and transfer services will be licensed. Therefore all consumers 
will be protected by having the prepaid contract assurance fund 
in place. Consumers are naturally frustrated if they are unable to 
obtain specific information about prices in funeral homes or 
crematoria. The Bill will now require owners to keep current, 
itemized price lists, and to make these readily available to the 
public on request. Specific details as to what prices are to be 
itemized and as to what other information is to be provided to 
the public will be expanded upon in the regulations. 
 
(1630) 

The Bill also prohibits misrepresentations such as companies 
representing that certain goods or services are required by law, 
when in fact they are not. For example, this applies to a 
representation that a casket is required for cremation, when this 
is not the case. The existing protection for consumer funds in 
prepaid funeral contracts is being continued. These include 
requirements to place money received under a prepaid contract 
into trust, a 10-day time period in which to cancel a contract 
with full refund upon cancellation, and the ability to cancel a 
prepaid contract at any time before it has been fulfilled with a 
full refund less a small administrative fee. 
 
Funeral home owners have expressed concerns that they are 
required to place 100 per cent of the money received under a 
prepaid contract into trust. They have administrative expenses, 
including salaries for sales people at the time the contract is 
sold. Therefore new provisions will permit the owner to place 
85 per cent of the funds paid under the contract in the trust. 
Consumer funds remain fully refundable and protected by the 
assurance fund. 
 
Mr. Speaker, sometimes there is uncertainty as to which person 
is the next of kin for the purposes of making decisions about the 
disposition of human remains after a death. This can be 
particularly problematic when there are disputes about final 
disposition of the remains. The Bill clearly sets out a list in 
order of priority of the authorized decision makers, beginning 
with the executor of the will. 
 
If the first person is not available, the next person on the list is 
deemed to be the authorized decision maker. This will clarify 
matters for the next of kin and for the funeral home or 
crematorium providing services. 
 
At present, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has no legislation that 
deals specifically with services provided by crematoria. 
Increasingly cremation is chosen over burial by residents of this 
province, as is true in other jurisdictions. There are now 10 
crematoria in Saskatchewan. 
 
The Crematorium Association of Saskatchewan fully supports 
this legislation to govern crematorium operations. Since 
cremation is an irreversible process, it is therefore very 
important that there is certainty as to the identity of the 
deceased person before cremation can take place. The Bill sets 
out requirements respecting visual identification and 
alternatives if visual identification of the remains is not 
possible. 
 
The health and safety of the public and crematorium personnel 
must be ensured. For this reason, it is necessary that the 
crematorium operator be certain that the human remains do not 
contain a pacemaker or other potentially explosive device. The 
Bill provides for this. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, this is a comprehensive Bill that 
contains provisions to address concerns of both consumers and 
industry members. This has been achieved through 
representatives with the various interest groups working 
together to resolve issues. The commitment and effort made by 
these representatives is very much appreciated. And, Mr. 
Speaker, the continued involvement of this committee in 
developing subsequent regulations to the Act will be essential to 



April 27, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 825 

the successful implementation of this legislation. 
 
I beg to inform the Assembly that His Honour, the 
Lieutenant-Governor, having been informed of the subject 
matter of the Bill, recommends it to the consideration of the 
Assembly. 
 
I therefore move second reading of An Act respecting Funeral 
Services, Cremation Services and Transfer Services be now 
read a second time. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As with the last piece of 
legislation that the minister brought forward, Bill No. 31, The 
Funeral and Cremation Services Act, here again is another 
situation where, as I understand it, we have just a cleaning-up of 
some Acts, bringing two Acts under one, and clarifying a 
number of issues in regards to funeral and cremation services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we talk about funerals and we talk about 
crematorial services, it causes each one of us, I believe, just to 
reflect a little bit about the fact, as the minister indicated, that 
there isn’t an individual who not . . . at some time or the other 
will not be forced to seek the services of groups and individuals 
who provide the funeral services in this province. 
 
And I think it’s only fair and fitting that we have a regulatory 
process or a legislative process that certainly gives some 
direction and guidance. Because there’s no doubt when families 
lose a family member regardless of age, the sadness and the 
trauma of the situation is difficult all of a sudden to be thrust 
upon with the responsibility to have to plan for a funeral and 
being under the duress of loss of a family member. 
 
And certainly we hope and trust that you have the ability to be 
able to meet and sit with a very diligent funeral director, 
someone who really is able to show compassion, to help guide 
you through that process of not only grieving but planning for 
that funeral service. 
 
And I think it’s certainly appropriate that there are some 
guidelines and regulations. I think if we . . . As an individual 
who’s certainly been thrust into that situation not too . . . or 
fairly recently, Mr. Speaker, I can say that and I would believe 
that many of the funeral homes and directors across this 
province are very compassionate, very understanding, give very 
clear guidance, and really willing to sit down with family 
members. 
 
And I think the profession themselves certainly will want to see 
some guidelines under legislation and regulation. That basically 
they know that their profession is going to be held with high 
esteem rather than allowing an individual or group to take 
advantage of families during these very difficult times and 
situations. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s appropriate as well to 
just review the legislation a little more in depth before we move 
on to further discussion in regards to the legislation, and 
therefore at this time I move adjournment of debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Saskatchewan Water Corporation 

Vote 50 
 
Subvote (SW01) 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Deputy 
Chair of committees. I’d like to welcome the minister and his 
officials here today. 
 
Yesterday we were dealing with SPUDCO (Saskatchewan 
Potato Utility Development Company) when the session ended, 
and I know there’s a number of difficulties occurring there. 
There is rumours, and perhaps you can confirm what is 
happening there, Mr. Minister, about the economic viability of 
the operation with the Lake Diefenbaker Potato Corporation. 
Can you get to the root of the matter for us please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Chair, we’ve been made aware that 
they are certainly experiencing cash-flow problems and are in 
discussion right now with their secured creditors. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Is that just the 
Lake Diefenbaker Potato Corporation or does it involve some of 
the other corporations that are involved with that operation and 
involved with Sask Water? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — To our knowledge it is just Lake 
Diefenbaker Potato Corporation. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Exactly what 
assets does Sask Water have involvement with, with the Lake 
Diefenbaker Potato Corporation? Is it the storage sheds only on 
the quarter section of land that they sit on, or is there other 
assets that Sask Water is involved with in that operation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — It’s just the buildings that we talked 
about last night, the Lucky Lake Potato Storage terminal. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Minister, with the debentures and 
the mortgage that you hold, are the buildings and the land 
enough security on those debentures and mortgage? You sold 
the land and the buildings for $5.81 million. You provided 
financing of $5.81 million, so 100 per cent financing on that. 
 
What kind of due diligence did you do in providing that kind of 
financing? And is it acceptable financial practices to provide 
100 per cent security on an asset? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — As part of the . . . I guess I would try to 
put it in this historic perspective. Late last year we were made 
aware that they were experiencing some cash flow problems, 
and in discussions with the Farm Credit Corporation and the 
Royal Bank, this is the arrangement that we came to, to try to 
attempt to assist the growers out in the Lake Diefenbaker area. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — What kind of due diligence did you do 
on this particular project? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — We reviewed the business plan . . . In 
terms of the due diligence we reviewed the business plan and 



826 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 1999 

the financial plan that was put forward. Actually, the Farm 
Credit Corporation, the Royal Bank and ourselves — all three 
parties agreed that this is what would be done to again try to 
assist the growers out there since they were experiencing cash 
flow problems with the depressed potato prices. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — What kind of involvement then does 
FCC (Farm Credit Corporation) and the Royal Bank have? Do 
they have some investments in this operation? If so, what are 
their investments? Or is Saskatchewan and Sask Water the only 
carrier in this financial situation? 
 
(1645) 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Okay, we’re aware that the Royal Bank 
provides an operating line of credit. The Farm Credit 
Corporation has provided long-term financing for equipment. 
But because of the commercial nature of the business, the 
relationship that you’re asking us to disclose is essentially 
between Lake Diefenbaker Potato Corporation and those two 
lenders, and we don’t have the ability to provide specific 
information to you. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well I recognize that you wouldn’t have 
the information from the Royal Bank or from FCC, but you 
would have knowledge of who else may have caveats or claims 
against the property and the supplies, the equipment, the 
product that may be owned by the Lake Diefenbaker Potato 
Corporation. I’m just wondering how secure Saskatchewan 
investment is. 
 
These plants have been in operation now for a short period of 
time. You have a hundred per cent invested in the security. I 
think it’s a risky operation to have a hundred per cent invested 
in anything. And yet it is. 
 
Have you been and visited . . . have you visited with these, and 
had a look at the property that you still have a hundred per cent 
investment in, to determine what kind of situation they’re in 
now? Are they being used? Are they empty? Are they being 
maintained properly? And what is the current tax status on that 
property? 
 
I know that in other operations whenever the situation becomes 
financially difficult, oftentimes the taxes are not as up to date as 
they could be. What kind of situation are they in with taxes? 
Who else might have a claim on that property? Does anybody 
else have a caveat on it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — We don’t have any information on the 
taxes at all. To our knowledge there are no caveats that we’re 
aware of on the property. And we do have staff that are in the 
area working on a continual basis. And they certainly do 
drive-by inspections, and we’re informed that everything is well 
maintained. 
 
And I think the last question you asked was with respect to 
whether or not there were still potatoes in the facility. And yes, 
they are still . . . some of the bins still have potatoes in them. 
It’s not completely full but there still is potatoes in the facilities. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. SPUDCO 
— what other investments would SPUDCO, have or 

involvements does it have? Is it strictly with the Lake 
Diefenbaker Potato Corporation, or does SPUDCO have other 
investments and other involvements? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — We own five other potato storage 
terminals, plus potato handling equipment that we lease to other 
area growers. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Could you please give us an indication 
of the names of these other storage units? Are they all entitled 
SPUDCO, or do they have some other name that they’re being 
used, and what their locations are. Also any corporate names 
that you may be using for the equipment that you have financial 
interests in. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The five buildings are owned by Sask 
Water and operated by the SPUDCO division. They are located, 
one in Tullis . . . the Tullis Potato Storage building is in, of 
course, in Tullis. There’s one in Riverhurst, and there are three 
in Broderick. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Tullis potato corporation, who is the 
Tullis potato corporation? Is it a wholly owned subsidiary of 
Sask Water or are there other principals involved in it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — You’re correct. It’s a wholly owned 
subsidiary of the Sask Water Corporation. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Back to the 
Lake Diefenbaker Potato Corporation, I wonder if you can tell 
us who the principals are of that corporation and where they’re 
located at. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Just had a quick discussion here as to 
whether or not this was public information we could give to 
you, but by searching the corporate register you could probably 
gather this information anyway. So to the best of our 
knowledge, there are four owners. They are Judith River Farm, 
the Newbridge, Coteau Hills potato corporation, and the 
Marathon Investments. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I wonder if 
you could give us any information about the Judith River 
corporation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — We believe it to be a diversified set of 
investors from western Canada and the northern United States. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — How much due diligence was done on 
Judith River before entering into this financial arrangement 
with the Lake Diefenbaker Potato Corporation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Let me try this. There was no equity 
investment by Sask Water at all. So in working with Farm 
Credit Corporation and the Royal Bank, we were dealing in 
simply a cash flow problem. 
 
We believe that the process that we followed was adequate and 
that there was no, as I said, there was no equity investment any 
time on behalf of Sask Water. So we believe that the process 
that we followed was appropriate. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, while you may not 



April 27, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 827 

have an equity investment in the sense of buying shares in the 
corporation, you certainly do have a substantial investment of 
$5.81 million in this corporation in the sense that you have lent 
them that much money as security against the buildings and a 
quarter section of land — buildings and land that were 
originally Sask Water’s. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I would think it extremely incumbent on you 
to have done some due diligence on the people who were 
operating this corporation, who were the owners of this 
corporation, particularly on Judith River corporation as being 
not only, I believe, from western Canada but involved heavily 
in the Idaho potato . . . coming out of Idaho. 
 
(1700) 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I think perhaps you need to do some due 
diligence on the principals of the Lake Diefenbaker Potato 
Corporation to make a determination as to what their corporate 
history is and the history of their investment practices, and 
whether or not you have made, on behalf of Saskatchewan 
people, a good investment in this particular area. 
 
And perhaps you have done this and perhaps you haven’t. But 
when you say that we don’t have an equity position so there 
was no need for us to do that kind of due diligence, I think 
you’re wrong, Mr. Minister. I think it’s incumbent on you to 
have done some due diligence, and included in that due 
diligence is finding out what you can about the principal owners 
of that corporation. 
 
Now are you doing that now that there is a potential for some 
difficulties in that corporation, or are you not doing it? 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — I would ask that we recess at this time, Mr. 
Deputy Chair. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
 



 

 


