





























































Hansard: December 09, 1999


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 75 
 December 9, 1999 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition today. 
I’d like to present a petition today dealing with the automobile 
insurance Act. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to repeal the provisions of the 
personal injury benefits contained in the automobile 
insurance Act and adopt a return to an add-on insurance 
system that would provide benefits on a no-fault basis to 
all victims without taking away the innocent victim’s right 
to seek compensation from the person responsible for the 
accident but with appropriate modifications to reduce the 
overall personal injury costs. 
 

This petition is signed by good citizens of Estevan, Regina, and 
Lacombe. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — A petition to present, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your humble 
Assembly may be pleased to repeal the provisions of the 
personal injury benefits contained in the automobile 
insurance Act and adopt a return to an add-on insurance 
system that would provide benefits on a no-fault basis to 
all victims without taking away the innocent victim’s right 
to seek compensation from the person responsible for the 
accident but with appropriate modifications to reduce 
overall personal injury costs. 
 

This petition is signed by people from Estevan and Torquay. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Hon. Mr. Speaker. I present a petition: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to repeal the provision of the 
personal injury benefits contained in the automobile 
insurance Act and adopt a return to an add-on insurance 
system that would provide benefit on a no-fault basis to all 
victims without taking away the innocent victim’s right to 
seek compensation from the person responsible for the 
accident, but with appropriate modification to reduce 
overall personal injury costs. 

 
The petitioners are from Estevan, Eston, and Lloydminster. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to present a petition. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to repeal the provision of the 
personal injury benefits contained in the automobile 
insurance Act and adopt a return to an add-on insurance 
system that would provide the benefits on a no-fault basis 
to all victims without taking away the innocent victim’s 
right to seek compensation from the person responsible for 

the accident, but with appropriate modifications to reduce 
overall personal injury costs. 

 
This petition is signed by individuals from Estevan, Bienfait. 
Wakaw, Swift Current, and Bromhead. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with a sense of 
deep responsibility that I also present a petition today. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to repeal the provisions of the 
personal injury benefits contained in the automobile 
insurance Act and adopt a return to add-on insurance 
system that would provide benefits on a no-fault basis to 
all victims without taking away the innocent victim’s right 
to seek compensation from the person responsible for the 
accident, but with appropriate modifications to reduce 
overall personal injury costs. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The petitioners that have signed this one is from Estevan and 
Swift Current. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the petitions presented at the last 
sitting have been reviewed and found to be in order and are 
hereby received, the petitions being those petitioning the 
Assembly to repeal the personal injury benefits contained in 
The Automobile Accident Insurance Act. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on 
Monday next move first reading of a Bill entitled The 
Children’s Law Amendment Act, 1999. 
 
Also when I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, can I provide a written 
question? I give notice that I shall on day no. 9 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Premier: has any member of the staff of Executive 
Council been actively engaged in seeking private sector 
directorship for you in 1999? 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a great 
pleasure to introduce to the House one of my constituents, a 
supporter and a supporter for many years; but much more than a 
supporter, one who has tried to understand me and put up with 
me for 23 years and counting. Glad to introduce to the House 
my wife, Gail, who is sitting there already in Christmas red. 
 
I appreciate Gail. And those of you who also have spouses and 
are involved in public life know how valuable the support and 
understanding of your partner is; and I am very blessed to have 
Gail as my wife and I’m happy to introduce her to you this 
afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



76 Saskatchewan Hansard December 9, 1999 

Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my distinct 
pleasure and honour this afternoon to introduce to the House, 
Mr. Yogi Huyghebaert. Hon. members will recall that he is the 
man who has now lost twice to the Liberals, first as a Tory and 
later as a Saskatchewan Party candidate. I’d ask all members to 
welcome him this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like 
to introduce to you and through you to all the members of the 
House, 14 students from the Dumont Technical Institute who 
are sitting in your west wing, Mr. Speaker. Students are 
accompanied here today with their teacher Sheila Starr and they 
have toured the legislature, and they’re going to take in the 
proceedings of the House through question period. And I’ll 
have the opportunity to meet with them for a few moments in 
room 131 after the question period is over with. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all the members to offer them a warm 
welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s not 
often or perhaps even never that we introduce members of the 
media but today I think is a very special day. I understand that 
Jo-Lynn Sheane and her partner, Peter Dick sitting in the . . . 
Duck, pardon me, sitting in the . . . Peter Duck sitting in the 
gallery were engaged last evening and I think on behalf of all 
members would want to offer our most sincere congratulations 
and offer them the very best in the future. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, I take great pleasure in 
introducing today the students, grades 7 and 8 students from 
W.H. Ford. They’re up in the west gallery along with their 
teacher Louise Krueger. I’m looking forward to meeting with 
them later at about 2:30, and welcome to the . . . I’d like you to 
welcome them to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce to 
you and through you to the rest of the members of this 
Assembly, someone that I have known for 30 years; someone 
who has been a friend over that period of time; someone, more 
important than that, who also is my wife and also my campaign 
manager. She’s sitting in your Speaker’s gallery there. Thank 
you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join the MLA 
(Member of the Legislative Assembly) from Regina Northeast. 
I’m glad that the member, Mr. Boyd, loves my jacket from my 
cultural tradition. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Members will recall that 
it’s not appropriate to address a member by their surnames or 
by their names, but by the constituencies they serve. 
 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad that 
the member from Kindersley appreciates my cultural tradition 
in wearing my vest from Northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I rise of course with the member from Northeast 
in regards to the students from Dumont Technical Institute. I 
was the head of Gabriel Dumont Institute a few years back 
before I ran in the political field. And it was extremely 
important on the policy of inclusion, you know, by the 
government of the day on Metis people in this province in terms 
of education. It’s very, very important that the students are here 
today to be part of this session. So I welcome them and, please, 
all members welcome them as well. 
 
I would like to say this as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
I thank the people on what they are able to achieve in education. 
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to introduce to you and through you to this Assembly a 
member of my constituency, Mr. George Marcotte from 
Estevan, a very hard worker; helped me extremely hard in my 
campaign and I’m so proud of him. And he’s sitting in the 
opposition gallery. So please join me in welcoming George. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, through you and to the 
Assembly I’d like to introduce Bernie Collins, the former 
Member of Parliament — Liberal Member of Parliament — 
from the Estevan area, and I would assume also a constituent of 
yours. Please join me in welcoming Mr. Bernie Collins. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I, too, would like 
to extend my welcome to Mr. Collins. Mr. Collins and I happen 
to be . . . had the pleasure of serving together in the House of 
Commons for the period of the last parliament; Mr. Collins on 
the other side of the House, but we did work together on some 
things like fighting gun control. I know Mr. Collins worked 
very hard on behalf of his constituents in Souris-Moose 
Mountain, and I also too welcome him to the House this 
afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join 
my colleagues in welcoming the students here from DTI 
(Dumont Technical Institute) and I want to give a special 
message to the students that are taking training. We realize it’s 
always a difficult task to leave your families behind. Some of 
you may have children; you’ve got to leave them behind as 
well. 
 
But I want to encourage you to continue on with your studies, 
and the reason being is that many Aboriginal people throughout 
Saskatchewan will indeed be better served by a more intelligent 



December 9, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 77 

and certainly more motivated group of young people like 
yourselves. So I encourage you to continue on. 
 
And also to not get discouraged because grade 12 wasn’t the 
best four years of my life, but GDI (Gabriel Dumont Institute) 
certainly saved me and I went to a program and they’ve done a 
lot to help me get here. So once again, thanks for visiting and 
good luck. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
would like to join my colleagues in welcoming the students 
here, and particularly the students from DTI. 
 
But while on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce two 
members, three constituents of mine who are seated in your 
gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have Walter and Sharon Zaluski and their daughter Deanne 
and it’s kind of a special day for them. Not long ago, they were 
in Ottawa and did the tour of the House of Commons and sat in 
the proceedings. And in a discussion we had last week, they 
became aware of the fact that they’d not done that in their own 
province. 
 
So Deanne has taken a bit of a break from school to come and 
do a social studies exercise here. And following some 
observations of proceedings in the House, they’ll be taking a 
tour of the building. And I’d ask all our members to bid the 
Zaluskis a very warm welcome to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Mr. Speaker, I ask leave to revert back to 
notices of motions and questions. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

NOTICE OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — I give notice that I shall on Monday next 
give first reading to a Bill, The Crown Corporations 
Amendment Act, 1999 (Referendum). 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
Acknowledgement of Elks and Royal Purple Organizations 

 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to acknowledge all 
the Elks and Royal Purple organizations throughout the 
province for all the charity work that they do for their 
communities. Particularly, I would like to acknowledge my 
local Elks club in Bladworth for their hard work. They’ve been 
recently awarded the host provincial Corby Cup, a major 
curling event to be held in Davidson in January of the year 
2000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll be there in the year 2000 and I hope that other 
members will be there as well. Thank you. 
 

Alberta Garment Firm Expanding to Saskatoon 
 

Ms. Jones: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have 
some good news. A Calgary manufacturer is expanding to 
Saskatoon. The eastbound lanes — that’s lanes plural, Mr. 
Speaker — on the Trans-Canada are going to carry some traffic. 
Someone from Alberta is going to have the exquisite experience 
of paying tax. 
 
Seriously, Mr. Speaker, Alberta Garment Manufacturing of 
Calgary is coming to Saskatoon, taking an existing firm and 
equipment and doubling the current staff of 76 over the next 
two years. 
 
I’m also pleased to tell you that this is a shop represented by my 
former union, United Food and Commercial Workers. AGM 
(Alberta Garment Manufacturing) is one of Alberta’s top 
producers of casual pants, uniforms, and safety work wear. 
Much of its work is for private label clients. Significantly, 
AGM markets extensively to retail stores in the United States. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is good news for Saskatoon and for 
Saskatchewan, but it’s not just good luck. As the president of 
AGM says, Saskatoon has the necessary skilled labour force to 
meet its production needs for the ever-growing export market in 
the US (United States). 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the member from Regina Dewdney said 
yesterday that our economy is diversifying. The growing textile 
industry consisting of 400 companies, including 1,800 people 
with annual sales of 45 million is another example. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Labour Farm Safety Poster Contest 
 

Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure today 
to rise in this Assembly on behalf of one my constituents from 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Markus Wilson is a grade 5 student from Red 
Wing Elementary School, which is just north of Prince Albert. 
Marcus took the initiative to enter the Saskatchewan Labour Farm 
Safety poster contest. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with the plight of farmers that we are currently 
facing, it is absolutely crucial that our youth are aware of the 
struggle that their parents must contend with just to put food on 
the table. It gives me great pleasure to have one such young man 
in my constituency, Mr. Speaker. Markus’s ability to demonstrate 
the day-to-day dangers that his family and friends encounter is 
rather poignant. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there were over 2,000 entries, and I would like to 
congratulate Markus on being the grand prize winner for his 
message about farmers lowering their grain augers when working 
near power lines. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members of the Assembly, please join me in 
congratulating Markus on this remarkable achievement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



78 Saskatchewan Hansard December 9, 1999 

Federal Standing Committee on Agriculture 
 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, yesterday 
the Federal Standing Committee on Agriculture came to Regina 
to hear directly from those affected by the agriculture crises. 
The Liberal Chair in this committee heard in graphic detail the 
same stories we heard in this House on Tuesday. 
 
Their announced intention to report back to the parliament 
could be seen as negative. However, Mr. Speaker, let’s be 
optimistic. After all, if a glacier moves two feet in year, it is 
considered a major advancement. From some of the statements 
made by the Chair of the committee, we hope that our message, 
repeated over and over again, may finally be making an 
impression. 
 
For instance, Mr. Speaker, the Chair of the committee admitted 
that its AIDA (Agricultural Income Disaster Assistance) 
program has failed to recognize a large group of farmers. He 
has also admitted that some people would call the resulting 
feeling “alienation.” 
 
Some, Mr. Speaker, would call it desperation at this point. But 
he did say that, quote: “We have got to find a way of relieving 
most of the pain. And whatever we do has to be quick — very 
quick.” 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, did the federal glacier move an inch? The 
Minister of Agriculture thinks so. The opposition Agriculture 
critic thinks so. I suggest that the state of good intentions of the 
committee be accepted for now. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

By-election in British Columbia 
 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I notice in 
today’s issue of the National Post that all is not well for the 
NDP (New Democratic Party), not only in Saskatchewan but in 
British Columbia. 
 
In a by-election held recently in the constituency of Delta 
South, the NDP managed to gain 2.4 per cent of the vote. The 
near-death experience of the NDP in Saskatchewan has 
translated into certain death for the NDP in British Columbia. 
Or as one political consultant put it: 
 

I would strongly suspect that that’s the worst byelection 
result for a . . . (governing party) in Canadian history. 

 
Or put a little bit differently, there are more people in British 
Columbia that have seen Elvis recently than are going to vote 
for the NDP in the next election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — And in Saskatchewan after the so-called coalition 
scored on themselves in overtime, certain death seems likely in 
the next election as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Stories of Rural Saskatchewan Women Published 
 
Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I’d like to tell 
all members of the House about a new publication that I 
received recently. The booklet, Ordinary Lives, Extraordinary 
Women, profiles the lives of 13 rural women in Saskatchewan. 
Thirteen different occupations, ages, origins, and outlooks. It’s 
a truly beautiful book containing great pictures and 
heartwarming stories. 
 
The work of the Women’s Secretariat made this booklet 
possible. I’d like to thank the staff for their hard work on the 
publication that so accurately depicts the way Saskatchewan 
country women work, play and face everyday obstacles on the 
prairies. 
 
I’d also like to thank the 13 women who shared their personal 
stories to make this book so interesting, unique, and touching. I 
encourage all members to pick up a copy of this book that 
celebrates the lives of our rural and farm women of 
Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Doctors Named To Innovators List 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today I 
rise with pride to share with all members of the Assembly that 
two doctors from my home city of Saskatoon have recently 
been recognized for their talents and outstanding work. 
 
Dr. Mark Baltzan and Dr. Harold Johns have been named to the 
list of greatest Canadian medical innovators. This list was 
compiled by The Medical Post and includes 35 medical 
professionals that have broken new ground in their fields. Some 
of the other well known names on the list include Dr. Roberta 
Bondar and Dr. David Jenkins. 
 
Dr. Baltzan was named to the list for his work in the area of 
kidney transplants. He has been practising medicine for 40 
years in Saskatoon and was on the team that performed some of 
the first kidney transplants in the world. 
 
Dr. Baltzan is one of the founders of our world renowned 
kidney transplant program and has made an enormous 
contribution in this field. 
 
Dr. Johns is known for his invention of the cobalt-60 machine, a 
machine that allows radiation therapy to reach deep-seated 
cancer cells under the surface of the skin. 
 
His invention has saved the lives of many cancer patients not 
only in Saskatchewan but around the world. 
 
Sadly, Mr. Speaker, Dr. Johns passed away last year after a 
battle with Parkinson’s disease, but his work will continue to 
better the lives of cancer patients everywhere. 
 
I invite all members of the Assembly to join me in recognizing 
the work of Dr. Baltzan and Dr. Johns. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



December 9, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 79 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Ministers of Agriculture Meeting 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today, Mr. 
Speaker, my first question is for the Premier. Mr. Premier, 
yesterday’s Agriculture ministers’ meeting in Toronto was an 
unqualified disaster. In fact the other provinces and the federal 
Liberals were actually proposing less money for Saskatchewan 
farmers. 
 
Well, Mr. Premier, it’s not hard to understand why federal 
Liberals don’t care about western farmers — they are following 
the lead of the NDP government here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Premier, just two days ago you told the media that when 
push came to shove, you wouldn’t stand up for farm families if 
it meant ruffling Jean Chrétien’s feathers. Mr. Premier, you spent 
a considerable part of your public life working to build a stronger 
Canada. Well right now Saskatchewan farm families need a strong 
Canada to work for them in times of crisis. 
 
Mr. Premier, it’s time to stand up for Canada. Will you stand up 
for Prairie farmers and prove that Canada works for every 
province and for every family? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 
Opposition’s report of the ministers of Agriculture meeting, as I’m 
beginning now to quickly learn in the three or four days of this 
session, is inaccurate. 
 
The Minister of Agriculture will be in the House tomorrow and 
will give a full report on this. And the issue here is a question of 
less money directed by the Conservative government in Ontario. 
The Ontario government under the premiership of Mike Harris has 
said that they are insisting on $30 million more, which I find 
rather a surprising figure. It’s a lot of money, but not a lot of 
money for 11 million people, the wealthiest province in the 
country. Thirty million more for agriculture and that somehow 
they’re going to try to lever this as against other governments 
and other regions like Saskatchewan and Manitoba seeking to 
get more. 
 
Our position has been, in answer to the members opposite, 
consistent with the coalition straight across the piece. We are 
there to fight for the billion dollars for Saskatchewan, the $300 
million for Manitoba, and to represent faithfully those people 
who were here on the floor of the House saying so. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, those are interesting 
comments. How can we expect the rest of the country to stand 
up for Saskatchewan farmers when our own Premier refuses to 
take a stand, a stand like the Premier in Ontario is taking. He is 
standing for his farmers, and agriculture isn’t nearly as 
important to Ontario’s economy as it is to ours. 
 
In Newfoundland, Brian Tobin, pulled out all the stops to 
support the East Coast fishery. So what’s your excuse, Mr. 
Premier? 

You’re a constitutional expert. You’ve been around the block a 
lot of times. Why aren’t you using every possible instrument to 
get help for Saskatchewan farmers, help so desperately needed? 
Are you afraid of putting too much pressure on the Prime 
Minister? Is it going to hurt your chances for a fancy federal 
appointment when you retire next June? 
 
Mr. Premier, please put aside your own personal interests, take 
off the gloves, and get serious about supporting Saskatchewan 
farmers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I note and I would hope 
that the public notes very carefully, the premise of this question. 
The premise of this question is that I should stand up for the 
farmers of Saskatchewan, which I believe I have been, equally 
with the Leader of the Opposition and the Leader of the Liberal 
Party and the farm groups. And I think that is a taken and noted 
fact. 
 
But he says it this way — like the Premier of Ontario. And what 
the Premier of Ontario is saying in standing up for his farmers 
is that if he doesn’t get what he wants, he, Ontario, is going to 
pull out of agricultural programs. 
 
Now are you telling us that the Saskatchewan Party says that 
our government’s position should be to pull out of 
Saskatchewan programs — the very programs he urged us to 
join? That may be your position . . . Saskatchewan Party’s. It is 
not ours. We are standing with our farmers and our coalition, 
fighting for a billion dollars and fighting for family farms. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1400) 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s unfortunate the Premier 
is expending his energy pointing his finger at the opposition, the 
party that’s been working the hardest in Saskatchewan for our 
farmers. 
 
Time to come clean and admit that you’ve been too busy 
cozying up to the Prime Minister in lining up your next 
corporate appointments to really get serious about 
Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
Well, Mr. Premier, you aren’t alone when it comes to avoiding 
the good fight. Why is it that while the rest of the country’s 
Finance ministers are busy meeting in Ottawa yesterday and 
today, our Finance minister, our NDP Finance minister has 
decided to skip the trip in favour of tea and crumpets and 
Christmas parties here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Wouldn’t you agree about the most important thing our Finance 
minister could be doing this week is lobbying Paul Martin for a 
billion dollar trade equalization package. 
 
Mr. Premier, will you get your ministers busy, and you 
yourself, and with them work full time to get the much needed 
farm financial assistance for our struggling farm families? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



80 Saskatchewan Hansard December 9, 1999 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance 
was in this legislature for what I would have thought would 
have been a very useful and very good purpose sustained by the 
Leader of the Opposition, and that is to listen to the 
presentations of the farmers not only in terms of hearing their 
stories first-hand, but in fashioning whatever ideas could be 
fashioned with respect to the Saskatchewan solutions of which 
we advocate. 
 
Moreover the deputy minister of Finance, who was at and is at 
the conference representing the Government of Saskatchewan, 
is talking about the issues which are before it: farm aid — the 
subject of the premier’s letter; the question of the finance 
payments, transfer payments for health and education; and on 
an infrastructure. That Saskatchewan position has been 
communicated by letter and by the officials. 
 
Now the Leader of the Opposition stands up in his seat and says 
that he’s the only party working for Saskatchewan. Some 
working for Saskatchewan. March 6, 1995 from the Rosetown 
Eagle, quote, this is you: “There are benefits” . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . I will, I will. 
 

“There are benefits to losing the Crow benefit,” 
Kindersley-Lloydminster MP Elwin Hermanson said. 

 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Next question. 
 

Formation of Coalition Government 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, on September 29, 1999, in a 
private ceremony the Premier and the Liberal leader were 
joined in unholy matrimony. The Liberal leader promised to 
love, honour, and obey the Premier, forsaking all others 
including his own voters and his own platform. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Liberal leader now admits that the Liberal 
platform was nothing more than political rhetoric — political 
rhetoric, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the Premier paid big money 
for his new mail-order bride. He has no intention of letting him 
think for himself. 
 
My question is for the Minister of Education. Mr. Minister, 
what credibility can you possibly have when you freely admit 
that the election platform was nothing more than political 
rhetoric? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, please. Hon. members, I hesitate 
to interrupt during this important part of our business session 
because it does take away from this valuable time. I would ask, 
please, to allow the questioner to be heard and the answerer to 
be heard as well, for everybody’s benefit. I beg you to please 
. . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Liberal 
Party and the Minister of Education yesterday, in not only 
answering a question by one of the members of the opposition 
and in his what I would say was a very excellent maiden speech 
to the House, explained fully what the coalition relationship is. 

And what the coalition relationship is — and I want to add my 
word to this and this is why I’m answering this question at this 
point — is an agreement of those areas where the New 
Democratic Party and the Liberal Party can find common 
ground because we believe that, in a minority House, the people 
of Saskatchewan want stability in their government policies and 
they want progressive policies. 
 
They don’t want the Conservative policies of an old era and a 
gone-by era. They don’t want the 1980s returned. They don’t 
want spend, spend, spend, and a huge deficit. 
 
They want us to go ahead and deal with health; they want us to 
deal with education; they want us to deal with infrastructure; 
they want us to deal with farm families; and they want us to 
create jobs. And we are doing this from two separate parties, 
finding common ground in those areas to advance the cause of 
the coalition movement and the coalition government. 
 
And what is so painful to the people opposite and that member 
and the Leader of the Opposition is that’s it’s working and they 
know it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, just because the 
Premier lets you keep your maiden name doesn’t mean you’re 
not married. The only difference is, instead of having a wedding 
ring, you have a nose ring and he’s been leading you around by 
the nose ever since. 
 
Mr. Minister, you promised to cut government travel, you 
promised to cut government advertising, and you promised to 
cut government hacks. And you’ve abandoned every one of 
those promises. After all, it was just political rhetoric anyway. 
 
Mr. Minister, how on earth can we believe anything you say 
when you now admit that your entire election platform was a 
sham? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, it is absolutely 
incredible, this line of questioning. It’s incredible. The budget 
for 1999 and 2000 is fixed and set and now is about four 
months, three months away from being completed. 
 
We are now in the process, now in the process — with the 
Liberal leader now a member of the Treasury Board — we’re in 
the process of setting forward a new budget for the year 
2000-2001 which will embrace in that budget the platforms of 
the New Democratic Party and the platforms of the Liberal 
Party in the best interests of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And one thing I can assure the hon. member opposite: whatever 
we agree to we will never ever agree to the dark days from 
whence you come. And you talk about marriages and names 
which are adopted, you can call yourselves whatever you are 
but the people of Saskatchewan know full well where you came 
from and who you really are. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, September 29, 1999, was a dark 
day for the people of Saskatchewan. Mr. Minister, let’s make 



December 9, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 81 

one thing very, very clear. You were bought by the NDP; 
you’ve joined the NDP; you sit with the NDP; and you are an 
NDP. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — And now you’re following the NDP’s 
long-standing practice of breaking all campaign promises the 
minute you’re elected. 
 
Mr. Minister, yesterday our leader and our caucus introduced 30 
Bills. Every one of them was based on the Saskatchewan Party 
election platform. That’s why our leader got 99 per cent of the 
vote when he had a leadership review and we didn’t have to bus 
in teenagers to save his hide. 
 
Mr. Minister, for once in your life will you make one honest 
statement to the people of Saskatchewan? Will you admit that 
you have joined the NDP? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, this is a . . . this is a 
funny . . . this is a funny question. They didn’t have to bus . . . 
they didn’t have to bus in any delegates to the Saskatchewan 
Party convention. You know what? There was nobody who 
wanted to go to the Saskatchewan Party convention. That’s why 
they didn’t have to bus anybody in. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — I had more . . . (inaudible) . . . people 
at an NDP meeting in the central east — your area — two 
weeks ago, more people than they had in the entire convention. 
No wonder the bus companies are begging for business from 
the Liberals and from the NDP, because we have people coming 
to our conventions. 
 
Look. I say to the hon. member opposite, you judge this 
coalition by what we do. And what we will do is enact 
progressive laws for farmers and progressive programs for farm 
people and for business people and lower taxes. 
 
And that we will do over all of the heckling and all of the 
yelling of those people opposite. And the people of 
Saskatchewan like this coalition, and what hurts you bitterly is 
that you know that it’s true — you know that it’s true. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Education. The 
phony-baloney election platform of the Liberals included a 
promise to put every penny collected on fuel taxes into our 
highways, our streets, and our roads. 
 
Now the minister is not only contradicting his own platform, 
he’s contradicting the deputy minister of Highways. The deputy 
minister of Highways says there’s going to be more money 
spent on highways. The NDP Minister of Education says, no 
there isn’t. It’s hard to say which one of the clowns over there is 
running the circus. 
 
My question is for the Premier: who is actually running the 

Department of Highways these days — the Minister of 
Highways or the new mail-order bride? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Boy, I tell you, this is a . . . I think it’s 
supposed to pass off as humour, Mr. Speaker. So being 
somewhat of a gentleman, I have to smile at that, but I think she 
needs a better speech writer. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, what I find very interesting, I have a 
clipping here dated September 22 . . . very hard to hear me 
speak, but I’ll try in any event, Mr. Speaker. I have a clipping 
here dated September 22, 1999 in The Watson Witness where 
the report is that the hon. member wins the election. The hon. 
member asked a question. And here’s what the newspaper 
report says, quote . . . I’ll read it all: 
 

Draude hopes the new Legislative Assembly will see the 
different parties working together. She said voters are tired 
of all the bickering that goes on in the legislature and 
hopes this election will lead to better co-operation between 
all parties (better co-operation between all parties). People 
want us to get on with governing and stop playing this 
childish game of name-calling. 

 
Those are your words. Take them to heart; take them to heart. 
The people want you to take them to heart. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Education Policy 
 

Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier also has a bit of a 
credibility problem. During the leaders’ debate he said that the 
Liberal leader can’t run his own caucus, let alone the 
government. During the election campaign he called the Liberal 
platform an operating manual on how to make government 
stupider. He also said the Liberals have no plan for K to 12 
education. 
 
So what does the Premier do? He makes the Liberal leader 
Minister of Education. Talk about making government stupider. 
 
Mr. Premier, you called the Liberal leader incompetent. You 
said he has no plan for K to 12 education. How on earth do you 
justify making him the Education minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I know that the coalition 
government is working, and working well. And I tell you why I 
know it’s working well. Apart from the first two questions or 
three questions from the Leader of the so-called Saskatchewan 
Party, just remember this, Mr. Speaker, and I ask the public to 
remember this, every other question has been dealing with this 
question of the coalition. 
 
In the light of the farm crisis, in the light of issues dealing with 
the taxation, in the light of the question of what we can do to 
improve our education system, in the light of a highways 
program which needs obvious repair, in the light of a whole 
number of provincial and national issues which need to be 



82 Saskatchewan Hansard December 9, 1999 

addressed, and these men and women get up, and this is the 
level of the opposition that they provide to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
You know something? I hope you use the balance of your 
question period asking these questions because it will prove 
something else that I said during the leader’s debate. And that is 
that this Saskatchewan Party is no more, no less, than the old 
Tory Party reincarnated with absolutely no new ideas and no 
solutions for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I have to admit it is unfair . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I have to admit it’s unfair to 
say that the Liberal leader knows nothing about K to 12 
students. After all, he knows how to get them on a bus and ship 
them to Saskatoon to save his leadership. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Premier, the fact is Saskatchewan 
people do not support your decision to buy the Liberal caucus 
and to form a coalition government. Today we are releasing a 
poll showing that. And if I were you, I would listen to our polls. 
 
The majority of Saskatchewan people oppose the decision to 
form a coalition government. A majority of Saskatchewan 
people think overturning the election results . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Was wrong. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Was wrong. That’s right. And a majority of 
Saskatchewan people think the Liberal MLAs got bought off. 
 
Mr. Premier, that’s what Saskatchewan people think of the deal 
to buy off the Liberal members and that includes a lot of people 
that also voted Liberal and NDP. Mr. Premier, when and why 
can’t you admit the deal was wrong? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1415) 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I think all members will 
appreciate that these days I am a little bit wary of any poll from 
any source and will continue to do so for quite some time and 
particularly wary about that. 
 
What the people of Saskatchewan want is a stable government 
— one that works, one that is inclusive and listens to people. 
And I think this legislature has gotten off on a very good start in 
this regard with respect to the farm crisis. Some of the ideas of 
the Saskatchewan Party which are good, we want to 
incorporate. 
 
But I find it very strange and I find it very, very telling, Mr. 
Speaker, that not only will they not let me answer the questions 
because of their constant heckling — that’s fair enough, I’ve 
been around this House long enough, and I’ve had hecklers who 

are a heck of a lot better than those people — but what’s 
interesting about this is not one defence of their platform, not 
one positive idea, not one attempt to try to put aside victory, 
nothing whatsoever at all. 
 
They say they tabled the Bills. Nothing new about those Bills; 
they’re the same old Bills that the Tories had in the 1980s and 
the Sask Party had before the last election. Far out and far right. 
That’s all that opposition is. Far out and far right. Nothing new. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Formation of the Coalition Government 
 

Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, even 
your coalition partners, they don’t seem too sure about this deal 
that you have created. 
 
I have a copy of the November 21 Battleford Telegraph which 
quotes the Minister of Intergovernmental and Aboriginal 
Affairs speaking to the North Battleford Chamber of 
Commerce. The minister said, joining forces with the NDP was 
“the worst possible alternative except for the rest.” The worst 
possible alternative, Mr. Premier. What a ringing endorsement. 
 
My question is to the Minister of Intergovernmental and 
Aboriginal Affairs. Mr. Minister, the people of North Battleford 
voted against the NDP. Two weeks later you joined the NDP. 
Why did you betray the people who voted for you? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member from 
the Battlefords, North Battleford, can give an answer if there’s a 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order, please. Order. We 
continue to cut into this valuable time by the interruptions, and I 
hesitate to interrupt so please allow the questions to be heard 
and the answers to be heard as well, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the hon. 
member opposite again and I want to report again to the people 
of Saskatchewan: not one word about their five-year freeze on 
health care. We know why. Not one question about their 
five-year freeze on education. We know why. Not one word 
about farm families except for the two opening questions that 
the Leader of the Opposition. Not one whatsoever. 
 
The release of some phoney poll or whatever documentations 
they have. Their belief is that they have nothing constructive to 
ask about or to advocate. Can you believe the Legislative 
Assembly of the province of Saskatchewan having a coalition 
agreement written and a coalition government operating with a 
Speech from the Throne which every objective observer says 
has more detail than ever, and that’s the best they can do at day 
4 of the legislature? That’s the best they can do? Are there no 
legitimate questions of this government they can ask? 
 
Mr. Speaker, these people are like the old Bourbons — they 
learn nothing and they know nothing and they represent 
absolutely nothing with respect to new policy. None 
whatsoever. 



December 9, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 83 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Next question. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Speaker, obviously the Premier needs to 
find someone who can get a little better understanding of the 
Saskatchewan Party election platform, although he tried his best 
certainly to get someone to interpret it for him in the Throne 
Speech. It was just a little bit off yet, but with a little effort, he 
should be able to do very well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the bottom line is the member for North Battleford 
got bought. The Premier waved a cabinet salary at him. It was 
like waving a Pokémon card in front of an eight-year-old-child. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister went on to tell the chamber that he 
will use his position on the CIC (Crown Investments 
Corporation of Saskatchewan) Board to influence where 
government-owned businesses should locate. I think you know 
where I think would be an awfully good place, he said. 
 
Mr. Premier, your minister is flat out admitting he intends to 
use his position in cabinet to curry favour for North Battleford, 
at the expense of Swift Current, Estevan, Weyburn, and every 
other place. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order please. The member has 
been quite lengthy in his preamble. Would you go directly to 
the question please? 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, do you 
allow your ministers to use their cabinet position to give their 
riding an unfair advantage in getting government projects? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the question’s been . . . 
You know, Mr. Speaker, if this opposition has its way, they do 
not want debate at all. That’s really it. They talk about 
democracy and they talk about respect for democracy, and since 
this question period has started, they have been the most 
obstreperous, noisiest opposition that this House has probably 
seen in many years. Don’t lecture me about democracy. 
 
I do want to say this, Mr. Speaker. I say this on behalf of the 
government — the coalition government — of every minister 
and every MLA. Our job is to provide the best that we can — 
we make mistakes to be sure — in policy and in programs for 
every constituency in this province, whether it’s on this side of 
the House or that side of the House. And that includes the 
minister from North Battleford. It includes you as the MLA 
from that particular district that you represent. It includes 
everybody in this House. 
 
We are, so long as we’re government, determined to do the very 
best for the people of Saskatchewan in a progressive, humane, 
compassionate way. A lot more than what you people have 
promised the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the 
day, and following up on comments which were made in the 
question period, I believe, by the member for Saskatchewan 
Rivers, I would ask you to review the record. 
 
Because as I heard the member, he was casting . . . he was using 
language that in my view was not appropriate to this Assembly. 
In fact if I remember correctly, he said, in referring to the 
member for North Battleford, that the member was “bought” or 
something of that nature. If so, that, in my view, is outside of 
the language and is a serious reflection on the character of the 
member for North Battleford. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, in short I would ask you to review the record 
and make a ruling on that point of order. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I take the point of the Deputy Government 
House Leader and I will review the records and report back to 
the House. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before orders of 
the day, I’d rise to ask leave of the Assembly to move a motion 
to establish a special committee on tobacco control. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Special Committee on Tobacco Control 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, before I move the motion, 
I’d like to make a few remarks. 
 
Mr. Speaker, tobacco use is the leading preventable cause of 
disease and premature death in Canada. Smoking kills 1,600 
Saskatchewan people every year. It kills more people than 
AIDS, illegal drugs, suicides, murder, and traffic accidents 
combined. 
 
What is particularly troubling is the impact on our young 
people. Half of all smokers in Saskatchewan begin to use 
tobacco by the age 13. Most are smoking daily before they are 
18 years old. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Assembly must provide leadership in 
protecting the well-being of young people throughout 
Saskatchewan. To demonstrate that leadership we must take 
steps to prevent our young people from starting to smoke. 
Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I’ll be moving that this Assembly 
appoint a special all-party legislative committee on tobacco 
control. This committee would have broad authority to examine 
the impact of tobacco use, especially on children and teens; and 
to look at ways to prevent and reduce tobacco use; and to 
protect citizens from the dangers of second-hand smoke. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I feel very strongly about protecting the health and 
well-being of Saskatchewan people, particularly our children 
and teens. Saskatchewan people have told us they want us to 
take action to protect our young people from the dangers of 
tobacco. 
 



84 Saskatchewan Hansard December 9, 1999 

As members of this Assembly we need to work together on this 
vital issue. We need to speak with a single voice and we need to 
involve and include the people of Saskatchewan in these in 
important decisions. 
 
Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce the 
following motion: 
 

That the members Kowalsky, Higgins, Wartman, Addley, 
Eagles, Bjornerud, and Bakken be constituted a Special 
Committee on Tobacco Control and that the said special 
committee be authorized to consider and report in the 
spring of the year 2000 on matters related to: 
 
The impact of tobacco use in Saskatchewan, especially 
children and youth; the need for, and content of, provincial 
tobacco control legislation protecting children and youth; 
strategies to protect the public from the health risks of 
second-hand smoke including considerations of smoke free 
public place designations and jurisdictional authority 
related to tobacco use bylaws; effective and appropriate 
strategies related to enforcement, pricing, education and 
public awareness as they contribute to prevention or 
reduction of tobacco use especially by children and youth 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
And that the said special committee have the authority to 
sit during the intersessional period and during the 
legislative session except when the Assembly is sitting; 
that the committee have the power to send for persons, 
papers, and records; to examine witnesses under oath; to 
receive representations from interested parties and 
individuals; to engage such advisers and assistants as are 
required for the purposes of the inquiry; and to hold 
meetings away from the seat of government in order that 
the fullest representations may be received without unduly 
inconveniencing those desiring to be heard. 
 

With that, Mr. Speaker, I move, and seconded by the Member 
from Melfort-Tisdale, the motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as the 
seconder of the motion to voice our support for this initiative by 
the Associate Minister of Health. 
 
Mr. Speaker, everyone in this province, and certainly in this 
Assembly, knows that the issue surrounding tobacco and its use, 
particularly among our young people, is a very serious issue 
indeed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is our intent to co-operate fully as participants in 
this committee, and we trust that as the committee does its work 
across this province, that people will come forward and freely 
give their opinions and their concerns about the issue. There 
certainly are people that have many concerns about how 
enforcement and how heavy-handed potentially enforcement 
may happen. 
 
We have to understand that many people are indeed addicted to 
the use of tobacco and that this committee’s work has to be 
done in a very thorough and compassionate way. 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I rise in support of this motion and look 
forward to the report of the committee in the spring of the next 
year. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Ms. Higgins, seconded by Mr. 
Addley, and the proposed amendment thereto moved by Mr. 
Hermanson. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s indeed 
a pleasure to again stand in this Assembly and to represent the 
constituency of Moosomin and to speak on their behalf. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to begin just by raising a few points about 
some of the debate that took place today in the Assembly and 
some of the comments the Premier is making and the 
recognition. And, Mr. Speaker, I think what we saw in the 
Assembly today was another attempt by the Premier to try and 
have the people of Saskatchewan believe he is something more 
than he actually presents himself to be on many occasions, and 
to try and present that caucus as being the nicest most pleasant 
group of individuals. 
 
(1430) 
 
But I remember, and I don’t want to hold this against the new 
members. I do know there are a number of members sitting on 
the front benches that I happened to observe when they were in 
opposition side of the Assembly. And, Mr. Speaker, there aren’t 
enough words to describe the actions of those members. 
 
However that is a debate that took place a number of years ago 
and we’ll leave that in the past. And I would like to see the 
Premier begin to look ahead to the future because the people of 
Saskatchewan are looking for some leadership into the future — 
into the year 2000 which is just a few days away rather than 
belabouring the facts of — of the early 1990s or the ’80s or the 
’70s and beyond. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we were looking for — what the people of 
Saskatchewan were looking for in the Throne Speech was a 
Throne Speech that had a vision for tomorrow — for the year 
2000 and beyond, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would have to 
suggest to you the only vision that we saw in the Throne Speech 
that was presented the other day by His Honour the Lieutenant 
Governor was the vision the Saskatchewan Party presented to 
the people of Saskatchewan in the past election of September 
that . . . and the results that were seen on September 16. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we look at this Throne Speech and we 
examined the Throne Speech very carefully. Unfortunately, 
while the Throne Speech seems to give a lot of credence to the 
Saskatchewan Party platform, the fact is, I think a lot of the 



December 9, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 85 

Throne Speech was more or less a lot of platitudes to the people 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, having been in this Assembly for a number of 
years, I certainly want to thank the constituents of Moosomin 
for their support. Mr. Speaker, you can appreciate the fact that 
being elected through difficult times as to be elected in good 
times. And one thing that I can say, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that 
I have been elected by individuals in the constituency of 
Moosomin who have placed some trust and some faith in my 
abilities to represent them, and to speak on their behalf, and 
represent the issues that are very important to them. 
 
Issues such as highway maintenance and repair and 
construction in our constituency. Issues such as health care. 
Issues that relate directly to individuals and the crisis we are 
seeing now in the area of agriculture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t doubt that there isn’t a member in this 
Assembly who has not been contacted by one or two of their 
constituents, or many of their constituents, in regard to the 
situation in agriculture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are just a week or so away from what would be 
considered the most joyous day of the year, Christmas Day. But 
some of the conversations I’ve had in the last few days haven’t 
had a lot of joy in the expressions that have been given. Family 
members have been calling me and they have been calling my 
colleagues—and I am certain they have been calling 
government members as well — in regard to the difficult 
situations that they are facing on the family farms. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it’s not just the family farm; its business, 
men and women and individuals in our small communities who 
are facing the same affects as a result of the difficult 
agricultural economy we face today. 
 
Mr. Speaker what they were looking to this Assembly for at this 
time, what the people were looking forward to from this 
Premier and from this government was some direction that 
would not only give them some hope, that would give them a 
reason to have joy and gladness, and to express love and 
understanding at this time of year. 
 
And unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, I feel as an individual I talked 
to this morning, that they have been left out in the cold. And 
that there may not be the joy that they would love to share at 
this Christmas season that they normally would. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker we also have to acknowledge the 
resiliency of the Prairie farmer and people that have grown up 
on the Prairies and their ability to work through the difficult and 
the hard times. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the member for Moosomin, I will continue to 
work with my colleagues to put forward ideas and to put 
forward issues that we would hope the Premier and his 
colleagues would listen to very carefully. Issues that we believe 
would create some resolve to the agricultural crisis, but also 
help build the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as individuals in this Assembly, there isn’t any 
one of us that have taken this position of responsibility on our 

shoulders lightly. There isn’t any one of us that have just come 
here for the sake of saying we’ve been elected and had the 
privilege of being elected an MLA. 
 
Every person that put their name forward to seek the 
nomination and eventually run in the provincial election did so 
because they had a burning desire to work on behalf of 
individuals, because they had a belief that they could offer 
something to represent the issues and the concerns of their 
constituency, and to go beyond the constituency to work with 
their colleagues to build a better province. 
 
And one would have to ask, when we look at the Speech from 
the Throne, have we really achieved that? Certainly there are a 
number of ideas that have been put forward and everything on 
the surface, Mr. Speaker, looks good; and that’s all fine and 
well. 
 
But I guess the judgment will take place in the next months and 
maybe even years. As the Speech from the Throne indicates, the 
only reason for the coalition at this time was to guarantee the 
Premier a term of government that would be a full term of four 
years rather than possibly a minority situation of eighteen 
months to two years. 
 
This Speech from the Throne is basically saying to people this 
is what we hope to achieve. And I think as I talked to 
individuals in my constituency, on election night and shortly 
after when the results rolled in and we were in a minority 
government position, there wasn’t one person — not one person 
— who didn’t say to me, well it isn’t quite what we wanted, but 
it might be a pretty good government that we have to work 
with. A minority situation. It might be the first time in a long 
time that we’ve been able to hold the government truly 
accountable for their actions. 
 
And interestingly enough, Mr. Speaker, as well I was asked 
about my opinion. And I had indicated to a number of 
individuals that the Premier had been around for a long time. 
And I had a vision of him offering some cabinet positions — 
not really believing that he would — but I had a vision that he 
would. And that we indeed would not have a minority situation, 
but we would have a coalition government that, for all intents 
and purposes, would be an NDP government. 
 
You can imagine my consternation when about three days later 
the Leader of the Liberal Party said he would never, never sell 
his soul, never sell his soul to form a coalition . . . be part of a 
coalition government. He was going to represent his 
constituents and work with a minority government in a minority 
position to bring the best possible government of the province 
of Saskatchewan. And I can remember, Mr. Speaker, being on 
coffee row and the local editor of the paper saying well, what 
do you think now. And I said . . . the comment around the table, 
the comment I made was, well it’s not over; she ain’t over till 
it’s over. 
 
Sure enough, two days later, what happened? We have a 
coalition government. Three days later at the coffee table, you 
know what people are saying? This is no more a coalition. It is 
an NDP government. It is Roy Romanow — pardon me, Mr. 
Speaker — the Premier at his best, the Premier at his best, 
negotiating and forming and basically guaranteeing himself 



86 Saskatchewan Hansard December 9, 1999 

another mandate. 
 
Now he’s trying to tell us, as he did today, that he has been 
given the mandate to govern . . . to provide good government 
for four years — for a four-year term. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan did not vote for the 
NDP government majority we now have in front of us. The 
people of Saskatchewan voted for change. Sixty percent, over 
60 per cent of the population of this province voted for change. 
They didn’t vote for a coalition. They didn’t vote for the Leader 
of the Liberal Party to sell his soul. They voted for change. 
They voted for something new and something exciting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I look at the Leader of the Liberal Party and 
I think back to the days of the election days and I think to all the 
promises the Liberal Party was making, and certainly when you 
went on knocking on the doors and, I’m sure, maybe my 
colleagues found the same thing, people were asking, well how 
in the world is the Liberal Party going to keep all its 
commitments. It’s just promising the world. 
 
Well we now know why. And I quote from a recent article in 
the Leader-Post: 
 

A Liberal campaign promise to save millions by cutting 
government public relations hacks was just political 
rhetoric, Liberal leader Jim Melenchuk now says. 
 

Liberal rhetoric. Mr. Speaker, people believed that then and 
they still believe it today, and the papers confirm exactly what 
they believe. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the representative for the Moosomin 
constituency, I will hold this government responsible and the 
Minster of Health responsible for the commitment to the town 
of Moosomin regarding a new hospital. 
 
It’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, how the . . . just prior to calling 
the election, all of a sudden . . . The people of Moosomin have 
been working for a number of years for a new health facility in 
their community and it just seems to be sliding them by. But 
just before the election was called, Mr. Speaker, the Premier 
and the Minister of Health announced there would be a new 
hospital. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, as the MLA for the constituency, I’m 
working with the people in that community to guarantee that the 
minister and this Premier are true to their word and that that 
facility will proceed, rather than being told no, unfortunately, 
we don’t have enough money to do it anymore because of the 
election results. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ll also be holding this government accountable 
for the highway situation in our corner of the province. My 
colleague and I, the member from Cannington, certainly do 
have some highways that need major, major repairs, and we 
will be raising . . . bringing those areas forward. I realize that 
the colleagues on this side of the Assembly have the same 
problem with their highways, but mine are first. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, when we look at this, 
look at the debate here, and I would have to say that for each 

and every one that are sitting in this Assembly today, and 
having been elected a number of years ago, as elected members 
we certainly do give up a lot. And people don’t . . . many 
people don’t really realize that but I am fortunate to have many 
individuals in my constituency who recognize the things that 
we’ve given up: missed my son’s hockey games or missed the 
ball games, or missed the volleyball games. 
 
When I was elected to this Assembly, I had boys age 9 and 7 
and a daughter age 2. Mr. Speaker, today two of them are away 
from home and my daughter is in grade 10. That’s, that is 
almost a scary thought — to realize that when you realize how 
quickly families grow up and the fact that I’ve missed some of 
the most important years. 
 
But I don’t apologize to this Assembly and I don’t apologize to 
my constituents for the fact that there were times that I said, no, 
I’m sorry, I can’t make that event. My daughter’s got an 
important program that I need to go to. I’ve missed too many, 
or my sons. 
 
And you know what I find very interesting, Mr. Speaker,? Is my 
constituents have commended me for that — that I have placed 
my family ahead of the reasons I’ve representing them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe that’s why 
my constituents have continued to show faith in my abilities. 
Not only in the fact that I have the pleasure of standing in this, 
in this Assembly to debate the issues, not only for the fact that 
I’ve been out at numerous constituency events and functions 
and represented now our party as well as the province of 
Saskatchewan, but for the fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I’ve 
made a commitments to my constituents. I’ve made a 
commitment to represent them to the best of my ability, putting 
in mind I’ve made a commitment to my faith, my family and 
my constituents — in that order. 
 
And I appreciate the fact that many constituents have 
commended, commended me for that, for that commitment and 
indeed following that order. I would suggest to you, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, if we all followed an order somewhat similar, the 
constituents that we represent would certainly acknowledge it 
and would show it. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in view of the fact that there are so 
many other individuals who want to take place and indeed 
speak to the Throne Speech in front of us, I will take my place. 
 
But before I take my place, seeing as we are at that time of the 
year, I’m going to extend to each and every one of the 
legislative members here this afternoon and certainly to my 
constituents who may be watching, a very merry Christmas and 
a happy new year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Like my colleagues 
before me, I rise to offer my support for the Speech from the 
Throne. I’m happy and honoured to be here and proud to be 
elected as the representative from Saskatoon Meewasin. 
 



December 9, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 87 

Mr. Speaker, I wish to take a few moments to tell you about my 
constituency and my constituents, but before I do I want to 
congratulate you . . . oh, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m sorry. I’d like 
to congratulate you on your election to office of Deputy 
Speaker. I have every confidence that you’ll carry out your 
duties in a firm manner. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve been a political enthusiast since a very young 
age. And I’m awed and almost overwhelmed by the honour that 
my constituents have bestowed upon me. I want to assure them 
that I will work hard to deserve the trust that they have placed 
in me to represent their interests in this government, in this the 
twenty-fourth legislature of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Oxford Dictionary defines democracy as, government by 
the whole people of a country, especially through the 
representatives whom they elect. And democratic is defined as, 
in accordance with the principle of equal rights for all. The 
word itself comes from the 4th century Greek philosopher, 
Democritus, which literally translates as the people’s choice. 
 
This learned scholar was called wisdom during his lifetime and 
has often been referred to as the laughing philosopher because 
he laughed at people’s vanity and the folly of our human ways. 
 
But history shows that Democritus was no mere scoffer, and 
historians agree that in many ways he is ranked with Plato and 
Aristotle in terms of genius and common sense. 
 
For it was Democritus who differed from his colleagues in the 
sense that he carried his theory into practical philosophy and 
concluded near the end of his life that happiness consisted of 
having an even temperament and good friends. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1445) 
 
Ms. Jones: —Mr. Deputy Speaker, I came into this House 
blessed with the friendship of many of my colleagues, and I 
look forward to the making of many more friendships as we go 
about the people’s business. 
 
I also congratulate new and returning members on their 
election. Saskatoon, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is a diverse and 
challenging constituency to represent. We have a population 
which spans both the economic and the age spectrums. 
 
We have two districts, if you will, separated by the mighty 
South Saskatchewan river which highlights some of the 
accomplishments of the Meewasin Valley Authority. Contained 
within its boundaries are the Saskatchewan Indian Federated 
College and the marvel that is Innovation Place. 
 
My constituents live in historic City Park, North Park, along the 
river on beautiful Spadina Crescent, in River Heights, Lawson 
Heights, Forest Grove, and Silver Springs. Some of the areas 
are very old and some, like Silver Springs, are still developing 
and growing very quickly. 
 
I was especially pleased, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to hear in the 
Speech from the Throne this government’s continuing 
commitment to elementary and high schools. The good 

constituents of Silver Springs have been lobbying hard for both 
the separate and a public school in Silver Springs and they 
deserve to have them. The area is growing rapidly and it is 
estimated there are close to a thousand elementary school 
students in the area who are required to be bussed or driven to 
other schools outside of the community. 
 
Community is a key word for our government, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Although we recognize that we live in a global village, 
the Saskatchewan way is to build upon the community values of 
caring and sharing and looking out for each other. 
 
And a school, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the heart of a community. 
If your neighbour’s children are bussed to a different school, 
they do not know each other and they don’t play together and 
they do not have a sense of community. If your community 
association has to compete for gym time or rink time with a 
neighbouring association, the community’s children are 
deprived of more than a close proximity to a classroom. 
 
And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in spite of many competing 
priorities for public funds, I’m proud that this government is 
working hard to provide financial support for school 
construction and renovation projects across this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Jones: — Saskatoon Meewasin, according to the report of 
the chief electoral officer, boasts the largest number of electors 
of any constituency in the province at 13,587 eligible voters. It 
increased in numbers by over 1,800 electors since 1995. When I 
sought the support of my constituents, I told them that for me 
there are a half dozen bottom line positions which I believe are 
non-negotiable. These are: we must continue to lead the nation 
in educating our young people, we must play an active role in 
job creation, we must care for the sick and the elderly among 
us, we must feed hungry children, we must legislate a safe and 
fair workplace for all workers, and we must protect our 
environment for future generations. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Jones: — I’ve already spoken about this government’s 
commitment to elementary and high schools. And in addition, 
I’m proud of the consultative process announced in the Throne 
Speech to determine the best way to implement our initiative on 
making post-secondary education more accessible. 
 
The Throne Speech described the new economic strategy, 
Partnership for Prosperity, that will allow us to continue 
building jobs and growth. The Speech from the Throne outlined 
the government’s plan to protect and improve health care. 
 
Tax fairness for families, family leave, working with the federal 
government to make the national children’s agenda a reality, 
increased funds for child care, and support for the enhancement 
of the community schools program will help to meet the needs 
of hungry children and their families. 
 
Plans to improve and update The Labour Standards Act will 
further address a fair workplace for workers. And the 
announced forest renewal program is an important 
environmental initiative. 



88 Saskatchewan Hansard December 9, 1999 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I grew up on the family farm and 
members of my family are still active in farming today. On 
Tuesday we supported the gold ribbon campaign and 
participated in an historic agriculture debate on the floor of this 
Chamber. As stated in the Speech from the Throne, the issues 
are both complex and daunting, but we will take steps to 
address these issues. 
 
I began my remarks today with a reference to the philosopher 
Democritus and I referred earlier to the importance of 
friendships. It seems fitting to close with the thoughts of 
Aristotle who wrote these words about friends: 
 

Without friends, no one would choose to live . . . (though) 
he had all other goods. 
 

Friends help the young to keep from error. Friends aid older 
persons by ministering to their needs and supplementing the 
activities that are failing from weakness. Especially do those 
in office need friends, for they stimulate noble actions. And 
with friends, those officials are more able to both think and to 
act. 
 
To think and to act, my friends. To remember our priorities. To 
help each other adjust to change. These are the things we must 
keep in mind as we move forward to implement the course of 
action outlined in the Speech from the Throne. 
 
As the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow has stated, we were 
instructed to do good things. And we will, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
we will. I’m happy to support the motion. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s an 
honour for me to rise in this twenty-fourth legislature, and to 
have the opportunity to be part of this legislative process and to 
be able to contribute to this debate. It’s a very unique occasion 
when a newly elected member first takes his turn to express his 
thoughts, his concerns, his position, as well those of his 
constituents. 
 
There are many possible reasons that entice people to launch 
them into public service. I’m a proud resident of this province. I 
was born and raised here, educated in its fine institutions. 
Except for a few years during my working career, I’ve lived for 
the most part in Saskatchewan, and this is where I want to 
remain. 
 
I wish I could say the same about the opportunities, however, 
that face my children, and face maybe my grandchildren. I want 
them to remember they’re the fifth generation in this province. I 
want them to be able to look forward to the opportunity, to 
prosperity right here, and to be able to build and contribute in 
their time to the fabric and the promise of this great province, a 
province that has such great potential. 
 
Unfortunately, this may not be possible. For the present and 
maybe the future, the future citizens of Saskatchewan, 
opportunity seems elsewhere. Prosperity is only a promise, and 
personal and professional achievement only a dream that will 
come true only outside of our borders. It does not have to be 
that way because we are the ones right here in this legislature 

that can make the difference. 
 
We can and we must make those changes and set the course that 
will attract and keep not only these young people, but our 
educated and talented people as well, our trained and committed 
workforce. But as well, our retired and our seniors who have 
lived here as well, they’ve invested in this province and they 
wish to stay. Unfortunately this has not always been the case. 
 
And living in the Lloydminster constituency, this has been seen 
in spades. 
 
One of the root causes of the lack of confidence is lack of 
opportunity. The resulting exodus from Saskatchewan has 
undoubtedly been the high tax burden placed on our people. 
One of the highest burdens in any province. And as our people 
continue to leave the province and our tax base shrinks, each of 
us is expected to carry even a greater burden. 
 
The old way of doing things in this province has not worked. 
We must dedicate ourselves to becoming competitive, not only 
with our neighbouring provinces, but with states as well. And 
we have to encourage and attract both our young and old to 
remain here. And by building a confidence in the business 
sector that Saskatchewan can be, and is, a good place to be. 
 
We must take every opportunity to reduce our tax disincentives 
and change them into incentives for all of our people as well as 
for the businesses. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, living in Lloydminster, 
of course where the border splits the city, it allows one a very 
unique opportunity to witness first-hand where most people prefer 
to live and where most businesses prefer to locate, and to realize 
what the main reason is for that difference. And in a word, that 
difference is taxes. 
 
No matter what good things this government says about the 
economy and the opportunities in Saskatchewan, people and 
businesses alike have figured out for themselves what seems best 
for them. And in Lloydminster and the area, the Alberta side of the 
border is the beneficiary, and there is no doubt about that. 
 
Lloydminster is one of the most vibrant and commercially active 
communities in either Saskatchewan or Alberta. And it’s more 
than just being dependent on the oil industry, although that is a key 
sector. Lloydminster is a manufacturing . . . it’s a fabrication 
centre, has one of the biggest oilseed crushing facilities in Canada. 
It has a farming and a cattle ranching base second to none. 
 
Businesses and major chains and franchises are being attracted. 
And especially encouraging, young people and families are being 
attracted and want to make our region their home. But, funny 
thing, all of this activity and the development is on the west side of 
the border. 
 
For every housing start on the Saskatchewan side, there is 50 or 
more on the Alberta side, and this is in the same city. Every one of 
the new business franchises and the big box store chains are 
built and are being built on the Alberta side of the border. Even 
the new city hall office, it’s being relocated from the 



December 9, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 89 

Saskatchewan side to the Alberta side. Virtually the only new 
business opened on the Saskatchewan side of downtown this 
year is my constituency office. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, Lloydminster, 
Saskatchewan is stagnant. As economic development critic, this 
to me is alarming. The number one factor in this huge 
difference in development and location is, as I said, the tax 
difference. 
 
All statements by this government about the fallacy of the 
Alberta advantage is demonstrated wrong. There is a difference. 
People make their decisions on that difference and the results 
are dramatic and indisputable. It has become so apparent, that if 
Saskatchewan wants economic development, our taxes and 
incentives, they must be reasonable, they must be competitive 
and available. And now that shouldn’t be hard to understand. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, let me give you another example of the 
urgency of the needed changes. One of the agencies of the 
Saskatchewan government’s Department of Post-Secondary 
Education and Skills Training called New Horizons — in fact I 
believe now it’s called Career and Employment Services — will 
be moving out of a facility leased by the Saskatchewan 
government, and in conjunction with a similar Alberta agency, 
and the Canada Employment Centre, is relocating to a different 
facility in the city, but on the Alberta side of the border. 
Apparently even the Saskatchewan government recognizes the 
Alberta advantage. 
 
Because of the uniqueness of this Lloydminster border 
situation, there are many constituency issues that have been 
brought to my attention that require either special consideration 
or unique solutions. 
 
First however I must commend the several administrative 
entities in the city as they deal with this dual jurisdiction. For 
example, the city council and its administration; the public 
school boards; the separate school boards; the Lloydminster 
hospital board; the Lloydminster housing authority. 
 
In a very difficult administrative environment of two very often 
conflicting provincial sets of directives and policies, these local 
boards and councils have made the system work effectively, 
often with local initiatives and compromise, but always with 
local support and confidence. Their tasks are considerably more 
complicated compared to any other community using a single 
administrative policy and procedures. But in fact it is working, 
and quite often in spite of this provincial government. 
 
(1500) 
 
Lloydminster too often is considered by this government as 
only being a Saskatchewan portion of the city and policies and 
directives are often issued accordingly. Lloydminster is not just 
a Saskatchewan city of about 6 to 8,000 people. It’s a vibrant 
city of over 20 to 25,000 people. 
 
But it is one community and it is the centre of a very large 
trading area that draws nearly a hundred thousand people. 
Accordingly the services needed to be provided, especially in 

education and in health services, must be focused on 
Lloydminster as a single community and not just a divided 
centre. 
 
But because of this misconception there are several issues that 
remain outstanding. For instance, the introduction of a single 
city 911 emergency service, a service that is usually considered 
necessary for communities of 20 to 25,000 people, especially 
communities with a very strong industrial base. This service has 
yet to be instituted as this government doesn’t seem to want to 
take any of the leadership in this particular issue. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in this dual environment another example 
of outstanding issues is the unequal provincial funding for any 
of the facilities and services in the city. Examples such as an 
unequal funding for the educational capital budgets for 
Saskatchewan’s minimal funding to Lakeland College, which is 
in fact one of the few regional degree-granting colleges in 
communities this size, or the unequal funding and requirements 
placed on the community’s hospital and health services. All of 
these unique issues require unique solutions. 
 
In other parts of the constituency it must be noted that even 
while the oil industry is such a predominant industry, there are 
exceptional infrastructure and logistics problems created as a 
result. Now I’m sure, similar to other oil-producing regions, 
there are significant provincial royalties generated and extracted 
from these areas but with few of the extra costs that are created 
in the municipalities that should be considered for supplemental 
provincial assistance. 
 
For example, while the municipal roads have been categorized 
and assigned provincial funds paid in relation to a normal or an 
average usage by a few hundred farm trucks, in these oil field 
roads they are presently carrying several thousand heavy-haul 
trucking units with the associated extra upkeep costs of these 
roads picked up almost entirely by the municipal taxpayers. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, if royalties are created for the benefit of 
the entire province, surely these direct infrastructure costs 
generated to achieve these royalties must be shared in some part 
by the province, and not penalizing just a few of the local 
taxpayers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — In summary, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I must 
again reiterate. There are often exceptional problems and costs 
directed to communities like those of the Lloydminster 
constituency which have had provincial promotion and, in fact, 
provincial interest. For example, the bi-provincial upgrader, the 
border cogeneration electrical plant. But these have had very 
little consideration from the province for encountering these 
exceptional costs that they in fact have been creating. 
 
But more fundamental, however, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the 
necessary and the urgency to address the issue of tax reduction. 
This is critical and it’s time sensitive. Without making the 
province more competitive and creating the confidence and the 
incentive to attract and retain people and businesses, we will 
continue to be relegated to the position of underachiever, to the 
position of the province with the worst job creation record, and 
condemned to a continuation of stagnation in the economy and 



90 Saskatchewan Hansard December 9, 1999 

a population with a shrinking tax base. 
 
But we can make a difference and we must make those changes 
to our tax structure immediately. We don’t have the luxury of 
delay. Too many of my constituents have already moved away 
permanently. Time is not on our side. Immediate action is 
required. The potential of our province and the opportunity is 
just too great. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people issue this simple challenge: 
does this government have the courage and the leadership to 
carry us into the very possible and the very attainable economic 
development and prosperity of the new millennium. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I rise to speak on 
the 1999 Throne Speech at this twenty-fourth sitting of the 
legislature. 
 
I would like to start, Mr. Deputy Speaker, by thanking the 
people from Cumberland constituency, thank them for giving 
me the confidence to represent them for the fourth time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also like to thank my wife Linda. We 
celebrated our 25th anniversary this year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — And also to my daughters Koonu and 
Danis. Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s very important to mention the 
family, because being a dad and a politician or being a mom 
and a politician are very difficult. And going in on the fourth 
term, you’ll recognize the developmental years of your children. 
And I know that when they’re 22 and 23, at some point when I 
was first elected, they were 9 and 10 years old. So I’ve seen 
them evolve and develop as I tried to balance my time, you 
know, both as a parent and as a political person. 
 
I would also like to make a commentary on the fact of history as 
we’re entering the new millennium and we’re looking to the 
future, that as regards to political experience, I was lucky to 
have been part of a government in opposition and being with 
Premier Blakeney in opposition during that time, and watching 
the developments in terms of procedures of the House and also 
making statements at that time in opposition speeches about 
northern Saskatchewan. 
 
And I also was very pleased therefore when we were elected in 
’91, and in ’92 I became part of a cabinet. I was thankful to the 
Premier to allow me to part of the cabinet, to be part of a team 
with cabinet ministers as well as the MLAs (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly). 
 
And it’s also very important historically to look at the fact that 
we’re entering a coalition. I know from historical readings that 
it’s a fairly regular occurrence in some of the countries in 
Europe. And it’s interesting that, at this point in history, that I 
would become part of a coalition government. 
 
I know that . . . when I look at the different members putting the 

values of co-operation . . . constructive co-operation will be 
very important as we deal with the issues of the people of 
Saskatchewan . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Last time when I 
was in opposition of course, the member says I was doing my 
job with great rigor. And I would take that with some humour 
because as I look to the future, I knew that when I was in 
government or when I was in opposition, I did my fair share of 
what you would call political jousting. And as I look to the 
future, I know that amidst the talk that we do have, there is 
concrete action that needs to be done on a daily basis. 
 
As I looked at the Throne Speech, I looked at the general 
parameters of the Throne Speech, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I 
saw the essence of Saskatchewan at this time in history. I 
looked at the economic side of the question and I saw the issues 
of rural development and farm being addressed. And I saw that 
in there was also commitments in regards to education and 
health, which are critical issues at each of the regional levels 
from the North, rural, and urban level. 
 
I wanted to start out by dealing with the farm issue. Some 
people may be surprised as to why I would be dealing with the 
farm issue from northern Saskatchewan. When I was growing 
up, we had, in Cumberland, a farm that was run by the 
government which the community later on took over. 
 
But when I was growing up in school, we also had a 4-H club. 
There was a guy by the name of Don Neilson that used to come 
to Cumberland House and come to the school and we would 
have this 4-H program. So we were part in parcel of that which 
was taking place, you know, throughout the province as a 
whole. My dad was also one of the first Co-op store managers 
for the Co-op store in Cumberland, and he was very 
instrumental in the co-op movement in Cumberland. 
 
And when I looked back on those days, I was going to a 
conference one time with the co-ops, and one of the co-op 
members showed me a picture. He says are you related to the 
Goulets in Cumberland House. I said yes. I was quite surprised 
when he showed me a picture of my dad going to a co-op 
school in 1951. 
 
And later on I did go to a co-op school myself, you know, and 
had a discussion not only with the issues of the North, but with 
rural development in my younger days. As I looked at the issue 
of that development and as I listened to the speakers the other 
day, it struck me with not only the great degree of sensitivity 
the issue was, the great deal of emotion, but also the concrete 
nature of providing solutions for the future. 
 
The spirit of the people was there as I listened to the speakers. 
Although there was such a tremendous intensity of the situation 
that we were in, the spirit of the people from the farm would not 
be broken. 
 
And that was the essence that I felt as I listened not only to the 
concrete ideas for future development at the local level, 
provincial and national and international level, but I felt that 
that spirit was there which was important as it carries us to the 
next century. 
 
And I thought that when I looked at the issue and how I 
understood the issue, well indeed we focused in on the 



December 9, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 91 

international arena, recognizing the inequities and inequalities 
that could occur at the international arena and the importance of 
democratizing the WTO (World Trade Organization) over the 
long run, and also dealing with the UN (United Nations) on 
other international issues, that indeed there was still an inequity 
in terms of policy from Europe, United States, and us here in 
Canada. 
 
And that idea came out very clearly as I listened to the 
speeches. And I knew that, you know, close to 60 per cent of 
the help that was in Europe and close to 40 per cent in the 
United States and whereas our government in Canada at 7 per 
cent was a very important fact, you know, that came out. And I 
think that as we’re looking to the future we recognize therefore 
that the action had to be both at the, at the different levels . . . at 
the local, regional, provincial, national, and international level. 
And it was a very important information to behold as we were 
dealing with the issue. 
 
(1515) 
 
I also wanted to make some commentary by one particular 
statement that was made in regard to the speeches yesterday, the 
other day. And it was a comment by the MP (Member of 
Parliament) Mr. Kerpan. 
 
I appreciated Mr. Kerpan’s comments as they related to the 
agriculture issue. And I appreciated his comments in regards to 
the support on pressuring the federal government. But I also 
appreciated his comments here and there in terms of 
suggestions at the provincial level. 
 
But one of the things that I did notice his commentary was in 
relation to Aboriginal people. In that one I had a very, very 
mixed response. I notice that in his comments he was talking 
about the Nisga’a Agreement and he was talking to his deputy 
whip and his deputy whip had said that this was 
Saskatchewan’s Nisga’a. And I received that with very mixed 
feelings, because as I was listening in my heart, that in that 
statement there was a feeling that while we had a tremendous 
united support for the farm and people from a rural area, that 
there wasn’t to be in the case of Aboriginal people on the 
Nisga’a. 
 
And I thought to me that it was a very mixed message, to 
compare the Nisga’a situation to the crisis at the farm gate. I 
thought it was unfortunate; sometimes as politicians, you know, 
we speak and sometimes we make some comments, and I 
certainly hope that his comments did not mean that the 1,000 
Indian and Metis farmers in this province are not part of the 
united position, you know, for farming; that, indeed, Indian and 
Metis people are also farmers and they are also struck hard by 
the inequities at the international level. 
 
So my simple point is this — that as we support the people in 
the farm area, we also have to support all people, including 
Aboriginal people, at the farm gate. That’s to be the message I 
want to give in regards to his commentary. 
 
Because for me as I looked at the history of growing up in 
Cumberland House, I was always quite aware of the politics of 
division. People being divided up — Aboriginal and 
non-Aboriginal. And people being divided up — rural, urban, 

northern. 
 
I knew from experience that was wrong. I knew that the politics 
and policies of inclusion have to be the essence of a strategy to 
counter the politics of division. One doesn’t have to go to see in 
Africa the Hutu and the Tutsi. Or to see the peace that is being 
finally made in Ireland between the Irish and the English. Or to 
see what has happened with the Serbs and the Croat people. We 
know that in essence on our feelings, the politics of hate and the 
politics of division are wrong. 
 
As I was growing up, I knew that when I went to my first co-op 
school, I knew from personal experience that people have the 
same hurts, whether they’re in their rural area, the northern 
area, or the urban area. And that when we’re in a united 
position, it’s a united position of all peoples as well. I was 
taught that because of the experiences that I had. 
 
I knew when our veterans went to war for this country, they 
didn’t have to go because they were exempt from conscription. 
They did not have to go, but they laid their lives for this 
country. Many of them died, never to return home like many of 
their fellow soldiers from this province and country. 
 
When they came back they said they would like to see what 
happened in the development of Europe. They were very happy 
to say, they said I was able to walk into a restaurant with a 
non-Aboriginal person. They said that was a new experience for 
me; before that, I could not walk into the same restaurants. And 
they said it was a step in the right direction to see this idea of 
inclusion and respect. 
 
We know from history that the respect that they got in fighting 
and dying for this country was there during the war, and when 
they come back they had to fight every step of the way to gain 
further respect. Today there is still possibilities of a legal case 
wherein many of the veterans did not receive the same land 
grants — treaty Indian people as well as Metis people — as 
other people did receive. There was still unfinished business in 
that sense and yet most of them have now pretty well all left the 
earth. 
 
It is that sense that I am talking about on the politics of 
inclusion of . . . but how important it is. When I looked at the 
issue of the Nisga’a and I looked at the personal experience in 
Saskatchewan, I’m very proud to say that the level of conflict in 
Saskatchewan did not reach the level that we saw in New 
Brunswick and B.C. I am proud of that fact here in this 
province. 
 
But I also know this: I look at the history and I’ve read the 
history. If you read Chester Martin, “Dominion Lands” Policy, 
1938, after the resources transfer agreement of 1930, when you 
look at the facts there you will know why the importance of 
inclusion is embedded with the concept of justice and fairness. 
When you look at the facts you will see that just after 1930, the 
railroads, when we’re talking about the pressures and inequities 
of the policies from the federal government on the Crow rate 
and the railroads, aren’t the lack of greater consideration for the 
farm community. 
 
Land policies of the day were such that the railroads and the 
province received over 15 million acres of land. When you look 



92 Saskatchewan Hansard December 9, 1999 

at the Hudson’s Bay Company alone, they received 7 million 
acres of land in western Canada, 3.4 million acres of land in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
On the free homestead Act by 1930 there was 31 million acres 
of land; on the paid homestead Act there was another 6 million 
to make it 37 million acres of land. 
 
It is interesting from an historical perspective that as we look at 
the history there was over 900,000 people in the province by 
that time, and that there’s approximately 40,000 farms in those 
areas today. There is about 55 or 57,000 farmers out there 
today, and at that time there was 250,000 farmers. 
 
And when you’re looking at the policies, these policies were 
very progressive, positive policies for settlement and they were 
very positive also for the companies like the CPR (Canadian 
Pacific Railway) who got 6 million acres of land. 
 
But what a lot of people did not know when we did the treaty 
land entitlement in the province, and I think the reason why a 
lot of Saskatchewan people supported it was this. Treaty Indian 
people in Saskatchewan received about 1.2 million acres of land 
by 1930. The treaties were signed in the most cases prior to the 
turn of the century. But there was 1.2 million acres of land, and 
new settlement provided for about 60,000 acres of land . . . I 
mean 60 million acres of land and 1.2 million for First Nations. 
 
When we did the settlement and we started arguing and 
debating on TLE (treaty land entitlement), a lot of people 
started recognizing these facts and agreed that the settlement 
should be there. 
 
And as we’re moving forward into the future, the land base idea 
becomes important not only for all peoples, but also for 
Aboriginal peoples. 
 
I wanted to put those facts out because many times those facts 
are not known by the public. And every time that I speak about 
them, I will find somebody who knows and somebody who 
doesn’t know about that factual history. So when I talk about 
the politics of inclusion and policies of inclusion on land to 
include any of the Metis people, that is what I mean — the 
understanding of the history. 
 
When I was debating here at some point, I told them, the 
people, one time when somebody asked me that question, I said, 
look we have land to drop bombs. The Primrose Air Weapons 
Range is one and a half million acres, the same size as a treaty 
land entitlement of the ’76 formula. The ’76 formula was less 
than the amount of land that we had for the bombing range. 
 
I think also in Canada there’s about five times more land in 
terms of protection for parks than Aboriginal First Nations on 
their land. And I think that’s a very important aspect also to 
look at. 
 
I wanted to also move in on the issues of education, excuse me, 
and health and economic development. On the education side, 
when I went to school we had about a handful of us going to 
university. Today I’m proud to report that we have over 2,000 
Indian and Metis people going to university. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — On the Metis side as well, on the Dumont 
Technical Institute, I looked at the figures that were given to me 
for ’98-99 and there was 709 students. Also being from the 
North, when there was just a handful of us as I mentioned, there 
are now over 2,000 people going to the Northlands College and 
university programs right from northern Saskatchewan. So 
we’re seeing progress and change taking place. 
 
(1530) 
 
I was actually very proud of the fact that I was involved as well 
with NORTEP, northern teacher education program when it 
started as a developer back in ’76. I’ve seen now over 200 
teachers, you know, have graduated from that program. 
 
We’re looking at also the health development. When I was 
growing up and I went back to the North in the early ’70s, most 
of the controls on the North were external and we started to see 
northern control develop much as we saw in the more longer 
term on the rural development side. But in the North we started 
to see a bit of a control coming in when the Blakeney 
government was there and we saw the controls moving in from 
the schools, to all the schools in the North. We saw the schools 
to the community college system being developed in the North. 
 
We also saw municipalities and northern municipal council, and 
in the early ’80s we had municipalities formed in the North. 
We’re now seeing the development of a control in the health 
area, northern control in health. We know its going to be very 
strategically important because such issues as diabetes, which 
takes away your sight, a lot of the basic organs, or where you 
lose your feet and you can’t walk. These types of issues are 
very important for our people as we try and solve not only the 
specific attack in regards to the illness question as it stands now 
but the long-term preventative approach and nutrition and 
activity. 
 
As I looked at the question therefore of health, I move on into 
economic development and jobs. My grandfather, who is buried 
in P.A. (Prince Albert), on my dad’s side, worked in the mining 
development and he hurt himself as he worked in the 
transporting the ore. Later on he got TB (tuberculosis) and he 
died in Prince Albert. 
 
But as I looked at the development, very few of our people were 
involved in the early stage of development. During construction 
phases a few of us were there but then later on, on development 
phases most northern people weren’t around. 
 
What I would like to report now is this. From the early days of 
5 per cent, half of the workforce on the mining sector today is 
Northerners. It’s a combination of Aboriginal people, Metis and 
treaty Indians, as well as non-Aboriginal people. Out of that 
total number 86 per cent are Aboriginal people. 
 
So what we’re seeing is progress not only in regards to the job 
site at the labour development level, but also in regards to the 
apprenticeable trades on electricians, etc. 
 
So we’re seeing that development. Another thing we’re seeing 
is the entrepreneurial side of development which was there in 



December 9, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 93 

the fur trade period, diminished later on. And we see now, on 
the mining development, we had about $20 million worth of 
contracts in 1991. I’d like to report that last year, we had $180 
million worth of contracts for northern entrepreneurs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — It showed that northern businesses could 
compete at the world level because uranium development, the 
essence of uranium development is here in the province of 
Saskatchewan. It is a high-tech area, is a highly involved area. 
It shows that northern workers and northern businesses can be 
successful and be partners of the development in this province. 
 
An Hon. Member: — And they all pay taxes too. 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — And my friend said, they all pay taxes as 
well. 
 
Also, the question of wild rice. Some people on the agricultural 
side may be very interested to know this. Wild rice 
development started in Ontario and also in Manitoba and also in 
the Great Lakes area in the United States. 
 
What I would like to report to you is this. Over the past two 
years, and I looked at the reports for this fall, Saskatchewan is 
now the producer of 80 per cent of the wild rice in Canada. 
Saskatchewan is now 80 per cent of production in Canada. And 
I think that speaks well in regards to the supports that have been 
there. The partnerships with government, the partners with each 
other in business over the years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — There is also a fisheries report that I will 
be dealing with earlier on this year, early into the new year, 
trying to do a balanced approach between angling and 
commercial fishing. We’ll probably be looking at the policies 
and ideas and new ideas for development in that area. 
 
The last one I’d like to report on economic development side is 
forestry. As I was growing up, my father was also a sawyer in 
the sawmill, as many of our people worked at the sawmills 
around Cumberland House. 
 
And I’d like to report now that as we were . . . the early stage of 
development in the ’50s, and it evolved into the more 
development in the ’70s, it went up into a little bit of a 
stagnation and now it’s time to pick up again. 
 
What I would say in the forestry is that it was important not 
only to look at the training, the jobs, the ownership, and the 
management side, but it was important to take into 
consideration that on the business development side we are now 
combined a policy of balancing environment with economic 
development. Sustainable development is now part of the 
picture with the new legislation as well as the new policies of 
government. 
 
What I would say there is that Northerners, as we enter the new 
century, when we saw self-determination in education, 
municipalities, and health in this province including the North, 
we are now seeing the revival of self-determination in economic 

development. Particularly in the forestry sector, I would say 
this: we are now involved not only on the business development 
side but on the forest-management side. 
 
On the east side we have the Peter Ballantyne Cree Nation 
partnered with Ainsworth and moving forward on development 
in that area at Deschambault Lake and different phases into the 
future in that area. La Ronge Indian Band, Zelensky Brothers, 
partnering with a major company which they will be talking 
about later on in the future in the central area in and around La 
Ronge. 
 
On the west side we have Metis people, five Metis communities 
coming together and they’re now searching for a partner to do 
the development on the west side. And to me this is come full 
circle from training, jobs, management, ownership, and forestry 
management as a whole. We are now partners in that regard. 
 
In conclusion, I would like to say this. There are people out 
there watching, some of them are in the hospital, and sometimes 
they tell me it is very important for you to say a few words in 
our language to explain to us what happens in the legislature. 
Sometimes as they’re watching the TV they are very, very 
pleased when I tell them in our language what is happening in 
the House, so I will follow up some commentary, quick 
commentary in that regard. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, the policies and politics of 
inclusion has got to be the mark of the new century. True unity 
has to occur from all peoples — Aboriginal and 
non-Aboriginal. True unity has to occur from the rural area to 
the North to the urban areas. 
 
It is my dream, as I look into the future, as I see my children 
growing up, that they’ll be working hand in hand with the 
people from the farm, people from the trapline, and people from 
the city. And I think that will be a very important mark, Mr. 
Speaker, as we enter the next century. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I feel both privileged 
and humbled to speak in this legislature on behalf of the 
constituents of Estevan. I do not rise before you as a 
professional politician or as a person who possesses great 
oratorical skills; I stand before you as someone who cares 
deeply for mankind. 
 
I represent a constituency of very proud but concerned people. 
They are concerned, Mr. Speaker, at the direction this province 
has taken. They are concerned about the erosion of democracy. 
They feel that no one is listening. 
 
My constituents, whether they be farmers, labourers, or 
business people, are hard-working, proud people. They are, 
however, pessimistic, and they feel that there is no incentive to 
work as high taxes prevent them from making ends meet. The 
people of the Estevan constituency need concrete programs to 
restore their faith in our province. 



94 Saskatchewan Hansard December 9, 1999 

Mr. Speaker, I would now like to tell you and the members of 
this Assembly about the constituency of Estevan. 
 
We have vast grain fields that produce the highest quality grains 
in the world. We have the Estevan, Midale and Goodwater oil 
fields that are thriving with activity. We have one of the largest 
coal mining industries in Saskatchewan. Estevan has the 
Rafferty dam, which incidentally, Mr. Speaker, has very high 
levels of water in it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — We have the Boundary dam power station, the 
Shand power station, the Shand greenhouse which starts trees 
and ships them throughout the province. Estevan has a very 
modern hospital that was built in 1990-91 and opened in 
November 1991. Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, this government 
cannot take credit for that. 
 
Our SARCAN operation employs numerous physically and 
mentally challenged people. Mr. Speaker, in addition to the 
exceptional labour opportunities in Estevan and area, we have 
prided ourselves on the fact that we promote artistic talents as 
well. 
 
The Souris Valley theatre is an outdoor theatre that runs for a 
few weeks in the summer and brings in professional actors and 
actresses from all over the world, and even showcases local 
talent. This event is sponsored by Estevan Tourism and plays to 
packed houses. Mr. Speaker, this event is so well renowned that 
people from different parts of the world come to take in the 
talent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are very many reasons why I got involved in 
politics. I was encouraged by my family and friends to help 
make a difference in this province. I would at this time like to 
thank my husband, Vic, who has always been there for me with 
moral support. And I would also like to thank my children, 
Terry and Trisha, and my daughter-in-law Marnell. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, there are also some little people who are so 
special in my life and they are my grandchildren, Beau, Brooke, 
Shelby and Bailee. Mr. Speaker, these young kids are the future 
of our province and I just hope that there’s something left for 
them. 
 
I was raised . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — I was raised in a large family and my mother 
and father still live in Estevan. I am so thankful for the moral 
values that they have instilled in me. My father is 82 years old, 
and every day during the election campaign he kept everyone in 
line on coffee row. My mother was recuperating from surgery, 
but she did her share of baking for the office, and stuffed 
envelopes, something I think we can all relate to, Mr. Speaker. 
But for all their hard work, prayers, and dedication, I thank 
them. 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned before, constituents of Estevan are 

very proud people. Farmers that are fourth and fifth generation 
on the family farm do not know if they’ll be around in the 
spring. Low commodity prices, high freight rates, and 
astronomical input costs are making it virtually impossible to 
continue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to remind this Assembly of the 
farmwives and children whom along with their husbands 
receive no pay for their work. Every want is met with this 
response — maybe next year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we all witnessed in this Assembly earlier this 
week with farm delegations telling us their trying stories of the 
farm crisis, this devastation is leading to families literally 
falling apart, and even in extreme cases, suicide. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the past year I have attended a number of 
farm rallies and I’ve heard some heart-wrenching stories. 
Maybe this has had a greater impact on a person such as myself 
because I live with agriculture concerns every day. 
 
You see, Mr. Speaker, I am a farmer. I know what it’s like to 
get up at 4 o’clock in the morning to spray the crop before the 
wind gets up. I know what it is like to haul fuel to the combine 
at midnight. I know that a small electronic sensor for the tractor, 
which incidentally, Mr. Speaker, would fit in the palm of my 
hand, costs over $300. I know what rub bars for the combine 
cost, and I also know how little we are getting for our product. 
 
I realize that some of this is due to international grain wars. But 
I feel this provincial government must shoulder much of the 
responsibilities since they are the ones that can lower the 
education portion of land taxes, they can reduce income tax and 
fuel tax. They are the ones who are now promising some sort of 
long-term safety net, but they are also the ones who tore up 
GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) in the first place. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Mr. Speaker, GRIP was bankable; this Throne 
Speech is not. It has taken eight years of socialism and havoc in 
rural Saskatchewan for this government to realize that there is a 
crisis out there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, farming is the only industry where you buy 
everything retail, sell everything wholesale, and pay the freight 
both ways. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it has also taken eight years and a near-death 
experience for this government to listen to people regarding tax 
reduction, health care, and education. 
 
As I said before, Mr. Speaker, I am not a professional politician, 
nor do I ever want to be accused of being one. I am not here to 
take Regina’s message to Estevan; I am here to bring my 
constituents’ concerns to Regina. And fortunately, Mr. Speaker, 
I sit on this side of the House with a party that allows its 
members free votes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — I take very seriously the trust that has been 
bestowed upon me by my constituents, and in return I trust 



December 9, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 95 

these people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what I am very skeptical about is trusting a 
government who repeatedly states in the Throne Speech that the 
people told us to do this and the people told us to do that. Quite 
frankly, Mr. Speaker, what 60 per cent of the people of this 
province told this administration was that they did not want 
them to continue to govern. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — But with their arrogance and manipulation that 
60 per cent of the people voted against, they brokered a 
backroom deal for majority status. 
 
They promised tax relief over time, better health care over time, 
better education over time, better agricultural policies over time, 
and better highways — although we hope this is happening, 
because that wasn’t even mentioned in the Throne Speech. 
 
What this says to me, Mr. Speaker, is that their plan has not 
worked. And while I am talking about what was left out of the 
Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, this government forgot to mention 
our most important link to the history of Saskatchewan — our 
seniors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do not want to belabour this much longer 
because just like the past eight years of the NDP government, 
the Throne Speech has been a complete disappointment. I 
would, however, like to finish with a statement that I have held 
very near and dear to my heart for a long time, and I dedicate 
this to all the farmers of the province. 
 
I believe that a man’s greatest possession is his dignity and that 
no calling bestows this more abundantly than farming. I believe 
that hard work and honest sweat are the building blocks of a 
person’s character. I believe that farming, despite its hardships 
and disappointments, is the most honest and honourable way a 
man can spend his days on earth. 
 
I believe my children are learning values that will last a lifetime 
and can be learned in no other way. I believe that many of the 
best things in life are free — the splendour of a sunrise, the 
rapture of wide open spaces, the exhilarating sight of your land 
greening each spring. 
 
I believe true happiness comes from watching your crops ripen 
in the field, your children grow tall in the sun, your whole 
family feels the pride that springs from their shared experience. 
 
I believe when a man grows old and sums up his day, he should 
be able to stand tall and feel pride in the life he has lived. I 
believe in farming because this makes it all possible. 
 
And with that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to state that I support 
the amendment put forth by the member from 
Rosetown-Biggar. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, thank you. It’s indeed 
an honour to stand in this legislature. It is every time, but I’m 
always reminded right after an election when I hear speeches 

from new members about how tremendously capable 
Saskatchewan people are, Mr. Speaker. The very finest people 
in this province tend to work their way up through election and 
ultimately wind up sitting in this very legislature. And I say that 
quite sincerely about members on both sides of the legislature. 
 
There are times, of course, when, you know, they’re the enemy 
and we’re their enemy. But the motivation of politicians to do 
well for their communities, for their families, for their province, 
I think is something that is virtually universal amongst all of us 
that are so honoured by our constituents to spend some time 
here in this great Legislative Assembly. 
 
So my first words are words of welcome to all new members 
and welcome back to those of us that have served one or more 
terms before this term. I hope that your time here is well-spent 
and relatively productive for the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan. So I wish all new members and all members the 
best of luck. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — My second words, Mr. Speaker, are of course 
congratulations to you in your election as Speaker of this 
Legislative Assembly. It is, I know, an honour that you take 
very seriously and one that I have always had the utmost 
confidence that you will fulfill that role very well. So 
congratulations to you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — I go back a little bit to all of us and what it is to 
be a politician. Because, Mr. Speaker, I think too often in the 
last — pick your number of years, whether it be 10, 15, 20 
years — I think it’s too often in Saskatchewan we have said no, 
I’m not a professional politician. I mean what are we, what are 
we really saying? We’re saying that we want to get elected to be 
a politician to help our constituents, but no I’m not a politician. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I take exactly the opposite view to that. I 
think there is no more honourable calling. There are callings as 
honourable, but there is no more honourable calling in the entire 
world than that of being elected by your peers, your 
community, and enjoying the support of your family and the 
majority of your community — the majority of your electorate 
— and be charged with the responsibility of standing up and 
speaking out on behalf of those very same constituents. There is 
no higher calling. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I’ve heard tremendous 
speeches on both sides of the House. My colleague from Regina 
Qu’Appelle has dared to dream. We’ve seen people talking 
about their wishes for the future. Some of the wishes for the 
future even tie in to the Speech from the Throne, and that’s kind 
of a happy coincidence in some instances. But this being a 
wide-ranging topic, it’s a good opportunity for members to say 
what they want and for members to describe their constituencies 
and their own personal aspirations. 
 
I must confess, Mr. Speaker, that I thought as I was preparing 
for this speech, I should put a little bit of a historical perspective 



96 Saskatchewan Hansard December 9, 1999 

to, to what the government is about, what things are like in 
Saskatchewan. This is — I know it’s hard to believe when you 
see such a young guy here — this is my fourth term. I was, I 
was the kid when I was first elected. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you. Let’s . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Yes, now I’m the grandpa of the place. I don’t think I’m 
entirely washed up yet or at least I hope not. I can tell you all 
that the first term I was in this House, Mr. Speaker, was an 
opposition term and it was relatively easy, relatively fun, 
relatively challenging because I was busy learning the operation 
of the legislature. And of course we were concerned. We had 
some different visions of how the province should be run than 
they . . . than government had. 
 
The second term, Mr. Speaker, was in government, and the 
second term was the first term in government. And what it was 
about was simply, simply salvaging our province and our ability 
to control our future. There was a . . . urgent would be hugely 
understating the need to get our finances in control. 
Saskatchewan was right at the brink of economic disaster and 
an inability to even meet government payroll cheques. 
 
But we got through that. A million people worked together and, 
to the credit of all of the good people of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, we got through that. 
 
And then we got into the third term, which of course led up to 
the September election. And in the third term, I saw a corner 
being turned in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, in the third term, 
by the end of that third term, we had completed five in a row 
balanced surplus budgets. Admittedly, they were skinny surplus 
budgets, but they were surplus budgets. 
 
At the same time, Mr. Speaker, the debt of the province had 
been reduced by more than $3.4 billion, resulting in savings of 
well over $200 million a year in interest charges on the debt 
alone. 
 
So that enabled us in the second term of government, Mr. 
Speaker, to introduce things like the children’s action plan 
which Saskatchewan pioneered. It’s now a national program but 
started right here in Saskatchewan. And it was the 
Saskatchewan government that developed it and ponied up the 
money. 
 
We also were able to take the first few modest steps at 
improving some services. We were putting some more money 
into highways and certainly more money into health and 
education. But we were also, Mr. Speaker, reducing taxes, the 
first tentative steps of reducing taxes. The PST (provincial sales 
tax) had gone from 9 to 7, and then two years later to 6 per cent 
— where it is today. The income tax rate had dropped through 
that term. 
 
And that leads us now to this term. This September election 
leads us to those of us gathered in this great Chamber right now. 
And it leads us, Mr. Speaker, to the brand new day, the Speech 
from the Throne. It leads us to a coalition government that is 
working as diligently as any administration I have ever seen, as 
diligently as any — any — government I have ever seen. To 

listen carefully to what it is people have to say, then to 
formulate a workable plan that is affordable, sustainable, and 
the best plan that we can possibly have for Saskatchewan 
people. It is wonderful, from my perspective, to see the 
approach that is being taken now — the very careful, listening 
approach. 
 
And I know that I’ll have a few words, Mr. Speaker, about the 
task that my seatmate, the member for Moose Jaw North, has 
taken on in his post as Minister of Post-Secondary Education 
and the challenge that he has taken on to find the means to 
fulfill what I’ll describe as the coalition dream — the coalition 
government’s dream. 
 
(1600) 
 
There was two, two parties, Mr. Speaker. In the last election 
there were two parties that spoke to post-secondary education; 
that spoke to accessibility of post-secondary education — the 
Democrats and Liberals. Two parties. 
 
The opposition spoke to education. Their answer was, of 
course, lower taxes and students will be able to afford 
post-secondary education. Well it might work, might work. But 
I want to point just one thing out to all opposition members. 
When you’re in the business of talking about lowering income 
taxes so that your constituents presumably can afford to go to 
post-secondary education or can afford to do whatever it is they 
want, the little fact that I want you to think about and ask about 
and perhaps see — well over 75 per cent of the income tax paid 
to the province of Saskatchewan comes from the cities. 
 
So an income tax reduction, an income tax reduction, an income 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I’m reminded, Mr. Speaker, of a 
former colleague of mine in the House that said, you know, if in 
the dark of night if you throw a rock and you hear a yip, you 
know you’ve hit a dog. I think we struck a sore spot. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Anyway, I simply leave that and invite all 
members on both sides of the legislature to check that out and 
see what it is, what the real situation is with respect to income 
tax. 
 
And that’s certainly not an argument that we should not lower 
income tax. Indeed, indeed, in the Throne Speech card that we 
are handing out as far and wide as we possibly can, Mr. 
Speaker, the very, very first thing says: helping families make 
ends meet. We will work together. And it says, and I quote: 
 

We will reduce personal income tax to help families make 
ends meet and to build a fairer, simpler tax system. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that’s the commitment in the Speech from the 
Throne. That’s a commitment that we have made. I hear some 
heckles saying when. Well, isn’t it interesting. The process for 
all members for the province of Saskatchewan has always been 
you have a Throne Speech debate, and in March generally, 
some time in March. Occasionally it’s been as late as June . . . 
May or June. 1986, the Grant Devine Conservatives — was it 
May or was it June when they tabled the budget? It was very 
late, May or June. June. 



December 9, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 97 

Outside of that little piece of history, the budget has come down 
in March, possibly as late as early April. That’s when we find 
out the details of income tax reductions and so on. 
 
But I want to do this. I want to congratulate both the Premier 
and the Minister of Finance for putting together the group to go 
out and ask the people of Saskatchewan, to hold public 
meetings, to seek input, to find out what it is that people of this 
great province think is needed to form a fairer income tax 
system, a fairer tax system in all. So my congratulations to the 
Premier and the Minister of Finance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — The debate on the taxes, of course, is going to 
turn, Mr. Speaker. It is going to turn into a debate of — is the 
report acceptable in this area, in that area? Do we like what they 
have to say about the provincial sales tax? Do we like what they 
have to say about the reduction of income tax? Do we like what 
they have to recommend in that report about funnelling some 
rebate, a tax credit, of $15 million to the lowest income people. 
 
Those were all absolutely fair questions. Those are questions 
that quite frankly we’re going to debate on the government 
caucus side, and we’ll have that debate before the resolution or 
action comes to the floor of the Legislative Assembly. But more 
importantly, I’m hoping that the discussion takes place right 
across the province of Saskatchewan. Because this is how this 
consultation process is how we can bring out the very finest as 
we’re about to make changes. And this proposal is a 
fundamental shift in the tax system of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the brand new day Speech from the Throne, we 
talk about a bright future for our young people. We will act, it 
says, to make post-secondary education more accessible for 
families. Mr. Speaker, I’ve mentioned that my seatmate, the 
Minister responsible for Post-Secondary Education, is in a 
broad consultation process right now, is in fact starting to put 
together and meld the proposal of the coalition partners where 
the New Democrat side are part of the coalition. 
 
We’re saying we will pay first-year tuition fees at 
post-secondary institutions such as community colleges, SIAST 
(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology), 
and university; and the Liberal proposal which was a thousand 
dollars for each student in each of the first two years of 
post-secondary education. 
 
Obviously the two promises, if I can describe it that way, or 
election platforms, don’t exactly fit. You can’t do both. We 
could do one or the other. Or maybe there’s a third way to skin 
the cat, so to speak. 
 
And this is part of a challenge that my seatmate has, and I want 
to wish him all of the very best. And I know that he is going to 
be up to the challenge. And after the consultation process and 
the consideration process of discussions that go on, I’m very 
confident that this spring we will have a proposal ready and 
brought before the Legislative Assembly. I very much look 
forward to that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the Speech from the Throne we talked about 
fighting for rural families, and I quote: 

We will speak with one voice to urge our federal 
government to meet its responsibility to our farm families 
by negotiating aggressively at world trade talks for 
elimination of export subsidies and by providing an 
immediate trade equalization payment. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s the commitment that the government 
brings to this operation. Indeed we disrupted, if I . . . or took a 
break in the Throne Speech debate to invite representatives of 
farm organizations to this very Legislative Chamber — this 
very Chamber. 
 
And why did we use this Chamber, Mr. Speaker? Part of it is 
the symbolism; part of it is the vast area where people could 
come and watch; part of it is the media services that are right 
here. Part of it, frankly, is we’ve got the ability to televise what 
is said. 
 
We went for the whole day and late into the night, got nearly 50 
pages of verbatim text from people who made, and groups who 
made presentations here. Mr. Speaker, speak with one voice — 
we will speak with one voice, standing up for the farm families 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
I just want to get a little bit . . . I guess maybe it’s viewed as 
partisan; I view it as more standing up for Saskatchewan 
farmers and standing up for my relatives on the farm and 
standing up in memory of my farm background, the farm that I 
grew up on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re committed to standing up and speaking with 
one voice. The problem, as I see it, is we were very 
instrumental in organizing an on-to-Ottawa trek. We flew a 
planeload of people, including some members of the opposition 
party, to Ottawa. 
 
The idea was to speak with one voice — one voice — saying 
we need this trade equalization payment; we’ve been unfairly 
treated. To say our farmers, Saskatchewan farmers, can 
compete with any farmer anywhere in the world, if the rules are 
the same. The rules are not the same, so we need a trade 
equalization payment from the federal government. There’s no 
magic to it. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we got there. The federal government threw 
a little bit of a curve ball and said, no, here’s some new 
information that you should have had. Well the plane hadn’t 
even landed in Regina and the Leader of the Opposition was 
saying, the Saskatchewan government somehow withheld 
information; the Saskatchewan government somehow misled. 
 
One voice, Mr. Speaker — boy, that really builds credibility 
when you’ve got one unified voice like that. I just wish that 
somebody could explain to me how those actions will help get 
one extra penny into the pockets of farmers in your 
constituencies. Tell me how those actions get one more penny. 
 
And then, Mr. Speaker, we go on. We see question period, and 
question period is an opportunity for questions to be asked of 
government, and this is all fine and good. But it seems to me 
that there are issues beyond the credibility of numbers in 
agriculture. We should be using this legislature at this time for 
what it was called for, and that was to speak with a unified 



98 Saskatchewan Hansard December 9, 1999 

voice. 
 
Go to Ottawa, continue the pressure from here for this week and 
next week and whatever other length of time this legislature 
sits. But use that. That’s what we were charged with doing. 
That’s what our constituents expect and think this session is 
about. So, Mr. Speaker, I’m urging that we do that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are committed in the Throne Speech to 
developing better health care. We’re committing to strengthen 
the regional hospitals, to strengthen home care and emergency 
services. We’re going to be reducing key waiting times. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I suspect that all of us in the recent election, 
all of us had some constituents that expressed some concern 
about the waiting time for a friend or a relative or just an 
acquaintance to get into surgery. And I know we all heard some 
of those stories. We heard them, and we’re committed to 
working and doing what we can to reduce the waiting times. 
 
I wish it could just happen at the snap of a finger. I wish we 
could just somehow get the Minister of Finance to pony up 
another $50 million and the problem would be solved. Of 
course it’s not that simple; it never is. But we’re committed to 
reducing those waiting times, and I’m very much looking 
forward to that happening. 
 
Part of it is we’re committed to train and recruit and hire more 
front-line health workers; take some of the pressure off. We had 
a strike in June that was disruptive, to put it mildly. 
 
From my perspective, Mr. Speaker, I know that there are nurses 
in my constituency that were — I don’t know whether it’s 
parliamentarian of me to say — but they were spitting mad at 
me, at the government, during the last election. I also had 
nurses that were very, very understanding during the last 
election. And I mean, you can figure out how the votes went in, 
depending on which sort of camp those nurses were in. 
 
But we did make a commitment, Mr. Speaker, that we’re going 
to hire more front-line workers. And that’s a commitment that 
we’ve started to follow through on and one that we will 
continue to do so. 
 
(1615) 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the things that the opposition has raised, 
and probably legitimately raised, is that of, I’ll describe it as a 
PURC (Public Utilities Review Commission), to review the 
Crown corporations’ rates. We had a PURC in the Devine 
government, and the opposition has been calling for a more 
open accountability, if I can describe it that way, a process that 
is more transparent on the setting of rates in our Crown 
corporations. 
 
We are committing to move to a yet more accountable, yet more 
open method of addressing that. So, Mr. Speaker, I am quite 
pleased about that. 
 
There are other things that we are committed to doing in this 
Speech from the Throne. But, Mr. Speaker, seeing the time and 
knowing that there are other MLAs that would like to address 
this Speech from the Throne, I will be taking my place. But 

before I do, let me again congratulate all members on their 
election to this legislature. I look forward to working with each 
of you in the coming term. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I will not be supporting the 
amendment but I will be supporting the motion. 
 
I thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to introduce to you, 
and then through you to all the members of the House, a 
constituent of mine, a well-known and well-respected farmer 
from Davidson, a man who was a great help in my election 
campaign, Mr. Clark Puckett. 
 
Now that I’m a new member and this is my first week here, I’m 
going to be asked probably, what’s it like. Well so far it’s been 
like going to school. The bell rings, you come to your desk, it’s 
full of papers, there’s always lots of homework to do, and 
you’re expected to know everything about anything. You can be 
called upon any time to answer a question. And like any school 
there’s always a classroom full of kids that think they know 
everything. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the constituents of Arm River, I 
would like to extend my congratulations to all the members of 
this twenty-fourth Assembly of the Saskatchewan legislature. It 
is my hope that everyone here realizes the faith that 
Saskatchewan residents have put in us for the cause of 
democracy and freedom. It is my firm belief that we can, 
working together, and the co-operation, attain for the people of 
Saskatchewan the level of honesty, commitment, and above all, 
action, needed to deal with the serious problems of today. 
 
I must begin, Mr. Speaker, by saying how proud I am to 
represent the great constituency of Arm River. I sincerely want 
to thank all those who supported me in the recent election. I am 
indeed honoured to be here and will work hard for all the 
residents of Arm River to ensure that their concerns are swiftly 
addressed. 
 
I would also like to thank all of the volunteers on my campaign 
team who worked very hard and supported me and indeed 
continue to support me here today. I thank you, to my 
constituency assistant, Donna Petit, for all her efforts in keeping 
my office in Davidson running smoothly. 
 
I would also like to thank legislative staff and the Saskatchewan 
Party caucus staff for all their help which is greatly appreciated. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Arm River constituency has always been a 
place as diverse as any in the province, both in the land and in 
its people. From its prairie agriculture base to industry, and lake 
resorts; and from farmers, to ranchers, business people, working 
people, Arm River continues to be a model of rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
As well, my constituency is one of the most visible examples of 
rural life with No. 11 running the whole length of it, from 
Regina Beach in the south, runs past Dundurn to the north. My 
constituency also stretches to Riverhurst in the west and 



December 9, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 99 

Imperial in the east. 
 
The residents of Arm River, Mr. Speaker, are people proud of 
their past, concerned about the present, and quite worried about 
the future. No two groups represent this concern more than our 
prairie grain producers and our First Nations people. Farmers 
are facing economic collapse and the loss of their entire way of 
life. First Nations, notably the Dakota/Sioux of Whitecap 
reserve in Arm River, feel increasingly isolated and ignored by 
big government who are more worried about votes than the 
future of Native people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my constituents feel that as this province moves 
into the 21st century, they’re being left behind with commodity 
prices more in tune to the beginning of the 20th century rather 
than the 21st. Residents feel that both the provincial and federal 
governments have abandoned them and left them with trade war 
prices versus ever high inputs with no end in sight. My 
constituents are increasingly in fear of losing their whole way 
of life as no government solutions seem forthcoming. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that this government has no direction to 
lead us into the 21st century and I believe that this is indeed the 
worst crisis in agriculture since the 1930s. 
 
It is with serious concerns that I enter this great Assembly for 
the first time. My roots in politics began as a youth at our farm 
just outside of Bladworth. My father always said, Mr. Speaker, 
that politics was always a hot item in Saskatchewan. We spent 
much time discussing the various philosophies and issues in our 
province and in our country. 
 
Later on I served for many years on the Bladworth town council 
and still belong to the local Elks club which has been honoured 
to host the Corby Cup at the Davidson complex in January, year 
2000. 
 
Seems as though public service is in my destiny. With the 
founding of our party in 1997, my interest in provincial politics 
grew intensely. I believe this party has a great group of MLAs, 
an excellent group of MLAs, an excellent leader. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brkich: — With this, Saskatchewan will have a brighter 
future. And I want to help the people in Arm River and indeed 
the province realize that vision. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my reasons for running are much the same, I 
suppose, as many of my colleagues here around me. As a 
farmer and resident of the small town of Bladworth, I’m deeply 
disturbed about what I see happening. My hometown was once 
a thriving community not so many years ago but has since been 
in decline, losing its school and its businesses including the 
closure of every grain elevator. 
 
Under this present government, if things continue on, I will see 
where Bladworth disappears right off the map. All that remains, 
Mr. Speaker, right now is a post office and the shadow of the 
population that once was. The same can be said in the country 
as my friends and neighbours slowly but steadily leave the land. 
 
But all is far from lost. Communities such as Kenaston and 

Davidson, as well as others, have continued to miss the 
economic downturn and to be vibrant and inspired by a spirit of 
inventiveness and determination. Kenaston for example, 
demonstrated how a small idea could develop into a community 
saving enterprise. 
 
The result, Mr. Speaker, is the Kenaston Super Draft has since 
supported a new town hall, improvements to the local rink, a 
new roof for the swimming pool. In Davidson, where my office 
is located, two new concrete elevators and a potash bagging 
plant help to keep Davidson on the map. 
 
Another example, Mr. Speaker, would be Outlook. Through 
irrigation they have developed crops such as peas, beans, and 
potatoes on their own. Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, we all know 
too well what happened when SPUDCO (Saskatchewan Potato 
Utility Development Company) tried to control the potato 
industry and what followed afterwards. 
 
It would be wishful thinking on my part to want everything the 
way it was even 20 or 30 years ago. We must think in real terms 
for immediate future. As we head into the 21st century, a 
review of the last century becomes necessary. As Saskatchewan 
became a province, we see the pioneering era at its height. 
Along rail lines, towns are springing up and communities were 
born. A rapid influx of people from all over the world and the 
United States were populating a new land. 
 
Saskatchewan went on to grow and prosper despite two world 
wars and the Great Depression. And through it all, governments 
of all political persuasion have managed to keep us in the game 
if you will. That is until the last decade. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I talked to people throughout Arm River during 
the election campaign, the opinions I heard ranged from 
cautious optimism to outright apathy. Through it all, the 
message was that this government wasn’t listening and that they 
believed the government was abandoning rural Saskatchewan. 
 
They told me that while they realized that debate in this 
Assembly is a cornerstone of democracy, at the same time 
action is also needed as a fruit of the debate process. 
 
Simply put, this government has talked about agriculture for 
years; they’ve talked about health care for years; they’ve talked 
about high taxes for years; and we’ve been bouncing over 
crumbling highways for far too many years. 
 
The people of Arm River are not asking this government for 
miracles, but they do expect action, Mr. Speaker. These 
residents only want to make a decent living in the rural 
Saskatchewan they love. They look forward, hoping for brighter 
future in the 21st century. It is my hope that the beautiful 
constituency of Arm River remains a vibrant and integral part 
of this great province. 
 
My predecessors, Mr. Harvey McLane and, particularly, Mr. 
Gerald Muirhead, established a solid reputation as men of the 
people by listening and acting on the concerns of their 
constituents. I will work very hard to maintain that level of 
service to all Arm River residents. My office door will always 
be open and I will always be just a phone call away. 
 



100 Saskatchewan Hansard December 9, 1999 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, I would like to say that the new 
millennium offers great promise for Saskatchewan and that I 
will put forth the maximum effort in weeks, months, and years 
ahead to realize a bright future for this province. To begin this 
brighter future, we must address the many vital concerns in 
Saskatchewan today. By taking action on vital issues, I believe 
that the key, our destiny, can be forged. 
 
And finally, one last thought. I firmly believe, as my colleagues 
around me also believe, that public service begins at the 
grassroots level and at the grassroots level it should stay. 
 
I would also like to wish everybody a Merry Christmas and a 
Happy New Year. It is with that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to 
state that I support the amendment put forth by my colleague 
from Rosetown-Biggar. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — It is with great pleasure I rise to speak and give 
my maiden speech in this Assembly. I’d prepared a speech but 
I’ve decided to set it aside and instead speak from the heart. 
 
I’d like first to start by thanking you, Mr. Speaker, and 
congratulating you on your election as Speaker. And don’t 
mistake it, you were elected. You were elected because of your 
reputation and conduct in this Assembly and your 25 years that 
you gave to the people of this country serving as a member of 
the Royal Canadian Mounted Police. Make no doubt. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — As I heard the rhetoric from the members across, 
that you were not elected, I didn’t see any of them put forward 
their name to stand opposed to you. This leaves you with the 
complete faith, in my mind, of all members of this Assembly. 
Because if they had chosen, they could have ran against you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to thank the Premier and the Leader 
of the Liberal Party for having the courage to go beyond their 
own differences, their own biases, and having the courage to 
form a coalition government. It gave us an opportunity for a 
brand new day. 
 
Leadership, Mr. Speaker, requires courage. And the Leader of 
the Liberal Party and the Premier of this province were able to 
step outside the normal boundaries, their biases, their feelings, 
and the past to create a brand new day. 
 
I’d also like to thank all my colleagues from both parties in the 
coalition for working together to find common ground to 
establish a platform that we were able to put forward in a very 
dynamic Throne Speech. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to thank the constituents of 
Regina Dewdney because, Mr. Speaker, they’ve elected me not 
once but twice in the past year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1630) 
 
Mr. Yates: — I want to talk a little bit about the constituency of 

Regina Dewdney because many of you, particularly in the 
opposition, may not have much reference or background about 
the constituency that I represent. 
 
I’d like to tell you it is a constituency of middle-class, working 
people. It has men and women who labour all day in industries 
around and in Regina. It has seniors who have put their time in 
working in this community. And yes, it even has a large number 
of farmers. Within two blocks of my own home, I can count no 
less than a dozen farmers. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I have heard references that the agricultural 
crisis is only a rural issue. I want to correct that myth because 
as I speak with my constituents, they all understand the 
devastation, the hurt, and the pain being experienced in rural 
Saskatchewan. Many of us who live in the city are only a 
generation or two off the farm. We all have relatives, friends, 
colleagues, who farm for a living and are experiencing that 
pain. 
 
We understand the problems faced by subsidies created by 
national treasuries of some of the largest countries and most 
profitable countries in the world. It’s not fathomable that the 
province of Saskatchewan can compete with the treasuries of 
the United States or the major countries of the European Union. 
It isn’t. Only our national government can compete for the 
massive treasuries of the United States and the European Union. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, one of the greatest challenges that we face as a 
government is to make the federal government take 
responsibility for the issue of trade subsidies and in fact provide 
the $1 billion to the farmers of Saskatchewan that they need. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to thank four people 
who are very, very close to me: my wife, Sheila; my daughter, 
Catherine; my son, Christopher; and my daughter, Deanna. As 
you all know public life takes a great deal from each and every 
one of us. Fortunately I have the support of my family, as I 
hope all my colleagues on both sides of the House have the 
continued support of theirs. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I don’t know how my wife votes. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Well as the hon. member from North Battleford 
has indicated, he’s not sure how his wife votes. That may be the 
case in many households. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, as a member of this Assembly, I have great 
pride in the tradition of this Assembly. The decisions made in 
this Chamber over the past 70 or 80 years have shaped each and 
every one of our lives. It’s made a difference in how we think, 
it’s made a difference in how our children think, and it will 
continue to make a difference how our grandchildren think. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to respond to a number of things I’ve heard 
in debate about the Throne Speech, and I want to start by 
perhaps having a fairly harsh criticism of some of my 
colleagues. Because as I heard opposite, I am supposed to be 
told which way to vote, that I don’t have the ability to have a 
free vote. Well whoever is responsible to tell me which way to 
vote — you didn’t do your job — and as the deputy whip, I 



December 9, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 101 

want you to come see me because we have to have a discussion. 
Or it may be my colleagues give me the benefit of having 
enough common sense to vote the right way, to vote with my 
conscience, and vote what’s best for my constituents in Regina 
Dewdney. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also have a number of concerns about comments 
made about the Throne Speech. So I took a few minutes to talk 
to the Minister of Health, to consult with her, and it may be that 
we will have to amend an Act of this legislature. Because, Mr. 
Speaker, I have found that hearing aids are not fully covered 
under the health plan, and I think we may have to make an 
amendment so that hearing aids are mandatory for all members 
of the opposition, because none of them heard the Throne 
Speech. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, there were many great things in this 
Throne Speech. It was a new day. A day of optimism and hope. 
As was indicated in the Throne Speech, this is a new voyage, 
with new eyes, and a new vision. A fundamentally different 
government. A coalition, a coalition government that’s going to 
take this province into the 21st century. 
 
I want to talk about a number of things we did promise or did 
bring forward in the Throne Speech. We made some very, very 
important announcements in the Throne Speech. And the detail 
— as it always is — will be followed up in a series of Bills put 
forward before this House and in the budget in the spring. 
That’s been the common practice for many, many years. 
 
But first I’d like to touch on a number of the issues that we 
talked about and brought forward in the Throne Speech. 
They’re issues that we heard on each and every doorstep in our 
constituencies, and I know I heard them in my constituency. 
And our first commitment was to help families make ends meet. 
 
As I walked and knocked on doors in my constituency, I heard 
people telling me about the difficulties they’ve been having in 
the last number of years paying their bills, getting ahead month 
to month. And we’re not insensitive to that. 
 
I heard seniors talk about how it was difficult to maintain and 
remain in their homes. We brought those issues back. We talked 
about it. And we have put forward a commitment to reduce 
personal income tax in the Throne Speech. And you’ll hear the 
details of that commitment in the budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also know the benefit of economic 
development, and each of us looks at that from a slightly 
different perspective, but we each know and understand that 
benefit. And we have, in the Throne Speech, introduced what 
will become a very clear piece of legislation for people in the 
future — some of the most aggressive economic development 
strategies that this province has ever seen. 
 
Those things are good for the people of Saskatchewan. But I 
also want to point out that with the exception of the agricultural 
sector, this province has done very well over the last number of 
years. Our economic growth has continued to build on previous 
growth and we have, through many of the last number of years, 
led this nation in economic growth. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — And I think that in itself, Mr. Speaker, that in 
itself is a major accomplishment. But I want us for just one 
second to think about what we would have been able to do had 
we not been handicapped with a noose around our neck when 
we became government in 1991. 
 
There’s no use finding blame, but the reality was we had 
extreme deficits and we had a long, established debt. We had 
built a debt of nearly $15 billion dollars before we were able — 
an NDP government, mind you — was able to turn the corner 
and start dealing with that debt. 
 
Today we pay more than $700 million annually on just the 
interest on that debt. If we didn’t have that debt, what could we 
do for the people of this province? 
 
It is not that every member on this side of the House — and I’m 
sure every member on the opposite side of the House — does 
not want to help in every way possible deliver the programs the 
people of Saskatchewan want. If we weren’t paying the $2 
million a day debt accumulated in the 1980s, we could do a 
great deal for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, my children will 
have to pay that debt off because that debt is going to be around 
for a long time. Eight to ten years of mismanagement can cost 
30 to 40 years to pay back. And that’s unfortunate. 
 
We must ensure that we never again put ourselves in a situation 
where we mortgage our children’s future, and perhaps in some 
cases, our grandchildren’s future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to talk about our commitment to 
young people. We want to create a province where there’s a 
bright future for young people. And in fact we have created a 
province where young people have advantages over many areas 
of the country. 
 
We will act to make post-secondary education more accessible 
to all students. There was a time when a grade 12 education 
prepared you to enter the workforce. Mr. Speaker, I would say 
to you today, as my children are preparing to enter that 
workforce, that a grade 12 no longer sets you up in a situation 
to be able to seek employment that will allow you to raise a 
family in this economy. 
 
So we are going to act on that. And we haven’t decided which 
of the platforms — New Democratic platform or the Liberal 
platform — we will actually implement or maybe some new 
amalgamation or idea. But we have a solid commitment to 
make post-secondary education more accessible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have indicated in the Throne Speech, that we 
are going to assume, as finances permit, a greater share of the 
education tax and the education portion of spending for K to 12. 
And if we didn’t have this debt today, we could probably 
assume it all. But unfortunately, we still have $2 million debt a 
day. 
 



102 Saskatchewan Hansard December 9, 1999 

I want again just touch for a second on rural families. Because 
there is no doubt in my mind that the greatest problem we face 
today is in rural Saskatchewan. The families living on farms in 
this province are in desperate situations in many cases. And we 
have made a commitment to work to help those families. 
Everyone in this Assembly — I mean everyone — knows that 
the solutions cannot be found within the confines of the 
provincial treasury. You know what money’s available. We all 
do. 
 
But we will do what we can. We will continue to push the 
federal government for $1 billion, but we will also look to see 
what innovative things can be done within the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to talk for a minute about health care. The 
NDP and CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) 
governments, the CCF under Tommy Douglas invented and 
brought in health care to this province. We’ve had the 
responsibility and subsequent NDP governments continue to 
build on the health care model. 
 
We’re making some very strong commitments in the area of 
health care. We will strengthen regional hospitals and 
emergency services, particularly in rural Saskatchewan. We’ve 
identified a need to increase emergency services in rural 
Saskatchewan outside of Regina and Saskatoon. We’ll increase 
funding for home care. We’ll make it more accessible for 
people. 
 
We have a commitment to reduce key waiting times for 
surgeries within this province. And we will do that. It’s not 
easy. There is no simple solutions. We can’t get surgeons to go 
to every community by just snapping our fingers. We can’t 
build new operating rooms overnight. We can’t find staff to 
man them simply by wanting it done. It requires work. It 
requires time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve also made a commitment to recruit, train, 
and hire more front-line health care workers. We need them. 
Nobody is denying that. We need more health care workers. 
We’ve made that commitment and we intend to live up to it. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we are going to deal and simplify the 
governance issues in health care. Put more money that currently 
is going to administration and put every available dollar into 
front-line services. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1645) 
 
Mr. Yates: — And perhaps our most important commitment for 
democracy is that we’re going to make government more open 
and accountable. 
 
I want to talk a little bit about the first time I came to this 
Assembly. I was 11 years old, in grade 6, and sat in the galleries 
and watched question period. And the one difference that 
strikes me and strikes to what I believe in is the fact that I did 
not see, when I came here as a young child, the banter, the 
interruptions, and the disrespect during question period. And 
that is something that as a child I remember. 
 

And I saw today the students from an elementary school sit up 
in that gallery and watched their reaction as they watched 
question period. And quite frankly they were dismayed. And we 
expect, as children, our parents and our leaders to lead by 
example. And, Mr. Speaker, I hope that in the future we can be 
a better example for those children who come to us. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about some of our 
other commitments around accountability. We are going to 
establish a permanent body to review utility rates in the Crown 
corporations, something that the members opposite have been 
asking for. And the members opposite have made a point of 
making that an issue as many years as I’ve followed the debate 
in the last few years. And we are going to do that, Mr. Speaker. 
We have heard, and are willing to take ideas that are good from 
all sources. A good idea is a good idea. 
 
We are also going to implement a comprehensive program of 
government accountability with goals and accomplishments 
clearly, and benchmarks clearly, laid out in annual reports to the 
people of Saskatchewan so that people can judge for themselves 
the government’s record on delivering services. 
 
We are also going to clearly put clear accountable benchmarks 
on health care so the people of Saskatchewan can, in fact, judge 
the accomplishments of the government over this four years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to talk about our commitment to 
Aboriginals and First Nations people. We are going to continue 
to work with First Nations people to make progress in the future 
so that Aboriginal people can feel that they are truly partners 
and involved within our society in this province. Aboriginal 
people for too long have looked inward from the outside. This 
province, if it wants to be inclusive, has to include all people as 
equals to move forward in the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to talk for a minute about public safety. We 
made a commitment that we were going to hire an additional 
200 police officers, and, if the members opposite follow the 
paper, they will know that the Minister of Justice has indicated 
we will live up to that commitment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are going to do all these things in an 
environment of co-operation and openness. We heard loud and 
clear on the doorsteps in my constituency, and I’m sure in many 
of the constituencies around this province, that people no longer 
wanted us to yell at each other, criticize each other, heckle each 
other, but in fact wanted government to be open, work together 
to solve the problems that face this province. 
 
And I think we have one good working example so far and I 
hope there are many more over the next four years. I wasn’t in 
the room, but I think it probably took a great deal of effort on 
the parts of all three political parties to put a united front 
together on the issue of the agricultural crisis. It’s not easy for 
people, who spend their time talking about their differences, to 
build a united position and an united front, to move forward on 
an issue. But my challenge to all of us is to not let one issue be 
the end of this resolve. Let’s build and look for other issues that 
we can build a common ground on to move forward. 
 



December 9, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 103 

Mr. Speaker, my constituents sent me to this Assembly to 
represent their interests, as did every member in this House, and 
that is what my task will be over the next four years. And I will 
carry through with that task with a respect that I think every 
member in this House deserves. 
 
Each and every member on both sides of this House came here 
wanting to represent their constituents to the best of their 
abilities. And, Mr. Speaker, I think we should allow each 
member the dignity to do that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank the members 
opposite for the opportunity to make this speech without being 
interrupted or heckled. I understand that’s a long-standing 
tradition, and I think that’s an excellent tradition. 
 
And I thank the members opposite and hope they continue in 
that tradition. One freebie, as people say, one shot — I would 
hope that type of rapport could continue on, but that will be 
determined by the members of this House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would think that it’s obvious to the members 
opposite and to my colleagues that I support the motion but not 
the amendment, and that I hope that we move forward together 
to make Saskatchewan a better place to live. Thank you. 
 
I would like to move adjournment of debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:53 p.m. 
 



 

 


