





























































Hansard: March 31, 1999


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 365 
 March 31, 1999 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy this 
morning, Mr. Speaker, to present petitions that were forwarded 
to me from the RM (rural municipality) of Reford No. 28. I’ll 
read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately start work on the rebuilding of our secondary 
highway system to provide for safe driving on what are 
becoming known as pothole roads, to enter into 
negotiations with SARM and SUMA for a long term plan 
of rural road restitution reflecting future needs, and to 
provide safety for all drivers as the new trucking regulation 
changes safety factors on these roads. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

All of these people, Mr. Speaker, come from the community of 
Nokomis, Saskatchewan and I presume the farm community as 
well. I’m happy to present them on their behalf. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To present a petition as 
well, reading the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide a review process with respect to family 
intervention to ensure the rights of responsible families are 
not being violated. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition I present is signed by individuals from 
the Saskatoon area. I so present. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
citizens asking for review of parental rights. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide a review process with respect to family 
intervention to ensure the rights of responsible families are 
not being violated. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from the 
communities of Melfort and Fairy Glen. I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I also have a petition to present 
today: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
abandon any plans to reduce acute care or close any more 

hospitals in the Parkland Health District and to release the 
district’s three-year strategic plan. 
 

People who have signed this petition are from all over 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have 
petitions to present today on behalf of Saskatchewan’s 
disenfranchised widows and the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to have the Workers’ 
Compensation Board Act amended whereby benefits and 
pensions are reinstated to disenfranchised widows and 
whereby all revoked pensions are reimbursed to them 
retroactively with interest to April 17, 1985. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from the Saskatoon area. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
also have a petition to present. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
abandon any plans to reduce acute care or close any more 
hospitals in the Parkland Health District and to release the 
district’s three-year strategic plan. 
 

The signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from the community of Speers. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m here to present 
petitions today. I’ll read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call upon the federal and 
provincial governments to address the issue of recent 
American and European grain subsidies and the resulting 
low commodity prices immediately, work with trading 
partners to reduce subsidies, and in the event no immediate 
progress is made, bridge the current cash shortfall 
appropriately in order to protect the Canadian and 
Saskatchewan producers. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

The signatures on all these petitions, Mr. Speaker, if I were to 
stand here and name each of the communities it would take the 
balance of this afternoon’s session. So I won’t do that but 
merely say that they come from petitioners from right across 
this great province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to rise again today to 
present petitions on behalf of the people of this province. The 
prayer reads as follows: 



366 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 1999 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call upon provincial and 
federal governments to immediately take steps to end 
unfair world subsidies and provide farmers with prompt 
relief from declining incomes, and act as watchdogs 
against rising input costs which are harming the rural 
economy. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I have petitions here today from right across this 
province. I’ll just name a few of the communities. We have 
them from Mayfair, from Spiritwood, from Leoville. We have 
them from Consul. We have them from Avonlea. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have some from Kindersley, some from 
Elrose, Cupar, Arborfield, Limerick, Wadena, Stoughton, and 
Corning, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have a lot here from Findlater, Disley, Bethune, which of 
course is in the great constituency of Arm River. We have them 
from Carnduff. We have them from Grenfell, Wolseley, all 
across the land, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I so present. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise with my 
colleagues here today and bring forward petitions. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call upon provincial and 
federal governments to immediately take steps to end 
unfair world subsidies and provide farmers with prompt 
relief from declining incomes, and act as watchdogs 
against rising input costs which are harming the rural 
economy. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions add to the thousands that my 
colleague just raised, and I see they’re from Kincaid, 
Hazenmore, Ponteix, Willow Bunch, Aneroid, Glentworth, 
Weyburn, Estevan, Bladworth, Saskatoon, Strongfield, 
Holdfast. It looks like they’re from every area of the province, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Now the Chair is having . . . I’ll ask all 
hon. members to come to order. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you once again, Mr. Speaker. It is 
an honour once again to stand on behalf of citizens who are 
concerned about excellence in the education of exceptional 
children in the province of Saskatchewan, and I’ll read the 
prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide essential funding and ensure the delivery of 
scientifically proven, diagnostic assessment and programs 
for children with learning disabilities in order that they 

have an access to an education that meets their needs and 
allows them to reach their full potential. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, today all of the petitioners are from Prince Albert 
and I’m very pleased to table these on their behalf. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the petitions presented at the last 
sitting have been reviewed and found to be in order. Pursuant to 
rule 12(7) these petitions are hereby received. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 18 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: what portion of the health care 
budget will be targeted to non-governmental organizations 
who deal with addictions treatment in the areas of alcohol, 
drugs, and gambling? 
 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 18 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Justice: do you support the position 
taken by the Hon. Anne C. Cools as presented in the 
Canadian Senate on March 4 . . . 

 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Now I will ask for order 
from members on both sides of the House. The Chair is having 
some difficulty being able to hear the hon. member for Cypress 
Hills provide his notice of question, and I’ll ask for the 
co-operation of all members to permit it to be heard. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll just continue 
from where I was: 
 

. . . the Canadian Senate on March 4, Thursday, 1999, 
where she supports Alberta judge, Justice John McClung, 
who has criticized the Supreme Court judges; if so, on 
what basis; if not, on what basis; and how will this debate 
and the ruling affect the Saskatchewan judicial system; will 
you acknowledge receipt of a copy of the debate as sent to 
the minister. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
to introduce to you and through you to the members of the 
Legislative Assembly a delegation representing the Tobacco 
Free Saskatchewan Campaign. I’d ask them to stand when I 
mention their name. 
 
Walter Gillard is the executive coordinator, Tobacco Free 
Saskatchewan Campaign. Tristyn Bulai and Shane Kleisinger, 
two grade 9 students from Lumsden High School. Doug 
Alexander is representing the Heart and Stroke Foundation of 
Saskatchewan and the Canadian Cancer Society, Saskatchewan 



March 31, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 367 

division. And Patti Pacholek, public issues provincial Chair of 
the Canadian Cancer Society, Saskatchewan division. 
 
I look forward to meeting with this group in my office 
following question period. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Through you 
and to you to the Assembly I’d also like, on behalf of the 
official opposition, to welcome the people here from the 
Tobacco Free Saskatchewan Campaign. 
 
I had the pleasure to meet them earlier today and to address 
them outside the Assembly. And I again would ask everyone to 
welcome them here and to support them in their campaign. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to add the 
voice of welcome on behalf of the Liberal caucus to the people 
that have joined us in our galleries here today for this 
afternoon’s proceedings. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Renaud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Seated in your 
gallery, and I would like them to stand as I introduce them, 
representing Premier Peat Moss Ltd., Claude Samson, a project 
engineer from Rivière-du-Loup, Quebec; and Claude Gobeil, 
manager of their Saskatchewan division at Carrot River; and 
Spencer O’Byrne, technical coordinator at the Carrot River 
operation as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Premier Sask operates a peat bog located about 50 
kilometres north of Carrot River. They produce about 430,000 
cubic metres of peat moss every year and it’s shipped to, not 
only locally, but all across Canada, the US (United States), and 
internationally. And a lot of it in Saskatchewan because it’s 
such good quality, it’s used for mushroom production and 
seedling production. 
 
So please welcome our guests here this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as well to 
introduce guests to you and through you to members of the 
Assembly. 
 
We’re joined here this afternoon by five grade 3 students from 
the Cowessess Community Education Centre. They’re 
accompanied by their teachers, Lois Delorme and Myra 
Sparvier. 
 
And I’m looking forward to meeting with the group after 
question period and looking forward to questions they may 
have. And my colleagues have been suggesting maybe we could 
offer banana splits. I’ll go to them and see if they’ll actually 
help me fund that. But I’d like to invite the members of the 
Assembly to join me in welcoming this group. 

And as well, Mr. Speaker, another individual who has joined us 
this afternoon, a long-time friend who’s actually taught at the 
university, Mr. Don Clark, who’s just retired from teaching but 
has been very active, and was here with the group students 
against smoking, and so I’d like members to welcome him as 
well. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I should like to draw your attention and that of the 
members to a group who are seated in your gallery. This is a 
group of 10 adult students; they’re accompanied here today by 
their instructor Bobbie Baker. And they’re enrolled, Mr. 
Speaker, in the University of Regina LINC program, and that is 
the Language Instruction for New Canadians. 
 
I would ask the members to join with me to welcome these 
students here, not only to welcome to the legislature but also to 
congratulate them on their choice as Canada as their new home. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 
you and through you to the colleagues in the legislature, I’d like 
to introduce a constituent of mine in your gallery, Mr. Wayne 
Bacon. Wayne and his wife Carol operate a farm in the 
Kinistino area. Over the years Wayne has been extremely 
involved in community service, being very instrumental in the 
formation of the Kinsmen Telemiracle. Currently he’s the 
vice-president of the Canadian canola growers association and 
president of the Saskatchewan Canola Growers Association. 
Would everyone in the Assembly please give a warm welcome 
to Wayne Bacon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you and through you to the members of the 
Assembly an important constituent of mine that is here today in 
the west gallery. It’s Isabelle Butters, who is known for her 
service within our own city of Weyburn and area, but also right 
across the province. She wears many, many hats and of course 
is today here on behalf of the non-smoking campaign with heart 
and stroke. 
 
But also I had — just recently, on Saturday — was able to be at 
a page-turning ceremony in Weyburn for the new Southeast 
Regional Library that’s going to be built there. And she’s of 
course well-known for all of her extremely volunteer work that 
she’s done right across this province. I want everyone to 
welcome Isabelle Butters here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I’m very 
pleased this afternoon to introduce to you and through you to all 
the members of the Assembly an individual who has been 
extremely active in health care in Saskatchewan, someone I 
consider a friend, an individual who has been politically active 
in her life and was president of SUN (Saskatchewan Union of 
Nurses) at one point in Saskatchewan as well. 



368 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 1999 

Her name is June Blau She’s from Regina. She’s in your west 
gallery, Mr. Speaker, and I’d like her to stand and be 
recognized. Would everyone welcome her please. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Also in the west 
gallery with many people who are active in the tobacco . . . or 
anti-tobacco lobby, I should say, is Ruth Robinson, who is 
former president of the Consumers’ Association of Canada, has 
been involved in just about every organization you can think of, 
is a long-time friend of mine, and a former citizen of the year 
from Saskatoon. 
 
So I’d like to welcome Ruth here to the legislature today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Without 
belabouring the point, I too would like to welcome Ruth here. 
She’s a constituent and well-known for her advocacy on a 
number of public issues, most recently the advocacy to tighten 
up smoking legislation in Saskatchewan. Well done, Ruth. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
want to introduce to you and members of the Assembly today, 
seated in your gallery a young man by the name of Doug 
Raynes, who’s currently working with the Department of 
Justice, has served in the development of the community 
corrections program in the area of Yorkton, and is also a shop 
steward with SGEU (Saskatchewan Government Employees’ 
Union) and does some very valuable work for the member from 
Yorkton on occasion. 
 
So I want to ask you to welcome Doug Raynes to the Assembly 
this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, what a red-letter day to have so 
many great people in the galleries taking in the proceedings. 
Through you and to all members of the Assembly I want to 
meet . . . to introduce rather, three very special people who are 
visiting from Manitoba. Jean and her sons Jeremy and Randal 
Boiteau are here actually in the process of purchasing a house in 
Regina, and assuming the realtor has any sense at all, in Regina 
Coronation Park, my constituency. 
 
Jean’s husband Lionel has been here since the beginning of 
November and he’s working for a high-tech company here in 
Regina. Jean and Lionel came here last summer. Jean was 
competing in the dragon boat races on a team . . . with a team 
called Chemo Savvy. That team consists of a group of women 
who have survived breast cancer. And I want to add that they 
did fairly well in the dragon boat race. And in the process, Jean 
and Lionel fell in love with Regina and the rest is, as you might 
say, history in the making. 
 
So I ask all members to join me in welcoming the three guests 
soon to be residents of Regina. 
 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Liberal Party Platform 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday the Liberal Party released Priorities 1999, our election 
platform. We talked of $1,000 grants for first- and second-year 
post-secondary students in Saskatchewan. We talked of 
reducing the hacks and flacks that have slithered their way into 
government offices. We talked about more money for health 
care. We talked about what the Liberal priorities are. Yet after 
the release of our platform the only thing the Premier criticized 
was that there were no tax cuts. One can only assume by the 
Premier’s statement that you believe there must still be room 
for tax cuts. 
 
Mr. Premier, are you saying to the people that there is still more 
room for tax cuts? After your Finance minister said there was 
none? Mr. Premier, either you agree that there is . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Now the hon. member will be 
aware of course of rule 28 which requires that . . . (inaudible) 
. . . the Assembly, including statements by members, be 
directed through the Chair. And I’m sure that he’ll want to 
make his statement consistent with the rules. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — So, Mr. Speaker, the Premier must either 
agree that there is no room for tax cuts or there is still some 
room for tax cuts. And which is it? Does he agree with us that 
his Finance minister . . . that there is no more room for tax cuts 
and that the money is better used for health care and education 
and other priorities that put people first? Or do you agree with 
the Sask-a-Tory party that — zap — health care and education 
funding is frozen just to offer more tax cuts? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Increased Funding for Health Care 
 
Mr. Ward: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As a result of our 
recent budget, funding to the Saskatchewan health care system 
has grown to $1.9 billion this year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Ward: — Up 195 million over last year. This money will 
be targeted to the government’s four priority areas. Monies for 
front-line health care workers to meet our commitments and to 
address wage issues. Twelve million to reduce waiting times for 
surgery. Over 25 million for cancer programs — an increase of 
14 per cent over ’98-99. The new funding will go towards new 
cancer drugs and programs and services working to fight the 
disease and 800,000 to expand women’s health services. The 
government is introducing unique made-in-Saskatchewan 
programs to meet the special health challenges of women of all 
ages. 
 
The budget also provides funding for additional important 
health services; over 20 million to support the College of 
Medicine, funding for three new MRIs (magnetic resonance 
imaging); a CT (computerized axial tomography) scanner and a 



March 31, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 369 

bone density program; over 5 million increase in home care 
funding for people requiring care at home; over 20 million to 
support services for northern residents; new hospitals in 
Meadow Lake, La Loche, and Stony Rapids; 50 million to assist 
districts in enhancing equipment and supporting a smooth flow 
of health services into the year 2000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this health care investment is unprecedented in 
Saskatchewan history and identified the government’s . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The hon. member’s time has expired. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Minister of Municipal Affairs, Culture and Housing 
 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to acknowledge the announcement by the Minister of 
Municipal Government this morning that she will not be 
running in the next election. Mr. Speaker, we’ve had many 
exchanges in my short time in this legislature, some pleasant, 
some not so pleasant, some complimentary, and some not quite 
so complimentary. 
 
Very seldom have I agreed with the policies of the ministers, 
but Mr. Speaker, I must say that through all of this and through 
all the exchanges that we’ve had, I’ve had the greatest respect 
for the Minister of Municipal Government. Mr. Speaker, I have 
always admired her wit and humour: her one ring-a-dingy, her 
two ring-a-dingy, and so on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I presume that the minister is going back to 
full-time farming and I would imagine what that would mean is 
that she will be now supporting the Saskatchewan Party because 
we are the only people in this legislature sticking up for 
farmers. But having said that, Mr. Speaker, I just want to say on 
behalf of the official opposition that I wish the minister the very 
best in whatever endeavour she takes, and I will miss you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Fiftieth Anniversary of Saskatchewan Arts Board 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Mr. Speaker, life is short; art is long. The words, 
pictures, and music which give definition to an era keep that era 
alive long after it is past. That is a truism not often recognized 
in the political world unless we are concerning ourselves with 
the economic impact of the arts. Witness our successful tax 
credit for films from last session. 
 
But today is the 50th anniversary of a very significant event in 
the history of our province. On March 31, 1949 the legislation 
which established the Saskatchewan Arts Board was 
proclaimed. This Act created what is now the oldest 
arm’s-length funding agency in North America, and only the 
second of its kind anywhere. 
 
This legislation was a political decision, it was an economic 
decision, and for the Douglas government of the day — a 
government of teachers, preachers, and farmers in a 
hard-scrabble land struggling to recover from depression and 
war — it was an incredibly courageous decision. 
 

They knew that art makes a difference in our lives, and that as 
intrinsically valuable as it is, to flourish, it must have support. 
This is especially true for Canada and even more so for us in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I know all members will pay tribute to the vision which 
produced the Arts Board — to Ernest Lindner, Emrys Jones, 
William Riddell, and others — and to congratulate Valerie 
Creighton for her eight years as executive director. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Health Care Concerns 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today on 
behalf of my constituents in Arcola and area, and the serious 
concerns they have for the future of health care in 
Saskatchewan. Last night I attended a health meeting in Arcola 
with over 50 people in attendance to discuss the health care 
crisis we are facing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is becoming more and more apparent that last 
week’s Health budget did not put to rest any doubts the people 
of Saskatchewan had for the health care system. The members 
opposite are so out of touch and estranged with the people of 
Saskatchewan they continue to say wellness is well. I’m not 
sure though that even they believe their own words, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The people want to know why Saskatchewan has the longest 
waiting list. They want to know why this government has not 
come up with any real solutions and they want to know whether 
or not they are going to receive proper health care in their 
communities if they need it. The people of Saskatchewan want 
the NDP (New Democratic Party) to come clean with their 
plans for the future of all hospitals in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite have claimed that 
Saskatchewan Party will freeze health spending. I would like 
them to know that these scare tactics they use on the people of 
Saskatchewan are old and tired, just like this NDP government. 
 
Approximately a month ago the Associate Minister of Health 
stated that the NDP government would consult with the people 
for the future of rural hospitals. Well, Madam Minister, once 
again the Saskatchewan Party has done your homework for you. 
Let the people know what . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The hon. member’s time has expired. 
Statements by members continue. 
 

Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation 
Business Education Partnership 

 
Ms. Murray: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
announce to the Assembly that an exciting new partnership in 
education was announced this morning by my colleague, the 
minister in charge of SPMC (Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation), and by Mary Reeves, instructional 
superintendent for the Regina Catholic school division. 
 
This partnership grows out of a special interest that developed 
several months ago. Students at St. Marguerite Bourgeoys 



370 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 1999 

School in Regina became interested and involved in the current 
rehabilitation project for our Legislative Building. Because of 
this interest, the Web site dedicated to the project was officially 
launched at the school. 
 
Since then the students and teachers of Bourgeoys School have 
been actively involved in developing the Web site. Out of that 
involvement has come a strong teaching unit on the history of 
Regina, a unit that Saskatchewan Education has recommended 
for use by grades 4, 8, and 10. 
 
The partnership extends beyond just the two key players, Mr. 
Speaker. For the people at SPMC, this project will give them a 
new perspective on their work and the students will learn about 
a variety of professions — architecture, restoration, building 
management, and so on. 
 
Partnerships work, Mr. Speaker, because they show us how 
connected we all are. My congratulations to SPMC and the 
Catholic School Board for this interesting example. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Swift Current Resident Wins Award 
 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to share some very exciting news for the city of Swift 
Current and the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Brad Wall, the director of economic 
development for the city of Swift Current, was recently named 
Saskatchewan’s Economic Developer of the Year. This 
distinction is awarded annually by the Saskatchewan Economic 
Developers Association. 
 
Brad was recognized for his work as a founding member of the 
Southwest Centre for Entrepreneurial Development and its 
success in attracting new businesses to Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Brad’s hard work is paying off. In spite of an NDP 
government that is burying people with the second-highest 
taxes in Canada, the city of Swift Current broke the record for 
building permits in 1998. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Brad now tells me that the population of Swift 
Current is now topping the 16,000 mark. 
 
Brad will go on to compete for the honour of National 
Economic Developer of the Year, an annual competition 
sponsored by Canadian National Railways. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as well I have further good news but maybe not 
such good news for the current NDP member from Swift 
Current. Brad Wall is also the Saskatchewan Party candidate for 
Swift Current in the next provincial election, which may 
explain why the current member wouldn’t recognize one of his 
constituent’s considerable achievements. 
 
Mr. Speaker, would you welcome . . . or congratulate Brad on a 
job well done. And we look forward to welcoming him in the 
. . . 
 

The Speaker: — The hon. member’s time has expired. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Negotiations With Health Care Workers 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 
Minister of Health. Madam Minister, overworked and 
undervalued nurses are walking away from nursing and are not 
being replaced. A shortage of nurses in Saskatchewan means 
closed hospital beds, forced overtime, and exhausted nurses. 
Exhausted nurses cannot continue to provide safe care. The 
government isn’t listening. 
 
Madam Minister, those aren’t my words. That is the message of 
the Saskatchewan nurses on this card now appearing in 
mailboxes throughout Saskatchewan. Madam Minister, NDP 
mismanagement of the health system has resulted in nursing 
shortages, overworked nurses, serious concerns about patient 
safety, and now we may be on the eve of a full-scale nurses’ 
strike. 
 
Madam Minister, will you admit that your NDP 
mismanagement has driven the health care system to the brink 
of collapse? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I want to 
thank the member for the question. Mr. Speaker, as the 
members may know with the exception of a tentative CUPE 
(Canadian Union of Public Employees) agreement between the 
employer, we are presently in a situation in this province where 
the Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations and 
SGEU, representing two health work places, and SUN and 
SEIU (Service Employees’ International Union) are presently 
negotiating collective agreements. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member will also know that these are the most 
complex set of collective agreements that this province has ever 
witnessed, given that we are trying to meld dozens of collective 
agreements into four or five, Mr. Speaker. And this takes a lot 
of time. It takes a lot of good will on the part of the people who 
are at the bargaining table. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m optimistic that the parties will continue to 
work through the many, many issues and that we will arrive at 
mutually agreed to collective agreements. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
for the Associate Minister of Health, a former nurse who traded 
in her nursing uniform for a turncoat. Madam Minister . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order, order, order. Now the 
hon. member is a veteran member and . . . Order. Order, order. 
The hon. member is a veteran member and I know well 
appreciates the limits of debate, and I think appreciates as well 
that his terminology has gone beyond the acceptable levels of 
parliamentary debate. I’ll ask him to withdraw his remark and 
apologize to the House. 
 



March 31, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 371 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I withdraw 
that remark and apologize to the House. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the hon. member from 
Cannington to conclude his question. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Madam Minister, when you became 
president of SUN you were elected to work for nurses. When 
you became an MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly), 
you were elected on the promise to hire more nurses. And now 
you’ve betrayed nurses. 
 
You knew there was a nursing shortage, you knew the NDP 
wasn’t really going to hire any more nurses, and you said 
nothing. Now nurses are sending out cards outlining exactly 
how you betrayed them. 
 
Madam Minister, why did you abandon nurses the moment you 
were elected an NDP MLA? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, a 
few moments ago we witnessed what I consider to be a most 
gracious act, where all of the members of this Assembly stood 
in their place and acknowledged the work of the Minister of 
Municipal Government. 
 
What I will say to the member is this. That in order for us to 
make progress in this province, it’s important for each of us to 
respect each other, and that’s what the public wants. Mr. 
Speaker, I have watched this member at his various public 
meetings across this province make untoward remarks. And I 
find it absolutely appalling and not the kind of behaviour that 
should be coming from the official opposition, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what I will say on behalf of the government is 
this. That the Saskatchewan Association of Health 
Organizations which represents the employers, and the various 
unions which represent the various employees in this province 
are presently at the bargaining table and they are making their 
way towards collective agreements that will meet the individual 
needs of the people working in the workplace and the individual 
needs of patients and the needs of taxpayers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would have 
gladly allowed the . . . or had the Minister of Health listen to 
any of my comments at a public health meeting. Unfortunately 
she refuses to attend those that she’s invited to, including the 
one that we invited her to last night in Arcola, Mr. Speaker. My 
question again is for the Minister of Health. Madam Minister, 
the SGEU has served strike notice to the North-East Health 
District. Support staff are preparing to walk off the job 
Thursday morning. 
 
Madam Minister, this means surgeries are cancelled, emergency 
rooms are shut down, and patient care will be virtually 
non-existent. It means family members taking care of patients 
in special care home residences. In short, Madam Minister, it 
means a full-blown health care disaster — something you are 
very familiar with. 

Madam Minister, what steps are you taking to ensure the patient 
safety in the North Central Health District, and how many other 
heath districts in this province are facing strike notice by the 
SGEU? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I know that had I 
gone to that meeting last night I would have swelled the crowd 
from 36 to 37, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what I can say to the member is that I understand 
that the Saskatchewan Government Employees Union which 
represents employees in the North-East Health District has 
served notice of strike action. Mr. Speaker, we are not at all 
clear at this moment whether or not that strike action will 
commence. What I can tell the member is that the parties are 
continuing to negotiate, and that’s what’s important for the 
people of this province. 
 
What can I tell the member is that the patient safety of the 
people that are in our various institutions and in home care are 
of the utmost top of mind for the Government of Saskatchewan, 
and we will do everything we can along with the health districts 
to ensure patient safety. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Had the 
minister attended the meeting last night, she could have swelled 
the NDP ranks by 100 per cent from one to two. 
 
Madam Minister, you’ve been told by district health officials 
that part of the government’s plan in the case of a strike by 
nurses is to send critically ill patients to hospitals in Alberta and 
Manitoba. Madam Minister, we have also been advised that 
health care unions in Manitoba and Alberta will support 
Saskatchewan nurses by refusing to take Saskatchewan patients. 
If that happens, Madam Minister, the only option available 
would be to send critically ill patients to hospitals in the United 
States. 
 
Madam Minister, can you confirm that it is your plan to send 
critically ill patients to US hospitals in case of a nurses’ strike? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I know that the member 
opposite likes to provide people with information, but I just 
want to advise the member that the information he provides is 
not correct. 
 
For instance, last night, he indicated that the only reason why 
Saskatoon doesn’t run the MRI full time is that they refuse to 
send money to hire more staff. Well, Mr. Speaker, for the 
edification of the member, the current hours of operation in 
Saskatoon are from 7:30 a.m. to 7 . . . or to 10:30 p.m. So 
factually incorrect. 
 
Yesterday he indicated that the Regina MRI is not running yet 
because we built the room too small. Well, Mr. Speaker, the 
president of the Regina Health District board indicated to the 
public that when they moved the MRI in, it fit, Mr. Speaker. 



372 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 1999 

On top of that, Mr. Speaker, he indicated that we are 
squandering — squandering $1.95 million in new spending 
because all we’re leaving is $63 million for nurses. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, we’ve increased funding for cancer which is important 
to the people of this province. We’ve got a mobile CAT scan 
which is important to the people of southern Saskatchewan. 
And I think this member is acting in a way that is irresponsible. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
there’s 24 hours in a day. Why isn’t that MRI running 24 hours 
a day? 
 
Madam Minister, family members of critically ill patients are 
extremely worried about what will happen to their loved ones if 
nurses go on strike. One father of a eight-week-old boy in the 
neonatal unit of the Regina General Hospital called us in 
desperation yesterday to say that his son may be shipped to 
Winnipeg or Toronto. 
 
He complained that no one was able to tell him exactly what the 
plan was. He was also concerned that if his son was sent to 
Winnipeg or Toronto he and his wife did not have the money to 
go to those cities with that child. 
 
Madam Minister, what are you doing to ensure that patients 
loved ones are kept informed about contingency plans in cases 
of the nurses strike? And how do you plan to support those 
families who do not have the financial resources to travel with 
critically ill patients in the event they are transferred outside of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Okay, I want to go on about what the 
member said last night. He said that the primary health service 
sites have no acute care beds. Just for the edification of the 
member so he can get the facts straight, in Hudson Bay there is 
a primary health service site and they have acute care beds. In 
Hafford, the member from Redberry can confirm that they have 
a primary site and they have acute care beds. 
 
In addition, he said, we should bringing more residents out to 
rural Saskatchewan. Well, Mr. Speaker, we have a program that 
does just that. On top of that, Mr. Speaker, we also have a 
program that trains rural doctors to have specialization in 
anaesthesia, general surgery and obstetrics. 
 
Mr. Speaker, then he said . . . when challenged about why he 
didn’t call the board, who would surely tell them that they 
weren’t going to close the Arcola hospital. All he can say is: all 
I can do is quote. Well, Mr. Speaker, this is what we get from 
this member opposite. 
 
I just also wanted to say, Mr. Speaker, that the nurses are 
continuing to bargain at the bargaining table and we’re 
optimistic a collective agreement can be arrived at. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Funding for Rural Road Maintenance 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Highways. Madam Minister, your 

commitment to fixing roads is a joke. Two million dollars for 
rural municipal government — that’s $2 million for 298 RMs. 
That works out to about $6,700 per RM. That’s about enough, 
Mr. Speaker, to build about a tenth of a mile or about 530 feet 
of road in each RM. And, Mr. Speaker, very little more for 
highways. 
 
You know, first we got rail line abandonment thanks to the 
federal Liberals. Now we got rural road abandonment thanks to 
the NDP government. It’s no wonder that Sinclair Harrison 
called the budget a black day for rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Madam Minister, why are you abandoning rural Saskatchewan? 
Where is your commitment to a long-term plan to fix rural 
roads and highways in rural Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And just to be 
able to inform the member opposite, we do have a long-term 
plan. That’s what we brought out in 1997, both a plan for 
increased dollars at $2.5 billion over 10 years and also a plan 
that certainly did tackle also the good planning and the efforts 
that we need to do in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
It’s interesting to me, when I listen to the members opposite in 
talking about branch line abandonment, talking about some of 
these issues, when their connections both as the Liberals and 
Tories and the kind of federal policy that has impacted rural 
Saskatchewan unbelievably, and on the transportation system, 
we’re trying to address that impact. We’re addressing that 
impact with the commitment for more dollars, as we see, more 
dollars we need from the federal government that is giving zero 
to this province right now, and also on good policy and 
planning. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Drug Inclusion in the Formulary 
 

Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week in this 
House the Minister of Finance presented his budget and once 
you get through all the political rhetoric that he had, you come 
down to find out what’s in the budget. And in the budget, Mr. 
Speaker, they talked about health care and he talked providing 
some program for meeting women’s needs in the province. But 
what’s most important, Mr. Speaker, is what wasn’t in the 
budget. 
 
Now in the budget they talked about meeting the needs of 
Saskatchewan women and they talked about funding for bone 
density equipment, Mr. Speaker. And the importance of bone 
density scanners, Mr. Speaker, detect osteoporosis. What the 
minister hasn’t told us, Mr. Speaker, is that the most important 
drug, the most effective drug that we have and it’s called 
fosamax, fosamax, Mr. Speaker, which is not covered by the 
drug plan. 
 
I’m wondering, Mr. Speaker, if the Minister of Health can tell 
us today why in the world this drug isn’t covered under the drug 
plan? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
What I can say to the Liberal Party here this afternoon is that I 
see that we have another press release about their platform. 



March 31, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 373 

Now, Mr. Speaker, last week on March 23, 1999 they indicated 
that they were going to reduce their health district boards from 
32 to 12 to 14. Well, Mr. Speaker, one week later they’re now 
scrapping them all. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these folks can’t seem to make up their minds. But 
I can tell the member in specific . . . in response to the specific 
question that this is a drug, Mr. Speaker, that I understand is 
presently under review as to whether or not it will be included 
on the drug formulary. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Well, Mr. Speaker, she made my point. 
There’s some more political rhetoric. That’s all they know. 
They don’t want to answer or address the needs of the province, 
the people of the province, Mr. Speaker — but more political 
rhetoric. 
 
What this shows, Mr. Speaker, is the incompetence of the NDP 
government to manage health care in this province — another 
example of that. They can diagnose the problem. They’re 
willing to do that. But then they don’t want to treat it, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in Alberta and Manitoba they’ve made this a 
priority. And they now cover fosamax under their drug plan. 
Why don’t we in this House? 
 
They stand in this House, Mr. Speaker, and they put their 
political rhetoric ahead of the needs of the people of the 
province, and especially women. They talk in the budget about 
how they’re going to meet the needs of women, the health 
needs of women, Mr. Speaker. But they don’t do it. 
 
Madam Minister, when will you get your priorities straight and 
start thinking about the women of this province and the rest of 
the people of this province as well? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Maybe the 
member doesn’t know this but what we have in the province of 
Saskatchewan is a drug Formulary Committee. This is a group 
of individuals — scientists, physicians — that determine which 
medications, which prescriptions should be included on 
Saskatchewan’s drug formulary. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is not something the Minister of Health 
determines. This is not something that any member of this 
legislature determines. This is something that is determined by 
a group of people that have expertise in this area. That’s how 
the process works, Mr. Speaker. And once they make a 
recommendation, the drug is included on the formulary. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Negotiations with Nurses 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Nurses are tired, 
overworked, and underpaid. Overworked and undervalued 
equals nursing shortage. Mr. Speaker, nurses will be in a strike 
position within hours. Like many times before, the NDP 
promised good working conditions and compensation for 
nurses. Apparently it’s just another broken promise. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one nurse from Fort Qu’Appelle says, and I quote: 

Pay me what I’m worth. I’m a registered nurse with 20 
years experience. I’m responsible for the lives and 
well-being of the people you govern. I suggest that you 
increase our pay and benefits to make nursing a more 
desirable profession. You may attract new nurses and 
possibly even keep the experienced ones like myself. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP is failing to make health care a priority. 
Will the minister explain why her government messed up health 
care so badly that nurses like this one from Fort Qu’Appelle are 
questioning why they should even stay in nursing? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, this province underwent health reform in 1993. 
And this is a decision made by our government to try and 
integrate our health services in a more coordinated and 
co-operative fashion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it meant that we reduced 400 individual boards to 
32. It meant that hospitals and home care and long-term care 
and mental health and public health, all of these different 
organizations that were in stovepipes, started to be more 
co-operative and collaborative to serve the individual needs of 
Saskatchewan citizens. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we acknowledge, Mr. Speaker, that this 
integration and coordination has had a tremendous impact upon 
the people who provide services to the people of this province, 
and that’s the health providers. Mr. Speaker, we recognize that. 
 
We now have a situation where we are bargaining the most 
complex set of negotiations ever in the history of this province. 
I am optimistic, Mr. Speaker, that the nurses, along with the 
other health care providers, will have collective agreements that 
are arrived at mutually. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, these people got rid of 600 nurses 
and they now try to tell us that their district health boards are 
much more important . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Now the Chair requests the co-operation of all 
hon. members on both sides of the House. Order. The Chair is 
having some difficulty being able to hear the Leader of the 
Third Party put his question. Order. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This NDP’s treatment 
of health care workers is shameful. They’ve known for years 
there was a nursing shortage, yet they continued to lay off 
nurses, hire hacks and flacks, and increase management. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another nurse from Moose Jaw sums the NDP’s 
record on health care up saying, and I quote: 
 

The health care system of this province has declined for the 
past 10 years. Tommy Douglas would be disheartened by 
the way the NDP has allowed the health system to fail. 

 
And she goes on to add that she’s been an NDPer for years; 
however, she won’t be again. 



374 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 1999 

Another nurse from Melville says, and I quote: 
 

Ensure a new contract is in place as soon as possible, as 
who would relocate to Saskatchewan if there is a 
possibility of a strike. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this government put some $63 million on the table 
to improve working conditions for health workers. According to 
the nurses, this won’t be enough. Will the minister explain why 
her government is not making this issue a priority? Why can 
you still find tax dollars for propaganda but not for much 
needed nurses? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Based on what the member has just told us, it would appear as 
though there’s nothing that’s done in this province in the way of 
health care. And what I do want to say to the member is that 
each year over 4.6 million visits to a doctor; each year over 
925,000 visits to a specialist; each year 9,200 of our citizens are 
served in nursing homes; each year over 5,000 MRIs; 28,000 
people receiving home care. Every day, Mr. Speaker, 35,000 
people of this province receive health services. That’s what we 
get for our $1.9 billion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, health care is getting better in this province, Mr. 
Speaker, not worse. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Health Research 
 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
most certainly would like to give the Minister of Health a 
reprieve this afternoon, but I’m sorry, I forewarned her that her 
questions would be coming her way today. 
 
Madam Minister, the federal government’s budget last month 
set in motion the doubling of health research funding in Canada 
over the next three years with the creation of the Canadian 
Institutes of Health Research. And I would like you to tell the 
people of our province today what Saskatchewan is doing to 
take advantage of this exciting opportunity to provide new jobs 
in the health research sector. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I want to thank the member for the 
question. This is an important question. Mr. Speaker, as the 
member indicates, the federal government has released its 
budget where there is a significant increase in the amount of 
research funding available to our medial scientists in this 
country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity to speak to Jim Dosman, 
who is a member, a Saskatchewan representative to the . . . a 
Saskatchewan representative to this council. I’m pleased to 
report, Mr. Speaker, that $1 million has been allocated to those 
provinces that are not Ontario and British Columbia and 
Quebec. And, Mr. Speaker, it will be incumbent upon those 
provinces to match that funding. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Economic Development and 
myself are going to be meeting with the necessary officials in 

April, and we hope that we will have something to report soon 
about the capacity and the interest of scientists of this province 
to do research with the help of the provincial and federal 
governments. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m smiling because 
that’s going to give me a slight hint as to what the answer will 
be to my next question, which I’m waiting with just bated 
breath here. 
 
The Medical Research Council of Canada, Madam Minister, 
has established a regional partnerships program for provinces 
— provinces that are viewed as disadvantaged when it comes to 
MRC (Medical Research Council of Canada) research grants. 
And you’re nodding because you know. Under this partnership, 
of course, the MRC gives $1 for every $2 of provincial funding 
given. And this represents a 50 per cent return on the 
investment that we make from the province. 
 
Manitoba, Madam Minister, just received 19 additional grants 
from this regional partnerships program. Sadly, Saskatchewan 
received zip, zero, none, because there were no provincial 
matching funds. 
 
Madam Minister, are there any plans to take advantage of the 
MRC regional partnerships program, or are we going to miss 
out yet again on this very, very important opportunity? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I want to thank the member for the 
question, Mr. Speaker. I can assure the member that the 
Minister of Economic Development and myself will be meeting 
with the necessary officials, and that we will . . . we are 
optimistic that we will be in a position to participate in this kind 
of program because it will do a tremendous service to the 
people of this province to have this kind of medical research 
done here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I do 
know that the government has many conflicting demands on the 
health care budget because it’s something that is endemic across 
the entire country. But decisions to chronically underfund and 
to ignore the importance of medical researchers to the overall 
health of all Saskatchewan residents is truly not acceptable. 
And it has happened and happened and happened for many 
years in our province to the point where we’re losing many, 
many credible people. 
 
Saskatchewan health researchers are actually asked, Mr. 
Speaker, to go into the boxing ring as if their hands had been 
tied behind their backs. And I’m wanting to know today, 
Madam Minister, if your department is able and willing to table 
with us any evidence which proves that the government actually 
has in progress a plan, a plan to help the medical researchers of 
our province to be able to compete, because the circumstances 
they face now don’t allow them to compete. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank the member for the question, 
Mr. Speaker. As I indicated, the Minister of Economic 
Development and myself are meeting with the appropriate 



March 31, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 375 

national officials. We have had the occasion to meet with 
medical scientists in this province to discuss the need to 
improve the amount of funding that is going into medical 
research in this province. 
 
I’m optimistic that we can significantly improve the amount of 
medical research that is occurring in the province and this will 
be good news for scientists, but it will also be good news for the 
people of this province that depend upon medical breakthroughs 
for our health care. And so I’m optimistic, Mr. Speaker, that 
we’ll be in a position to increase medical research in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I request leave to make a somewhat extended 
ministerial statement. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

Canadian Light Source Synchrotron Project 
 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to 
announce to the House that the Canadian Foundation for 
Innovation has agreed to provide $56.4 million in funding for 
the Canadian Light Source Synchrotron project at the 
university. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Today’s announcement brings the 
total amount invested by the partners in this project to $173.5 
million. This is the largest single scientific investment in 
Canadian history. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — And it means that the CLS 
(Canadian Light Source) is now a reality. Construction is 
expected to begin this spring. The facility will be operational by 
2003. 
 
This project is a shining example of our economic development 
strategy, promoting jobs, and economic growth through 
innovation. Innovation, the ability to use new ideas and new 
technologies, is key to creating an economy that can compete in 
the next century. 
 
Some benefits will be immediate. Five hundred jobs during four 
years of construction and 200 staff working at the facility by the 
time it’s fully operational. But the project is about more than 
jobs today. it’s about jobs and opportunities in the future. 
Opportunities that will give our best and brightest young people 
a chance for careers in Saskatchewan’s advanced technology 
sectors high-end, knowledge-based careers. 
 
The facility at the University of Saskatchewan will be used by 
researchers in the fields of agriculture, biotechnology, mining, 
petrochemicals, and medicine to name just a few. It will attract 
research projects from across Canada and around the world. 

And these projects will just be the tip of the iceberg. 
 
Over time firms from across Canada will locate their operations 
in Saskatoon. More and more R&D (research and development) 
firms, more and more high-tech companies will seize the 
opportunity to come to Saskatchewan to be part of the culture of 
research excellence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is an exciting day for the University of 
Saskatchewan and for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1430) 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — The Canadian Light Source project 
is going to put Saskatchewan on the scientific map. Researchers 
and scientists from all over Canada and all over the world will 
recognize that the work being done here is leading edge. And 
being on the leading edge scientifically means being on the 
leading edge economically. It means that our industries will be 
applying research done right here to improve existing products 
and create new ones. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the opening of this facility means that our image 
of a new Saskatchewan has become a reality. A Saskatchewan 
whose economy is dynamic and diversified. A Saskatchewan 
which is confident, innovative, and outward-looking. A 
Saskatchewan which has the best quality of life of any place in 
the world. The Canadian Light Source Synchrotron project is an 
investment today for our future, a future that our sons and 
daughters can have right here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
behalf of the official opposition, Saskatchewan Party, I rise to 
join in expressing our excitement about the announcement that 
the final piece of the puzzle, if you like, has come together on 
this exciting project for the University of Saskatchewan and for 
Saskatchewan in total. 
 
I think it’s fair to say, as we’ve watched this project being 
proposed, negotiated, and today with the announcement coming 
together, that all of us in this province have indeed been very, 
very appreciative of the fact that many partners had to work 
together and contribute to make this a reality, including the 
province of Saskatchewan, the government of Saskatchewan. 
And for that we congratulate them for the work that they’ve 
done and the co-operation that they have initiated to make this 
indeed a reality today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that many of the comments that the 
minister has made in regard to what this can mean for the 
high-tech, knowledge-based scientific aspects of our economy 
are very, very supportable. And I look forward to seeing this 
project develop and mature over the next number of years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would encourage the government to put as much 
diligence into reducing the tax burden for those 200 full-time 
workers that are going to come into this project on a permanent 
basis as they have in putting the project together. And, Mr. 
Speaker, we’ll make sure that that happens over the next very 



376 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 1999 

short while. 
 
Again congratulations to all those involved in this project. 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Liberal caucus 
would also like to express on behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan the welcome news today that the Canadian 
Foundation for Innovation has agreed to provide the additional 
money, the $56.4 million to this Canadian Light Source 
Synchrotron project at the University of Saskatchewan. 
 
The co-operation from the federal government ensures that this 
type of project has become a reality is extremely important. The 
announcement brings total investment to a hundred and 
seventy-three and a half million, meaning the project being a 
reality, under construction, and expected to open early in the 
spring of 2003. 
 
Those immediate benefits are more than welcome. This first 
ever project in Canada with all the jobs over the four years of 
construction and the 200 staff that will be continuously working 
when the facility if fully operational. What a hope for some of 
our young people, and technology that we are able to provide 
for other parts of this great country. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, we need to see leading-edge ventures 
like this, not only in science and technology, but also in 
economic development which is somewhat sadly lacking behind 
other provinces. 
 
I just want to, Mr. Speaker, salute all those people who worked 
so hard to bring this project to Saskatchewan and pray that we 
may attract more such ventures in the future, for the future of 
our young people, for the future of people who have left and 
may now want to return to this great province. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — With leave to make comment on a 
ministerial statement, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is 
an absolutely wonderful accomplishment that has been 
announced today. It’s been a . . . I think something that has been 
in progress for so many years that people don’t quite understand 
how significant an announcement this is. 
 
It’s interesting, because I was speaking with some scientists on 
this matter just in the last couple of days, and I was under the 
impression that attempts to get a Synchrotron for Saskatchewan 
and for Canada began as was announced in The Star-Phoenix 
some four or five or six years. And I do recall very vividly, 
having been to a political gathering in Ottawa — at the party 
that shall remain unnamed — at a convention that was being 
hosted and that this in fact was a resolution brought to the floor 
in about 1994, and people were very, very excited. But a lot of 

people needed to be convinced that this was something that was 
really worthy for the nation, and most importantly that 
Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, and the University of Saskatchewan 
in particular were the best places for this particular enterprise. 
 
Now I say that it’s been a process that’s taken place over many 
years. And just so people know, it’s been some 30 years, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s astonishing that after all of this time, that we are 
now going to be the beneficiaries of the newest Synchrotron 
technology — the absolutely newest. It’s going to place us at a 
tremendous advantage over the other 40-odd Synchrotrons in 
the world. 
 
I think it is a tremendous accomplishment for all of the people 
who played a major role in this, and I want to congratulate the 
government and all of the people who worked for this project to 
be in our province, because without their support it wouldn’t 
have happened. 
 
I most certainly would like to make mention of the federal 
government’s role, the commitment of the Liberal Party of 
Canada to see this through as well. In particular, Mr. Doug 
Richardson of Saskatoon, who was very, very pivotal in even 
the name, Synchrotron, being used in a consistent sort of way 
regarding Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, and the University of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And I do want to say that even though we have a huge amount 
to make up in the loss of . . . the people that we’ve lost in 
different kinds of research in the province due to many, many 
reasons, Mr. Speaker, that this is an opportunity that is going to 
be afforded so many different disciplines. 
 
It is truly exciting. Exciting for medical researchers, for those in 
the field of biotechnology, for mining, for pharmaceuticals, and 
the list goes on and on. I am just extremely excited in case 
people couldn’t tell today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I would like to once again congratulate everyone involved. It 
is truly a red-letter day. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, from a government that’s 
open, accountable, responsible, and progressive, I give you this 
answer to written question 31. 
 
The Speaker: — The answer to item no. 1, question 31 is 
tabled. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — I give the answer to question 32, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The answer to item 2, question 32, is tabled. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 



March 31, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 377 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion moved by the Hon. Mr. Cline that the Assembly resolve 
itself into the Committee of Finance, and the proposed 
amendment thereto moved by Mr. Gantefoer. 
 
Mr. Renaud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I had the privilege of 
speaking about this wonderful budget yesterday. Of course time 
ran out a bit at 5 o’clock so I have the opportunity to complete 
my statements about this budget that is really a stable, solid, 
responsible budget given by this government — and the sixth 
balanced budget of course, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And it talks of course about better health care and $1.9 billion 
to health care and shorter waiting times for surgery, Mr. 
Speaker, and on and on. And it talks also about lower taxes. Of 
course the sales tax dropping from 7 to 6 per cent, and less debt, 
Mr. Speaker, of course. As I mentioned earlier, six balanced 
budgets in a row, $3.4 billion paid against our debt, Mr. 
Speaker, a record that is just incredible, just incredible. 
 
So I’m going to talk a bit more about health care in a moment, 
but where I left off yesterday, Mr. Speaker, was talking about 
the Sask Tory Party and why they will not be allowed to give a 
budget in this Assembly probably ever again by the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I remember coming to power in 1991, Mr. Speaker, and there 
was no budget. The Tories didn’t pass a budget. Normally you 
pass a budget in February or March, the beginning of the year, 
so that you have the plan of spending for that year. Well you 
know we came . . . they finally called an election in 1991, Mr. 
Speaker, in October with no budget passed. They hadn’t passed 
a budget, if you can imagine. 
 
People remember that, Mr. Speaker, and people will not elect a 
Tory government ever again — that is one of the reasons, Mr. 
Speaker, that is one of the reasons. 
 
We talk about trust, Mr. Speaker. And that’s another reason 
why the Sask Tory Party will never sit on this side of the 
Chamber. Trust, trust. The member from Canora-Pelly, I 
remember him saying, and I quote: “It’s totally false and 
nothing but an attempt by the former Tories to grab media 
attention. We have signed a document from all members and I 
can say unequivocally there is no truth yet.” He’s talking about 
moving from the Liberals to the Tories. That’s what he said. 
 
And the member from Melfort-Tisdale, this is what he said: 
 

I absolutely can say I have never, ever considered, never 
mind participated in any discussions (to cross the floor). 
It’s almost too ridiculous to imagine (he says) . . . I was 
elected in Melfort-Tisdale as a Liberal, and will continue to 
represent Melfort-Tisdale as a Liberal. None of our 
members have initiated or participated in any discussions 
with any party. 
 

That’s the member from Melfort-Tisdale. That’s what he said, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 

This is why the people of Saskatchewan will not have Tories 
sitting on this side of the House. It’s a matter of trust, Mr. 
Speaker, a matter of trust. 
 
And the member from Kelvington-Wadena, this is what she 
said: 
 

I would like to inform the people of Saskatchewan, and 
particularly those in the Liberal constituencies, that we are 
continuing our loyalty and support to the cause of Liberal 
Saskatchewan party, the official opposition caucus, and to 
the people of Saskatchewan. We have not approached the 
Conservative Party or any other party with the intention of 
crossing the floor.  
 

That’s the member from Kelvington-Wadena, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And where do they sit now? With the Tories — the member 
from Melfort-Tisdale, the member from Canora-Pelly, the 
member from Kelvington-Wadena. They all moved from the 
Liberal Party over to the Conservatives. And they ask the 
people of Saskatchewan, now that it’s getting close to election 
time, please trust us — please trust us. 
 
And the member from Saltcoats, Mr. Speaker, he said: 
 

As ludicrous as these reports are I want to assure you, the 
people of the Saltcoats constituency, that I remain 
committed to you, the Liberal Party, and my caucus 
colleagues. 
 
As a further sign of my loyalty and that of my colleagues 
we have each signed a document in which we 
unequivocally deny any intention of joining any other 
party.  

 
(1445) 
 
Now that’s the member of Saltcoats. And he also, Mr. Speaker, 
was a Liberal and now he’s a Tory. And they ask now the 
people of Saskatchewan to trust them in forming a government 
on this side of the House. 
 
Didn’t have a budget in 1991. Told stories about their intentions 
of crossing the floor to the Tories. And they want the trust of 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Another reason, Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned yesterday, the 
Tory Party of today, the new Sask Tories are the same Tories as 
before. I have a little note here and it says . . . I believe it’s the 
Leader-Post article and it’s August 12, 1997. And the headline 
is “Devine supports new party.” What more do we need to say, 
Mr. Speaker? 
 
And then in the Fort Qu’Appelle Times, Mr. Speaker, Tuesday, 
February 9, 1999, an ad: 
 

Job Opening. The Sask Party has an opening for M.L.A. 
for this area. Most people think the pay is good and the 
hours are short. If you are honest, energetic and have 
common sense, you should apply to (who?) Grant Schmidt. 

 
The same Grant Schmidt under the old Tory Party is the same 



378 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 1999 

Grant Schmidt under the new Tory Party. And they ask the 
people of Saskatchewan to please trust us as we want to sit on 
that side of the House and we want to govern the province of 
Saskatchewan. Well, no thank you. 
 
Some of the articles are interesting, and this is back in 
November 26, 1997, Mr. Speaker, and this is an opinion from 
the Saskatoon Sun, and the headlines are: “Saskatchewan Party 
would take (the) province back 40 or 50 years.” The Sask Tory 
Party would take the province back 40 or 50 years. 
 
And it goes on to say, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan voters 
have already had the kind of government that this new party 
offers. It ruined an economy, widened the gap between rich and 
poor, destroyed useful social programs, and left a legacy of 
cynicism and mistrust. 
 
Voters aren’t infallible, but they do have long memories. And, 
Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly what we’re telling the Tory Party 
today, that they are not going to sit on this side of the Assembly 
and we will not have to listen to their kinds of budgets in the 
future. 
 
The Humboldt Journal, Mr. Speaker. “Association by name” is 
the article, and it’s from a Mr. Ben Gerwing from Lake Lenore. 
And this is what it says, and I quote: 
 

Because of my silly pride, I would find it impossible to 
vote for a group of unimaginative politicians who have 
named themselves (the Sask Tory Party) “The 
Saskatchewan Party”. 
 
I voted for the Devine Conservatives! I am not too proud 
of the display of intelligence associated with that fact. Now 
I hear my friends say the Conservatives in Saskatchewan 
were a bunch of crooks, and I cringe. 
 

The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order, order. Order, 
order. Just in the process of recognizing the hon. member from 
Prince Albert Carlton who wishes to catch the attention of the 
Chair, I did hear the hon. member for Carrot River Valley using 
some references that are unparliamentary in his debate. And 
although he’s quoting directly, that still does not permit 
members to engage in the use of unparliamentary words when 
engaging in debate. And I will, first of all, ask the hon. member 
for Carrot River Valley to withdraw his remark and apologize 
to the House. 
 
Mr. Renaud: — I withdraw my remarks, Mr. Speaker, and 
apologize to the House. 
 
The Speaker: — Now why is the member for Prince Albert 
Carlton on his feet? 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to request leave 
of the Assembly to introduce a guest. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — I want to thank the member for Carrot River 
Valley for yielding, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to introduce a 

special guest in your gallery today, Mr. Speaker, and that is our 
MP (Member of Parliament) Derrek Konrad from Prince Albert. 
He has just been in conversation with the member from 
Saskatchewan Rivers, and on behalf of myself, on behalf of the 
member from Prince Albert Northcote, and the member from 
Saskatchewan Rivers, I want to ask all members of the 
Assembly to greet MP Derrek Konrad to Saskatchewan through 
the Saskatchewan Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

(continued) 
 

Mr. Renaud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I too would like 
to welcome Mr. Konrad to the Assembly. Mr. Konrad is 
certainly my Member of Parliament, and welcome here, Derrek. 
 
I’m going to move on, Mr. Speaker, and talk a little bit about 
health care. And the reason I’m going to do that, Mr. Speaker, 
is we do address it in the budget — an extra $195 million to 
health care in many areas. And I want to speak a little bit about 
what that money is going to do. 
 
Nine million in emergency service enhancements such as a 
single-number calling FleetNet technology and more EMTs 
(emergency medical technician). Improved community health 
facilities that offer a broader range of services including 
emergency and chronic care, palliative care, respite care, 
visiting professionals. And the list goes on. 
 
Expanded cancer treatment now in 15 health districts, Mr. 
Speaker. Expanded renal dialysis programs. Ensuring the 
supply of rural physicians through the emergency room 
coverage. Weekend on-call relief. Rural practice establishment 
grants, and training programs and locum relief. And Telehealth 
pilot projects, Mr. Speaker, using video-conference technology 
to link physicians, specialists, and patients from rural 
communities to communities where those specialists might be. 
 
Other things that are happening in the health care field, Mr. 
Speaker, there are 4.6 million office visits during a year to 
family physicians in the province of Saskatchewan — about 
$96.1 million worth; 925,000 visits to specialists; 9,200 nursing 
home beds; 28,000 people receiving home care services; and a 
total of 1.78 million hours of service and 470,000 meals. Over 
800,00 days of in-patient hospital care. And most people out 
there do not realize these numbers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
An estimated 650,000 emergency room or clinic visits; 72,000 
trips by road ambulance; 800 air ambulance trips; 237,000 
diagnostic or therapeutic radiology services; 112,000 
ultrasounds in a year, Mr. Speaker; 46,000 CAT scans; 5,000 
MRIs; 400,000 immunizations for children and adults; 1.45 
million tests in the provincial laboratory; help with prescription 
drug costs to 100,000 families — $76 million worth, Mr. 
Speaker. And I could on and on. 
 



March 31, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 379 

And you know what the Sask Tories do when they go to these 
town hall meetings. First of all they inflate the number of 
people that are there. Instead of 37 in Arcola, they say 50. 
Instead of 200 in Carrot River, they say 300. And so that’s what 
the first thing they do. And then they tell people that your 
hospital is going to close —they say your hospital is going to 
close. They say to the people of Hudson Bay, your hospital is 
going to close. Well we know that’s not fact, Mr. Speaker. I 
was just there to cut the ribbon. 
 
We have a beautiful facility in Hudson Bay. We have an acute 
care facility, an integrated facility with a long-term care home. 
We have a doctor’s clinic that adjoins it. It’s an excellent 
facility, spacious and roomy and clean and bright, providing 
excellent care service. 
 
And it’s community service now, Mr. Speaker. It’s service in 
Hudson Bay where the doctors are on salary and there’s a 
primary health care nurse now. And there are other services that 
come to the community, specialized services. And, Mr. 
Speaker, if there is a service that is not there in the community, 
they can work to get that service there — like baby dental care 
or chiropractic care or whatever it might be that’s needed by the 
community. 
 
And what did the Sask Tories say? They say, oh your hospital is 
going to close. They tell the people that the hospital is going to 
close. How can they feel comfortable with themselves, telling 
stories like that, Mr. Speaker? How can they feel comfortable 
with themselves in confusing issues like health care? 
 
And I want at this point, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the Sask 
Tories however, for one thing that they did for me and my 
constituency. Because, Mr. Speaker, they did go to Carrot 
River, and they did call a meeting. And it proved to be a place 
where I could go and explain to the people the facts about 
health care. 
 
And do you know, Mr. Speaker, I didn’t have to pay for the hall 
— the Sask Tories paid for the hall. They actually paid for the 
hall. And I had the opportunity to explain to the people of 
Carrot River exactly the situation about health care. And I want 
to thank them for that, Mr. Speaker, because I haven’t had the 
opportunity before. And I want to thank them for that. 
 
And a little bit about agriculture, Mr. Speaker, before I take my 
place. You know the farmers in rural Saskatchewan are starting 
to understand that the Sask Tories are not their answer. They 
are starting to realize that in fact when the Sask Tories stand up 
and say just put your money up when it comes to the AIDA 
(Agricultural Insurance Disaster Assistance) program, that 
something’s wrong here. 
 
Why should we — the farmers of Saskatchewan and the people 
that work on Saskatchewan farms and in the agricultural sector, 
the agricultural industry in Saskatchewan — why should we be 
putting money from this pocket into this pocket? Shouldn’t it be 
all Canadians sharing in protecting our farmers when there is a 
crisis on the farm? Maybe that’s the way it should be. 
 
You know all Canadians help the Newfoundland fishermen 
when they get into trouble. But what happens in Saskatchewan 
when we have a problem in agriculture? The Sask Tory Party 

stands up and say Saskatchewan government just put . . . 
Saskatchewan taxpayers just put your money up. There’s no 
national vision by that party at all, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They are not protecting the Saskatchewan taxpayer. They are 
not protecting the Saskatchewan farmer. For the name of 
politics they’re standing up in this House and telling the 
taxpayers of the province of Saskatchewan to foot the bill on a 
national responsibility. And that’s not fair, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And every farmer in this province, by the time the election is 
called, will know that what the Saskatchewan, the Sask Tory 
Party have done is really cost them a lot of money — a lot of 
money out of their pockets. 
 
And the Liberals aren’t much better, Mr. Speaker. The Liberals 
aren’t much better. The Liberals . . . Here I see there’s a press 
release on March 3, 1999. And they say the Liberals demand 
NDP use provincial share of farm aid money to help those in 
need. 
 
Well that’s quite interesting, Mr. Speaker. Instead of asking 
their federal government . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Now all — order — all 
hon. members, all hon. members will recognize the importance 
of allowing hon. members to engage in debate in an 
uninterrupted manner. And I’ll encourage members to put their 
remarks on the record when the opportunity presents itself. 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. Renaud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And as I was saying, 
the Liberals are no better. They say to the province, take your 
hundred and forty million dollars and give it to the farmers in 
need; and if you . . . maybe it’s an acreage payment, we don’t 
know; we have no real solutions, but, you know, give it to the 
farmers some other way. Well a hundred and forty million if 
you divide it on an acreage payment might be, I don’t know — 
a couple of bucks an acre, three bucks an acre maybe. 
 
Instead of fighting or challenging their brothers in Ottawa, the 
Liberal government in Ottawa, for real help to talk to the 
American government about the unfair subsidy, to talk to 
Europeans about the unfair subsidy and to take challenge . . . to 
take this challenge as a national government and do what’s right 
for Canadian farmers. Take that national responsibility and 
instead of . . . You, sir, in the Liberal Party across, Mr. Speaker, 
must demand from their brothers in Ottawa that they take this 
national responsibility instead of asking the Saskatchewan 
taxpayer to foot the bill. 
 
And just before I sit down, Mr. Speaker, I want to just say again 
that I will be supporting this budget. A budget that put a 
hundred and ninety-five million dollars more into health care; 
$1 billion dollars in education, Mr. Speaker. It used to be in 
1991 when we came to power that we were spending more on 
interest on our debt than what we were spending on education. 
Now today we’re spending $250 million more on education 
than we are on interest on our debt. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



380 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 1999 

Mr. Renaud: — And our debt, Mr. Speaker — $3.4 billion 
paid on that debt. And as long as we’re in power, Mr. Speaker, 
we’ll continue to pay down that debt so that our children do not 
have to deal with it. 
 
Tax, Mr. Speaker — 1 per cent sales tax. A sustainable tax cut. 
Yes, the opposition Sask Tories would say, well cut more or 
expend more. But this sustainable tax cut is here forever. 
Hopefully as long as we’re in power. Oppositions say, you 
know, we should have cut more taxes, spent more. We on this 
side of the House, Mr. Speaker, will not buy votes with our 
children’s money. 
 
It’s a balanced approach — pay down the debt, improve 
services, and reduce taxes as we can afford it, Mr. Speaker. I 
will be supporting the budget and not the amendment to the 
budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m going to 
enjoy getting into the debate on the budget. I think there’s a lot 
of things that have got to be clarified. And really what this, 
what this budget is really all about is priorities. 
 
Now we look at the Sask-a-Tories, they unleashed their 
platform — when? — probably September, October. And it’s 
really their document that they’re taking into the election. They 
would rather not have to because it’s so outdated already. In 
fact it’s entitled The Way Up and I think they should be 
changing that to the way out, Mr. Speaker. It’s out of date, it’s 
out of touch, and it’s out of gas. And no more has to be said 
about that. 
 
What we want to talk about is the budget that was brought 
down in this province by the New Democrat government — but 
really the priorities of the people of what that budget should 
have been. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on Tuesday, March 23, Saskatchewan Liberals 
announced our health care priorities for 1999. We decided to 
announce our health care platform for the election at a time for 
two reasons: first because Saskatchewan Liberals, like the 
people of Saskatchewan, believe that health care must be the 
number one priority of the Government of Saskatchewan; and 
second because we were confident that our health care platform 
could be fully funded without any increases in taxes. In fact our 
health platform can be entirely funded using only the increased 
health funding announced in the federal budget of February. 
 
On Friday, I was pleased to see what the Saskatchewan Minister 
of Finance, that he went beyond the federal increase in health 
funding, increasing the health budget by $195 million. This 
amount of money will enable us to implement the Liberal health 
platform and more — if it is focused on the right priorities, if it 
is not wasted on more administrative costs, if it is focused on 
securing the front-line health care workers we need to overcome 
the long waiting lists, Mr. Speaker — so Saskatchewan can 
again provide the quality health care service Saskatchewan 
people have a right to expect in every region of this province. 
 
In response to a question on Tuesday, we made it clear that 
Liberals believe that we must refocus our priorities. If we make 

recruiting and retaining the front-line health care workers, we 
need a top priority. If we place priority on treating our nurses, 
physiotherapists, and other front-line health care providers 
fairly and with respect, two of the things we must do are, we 
must provide full-time regular jobs, so nurses aren’t forced to 
commute between two or three part-time positions to make ends 
meet. 
 
Experience shows that treating nurses the way the NDP health 
policy has, leads to burnout and loss of front-line health care 
providers we need. This must be changed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Second, we need to improve working conditions by doing 
things like making sure that workers doing the same job get the 
same pay. 
 
The NDP merged two unions but didn’t do the responsible 
thing, Mr. Speaker, by making sure this was done fairly. I am 
confident that a Liberal government can meet these immediate 
needs. I’m confident a Liberal government can and will create a 
work environment which treats front-line health care workers 
with dignity and respect for a cost of 110 to $120 million, about 
60 per cent of the budget increase proposed by the NDP. That 
will leave a Liberal government with an additional 75 to 85 
million to implement the other priorities to which we are 
committed. And the people of this province are going to 
appreciate these priorities. 
 
We will create 10 to 12 regional hospitals by making a modest 
investment in additional services at each of these regional 
hospitals. A Liberal government will make advanced diagnostic 
services available at each regional hospital. A Liberal 
government will provide renal dialysis equipment at each 
regional hospital, making it possible for people in many 
communities to obtain these life-saving services close to home 
without being forced to move away from their jobs, their 
homes, and their communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a Liberal government will purchase four mobile 
MRIs to provide these specialized diagnostic services at 
regional hospitals in all areas of the province. The proposed 
health budget increases will enable us to fulfill these health 
priorities and much more, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Access to cancer treatment services will be improved. Regional 
hospitals will increase the availability of services in rural 
Saskatchewan . . . in Saskatchewan, shortening the waiting lists 
in rural Saskatchewan and relieving the pressure that increases 
waiting lists in Regina and Saskatoon. 
 
Saskatchewan Liberals will not change the total funding 
committed to health care in the proposed budget because, if it is 
used properly, it will be enough to meet the health care 
priorities to which we are committed. And in future years the 
federal commitments to increased health care funding will 
enable us to maintain these commitments so long as all of these 
federal increases are applied to health care. Saskatchewan 
Liberals agree with the Minister of Finance. Health care 
funding cannot be frozen as the Saskatchewan Tories or 
Sask-a-Tories have proposed, but we still don’t think he has 
priorities right, Mr. Speaker. 
 
A Saskatchewan Liberal government will expand, improve, and 



March 31, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 381 

stabilize health services in rural Saskatchewan and we will 
relieve the pressure on hospitals in Regina and Saskatoon, 
removing hundreds of people from NDP waiting lists. 
 
A Saskatchewan Liberal government will do this by again 
making health care the number one priority of the Government 
of Saskatchewan by expanding diagnostic and treatment 
services in 10 to 12 regional hospitals, a commitment that the 
Health minister is not prepared to make; by keeping open all 
hospitals in rural Saskatchewan during our first term in office, a 
commitment the associate Health minister is not prepared to 
make; by providing physiotherapy and occupation services at 
each of these regional hospitals, a commitment that the Finance 
minister was not prepared to make. 
 
It’s a question of priorities, Mr. Speaker. Our commitment is to 
make high quality health care services which are accessible in 
every region of Saskatchewan the number one priority of the 
Liberal government of Saskatchewan. The health care budget 
increase is sufficient to implement these health care priorities if 
it is done right so it won’t be necessary to take additional funds 
from elsewhere in the proposed budget to meet these priorities. 
 
Further to that, we will be providing substantial budget 
increases in some areas and reducing the budget in areas which 
we don’t believe are the real priorities of the people of 
Saskatchewan, first in post-secondary education, Mr. Speaker. 
The budget for Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training 
has provided substantial increases for student support programs, 
training programs, career and employment support services, and 
support for post-secondary education institutions including our 
universities and SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 
Science and Technology). 
 
We reviewed this budget and decided that now, when economic 
conditions are not good, now is not the time to be adjusting 
programs that are helping our young people obtain the skills 
that they need to build a future. Now is not the time to be 
making adjustments in post-secondary program budgets. 
However, now is the time to enhance these programs, Mr. 
Speaker. Now is the time to find the funds from other budget 
areas so we can enhance these programs that help young people 
build futures. 
 
Today thousands of young people are delaying entering 
post-secondary education programs at our universities and 
SIAST, Mr. Speaker; they’re doing it for financial reasons. In 
today’s economic conditions, it is especially difficult for first 
and second year students. Many are having problems earning 
and saving enough for tuition. The government can’t entirely 
overcome this problem, but we had better try to help because 
Saskatchewan’s future depends on a well-educated labour force, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Again it’s a question of priorities, and in 1999 a Liberal 
government will introduce a scholarship program which 
provides $1,000 per year to every first and second year student 
enrolled in a full-time program of studies at the University of 
Saskatchewan, University of Regina, or any of the SIAST 
campuses. 
 
Beginning in 1999 a Liberal government will provide $22 
million per year to provide $1,000 scholarships for first and 

second year students; every first and second year student 
enrolled in full-time programs at our two universities and 
SIAST. 
 
Second, helping maintain rural communities. Saskatchewan 
rural communities are facing challenging times, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker: incomes are low, farm input costs are high, the NDP 
continues to threaten to close more rural hospitals, and threats 
of grain elevator closures are looming. 
 
In tough economic times rural communities don’t need more 
problems. A Saskatchewan Liberal government will stop the 
hospital closures; we will help rural communities stop the grain 
elevator closures. Within 14 days of being sworn in, a 
Saskatchewan Liberal government will introduce legislation to 
save rural grain elevators. 
 
Any company seeking to close a grain elevator will be required 
to provide notice of intent to close. From the date of notice, 
local community groups will have 180 days to determine 
whether they want to take over the elevator at fair market value, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. If the community group and the elevator 
company can’t agree on a fair price, an independent arbitrator 
will do so. It will be a community decision and a Liberal 
government will provide assistance to community groups to 
help them make that decision. 
 
Communities facing closure of their grain elevators, will have 
two questions to answer: does saving our elevator make 
economic sense, and if so, is it a priority of our community? We 
will assist community groups to fund feasibility assessments to 
answer these questions and to decide whether to take over their 
grain elevator. 
 
A Liberal government will provide funding to assist one group 
or community to complete a feasibility assessment. The cost of 
this assessment will be cost shared with the community group 
on a 75 per cent/25 per cent basis to a maximum provincial 
government contribution of $60,000 per community, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
(1515) 
 
Starting in 1999, a Liberal government will commit $4 million 
per year to help communities decide how best to save their 
grain elevators. Helping communities reach those decisions and 
save their grain elevators is a priority for a Saskatchewan 
Liberal government. 
 
Finally, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we need to place a high priority 
on rural Saskatchewan and urban Saskatchewan and shock 
absorbers and tires and wheel alignments and backbones. 
Highways affects all of those things. And all of us. And so do 
streets and roads throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
When you look at the priority the Minister of Finance places on 
Saskatchewan highways, if he has any at all, you have to 
wonder: do any of the cabinet ministers in the NDP government 
ever travel on our highways or our streets or our roads? Do they 
ever get out of that executive jet and come down to earth? A 
$15 million increase in the Highways budget all the way up to 
$235 million — 235 million when the province collects $370 
million in fuel taxes alone. 



382 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 1999 

If we don’t soon get serious, if we don’t soon start maintaining 
and repairing highways, roads, and streets in Saskatchewan, 
many will deteriorate so badly that they will have to be entirely 
rebuilt. 
 
A Saskatchewan Liberal government will not allow the 
deterioration of our highway and transportation systems to 
continue. A Saskatchewan Liberal government will make 
highways, streets, and roads a top priority, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Starting in 1999 every penny collected from gasoline taxes will 
be spent back on Highways and Transportation. 
 
This year it is estimated that the gasoline tax will raise $370 
million for the provincial coffers. A Liberal government will 
commit all that fuel tax to Highways and Transportation on the 
following basis, Mr. Speaker: 75 per cent, or two hundred and 
seventy-seven and a half million dollars will go into the 
Department of Highways and Transportation budget. That’s an 
increase of $47.9 million for provincial highways. 
 
In addition, 15 per cent will go to cities, towns, and villages and 
rural municipalities to build and maintain their streets and 
roads, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Minister of Finance generously put 5 million — 5 million 
out of 370 million in gas taxes — into a new program he calls 
rural roads strategic initiatives fund. With a name like that you 
can be pretty sure it was a bureaucrat in Regina who dreamed 
the name up, not someone who actually has to navigate around 
the potholes on rural roads. 
 
That fund will be renamed the rural and urban streets and roads 
fund, and the 5 million will be topped up to 15 per cent of the 
gas tax. In 1999 it will distribute $55.5 million to local 
governments throughout Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And the last 10 per cent of the gas tax or $37 million will be 
earmarked for twinning of the Trans-Canada and Yellowhead 
highways. For too long we have been hearing about death along 
the two major interprovincial highways, and it has got to stop, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
After the election it will likely be too late to design and begin a 
twinning program this year. And $37 million will only pay for 
twinning of about 90 kilometres per year. The interprovincial 
highways twinning program will start in 2000. And before it 
starts we intend to get a commitment from the federal minister 
to provide matching funding. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — With a total of $74 million in federal and 
provincial funding we will be able to complete the twinning of 
about 180 kilometres per year. At that rate, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, we will be able to complete twinning of the 
Trans-Canada and Yellowhead highways in the first term of a 
Liberal government. 
 
So there you have it, Mr. Deputy Speaker — the top priorities 
of a Liberal government. The priorities we will implement this 
year, Priorities 1999, the Saskatchewan Liberal election 
platform. 
 

Now no doubt one of the members opposite is going to ask, 
well where are you going to get the money? First let me say I’m 
glad they ask because it shows you the difference in priorities 
between the Saskatchewan Liberals and the NDP. 
 
The 30 to 35 million in annual operating costs for the health 
priorities we announced on March 23 will be covered by the 
increase in federal funding to health care which forms part of 
the proposed $195 million increase in the provincial health 
budget. A Liberal government will maintain that increase in 
1999. And we will increase the health budget in future years by 
at least the amount of the annual increases the federal 
government has already committed. 
 
First let me total up the cost of the priorities for 1999. Thirty to 
35 million for regional hospitals, MRIs for the regional 
hospitals, and 300 new full-time . . . 300 new full-time nursing 
positions — costs which can be covered from the proposed 
increases within this health budget. 
 
Twenty-two million dollars per year for scholarships for all first 
. . . for all full-time first- and second-year students at our 
universities and SIAST campuses; $4 million per year to help 
rural communities save their grain elevators; 47.9 million to 
increase the Highways and Transportation budget to $277.5 
million, or 75 per cent of total provincial gas tax revenues with 
implementation beginning in 1999; $50.5 million to increase the 
rural and urban streets and roads fund to 55.5 million, or 15 per 
cent of the gas tax revenues. This amount will go into the 
Highways and Transportation budget and every penny will be 
distributed to cities, towns, villages, and rural municipalities 
starting in 1999, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Thirty-seven million or 10 per cent of gas tax revenue will be 
earmarked for the Trans-Canada and the Yellowhead, for the 
interprovincial highways program, beginning next year when 
we hope to have concluded an agreement for a matching federal 
contribution to this program. Since these funds will not be spent 
this year they will be left in the general revenue for 1999. 
 
In summary, the Priorities 1999 commitments of a Liberal 
government will require spending 124.4 million on new 
priorities. These new priorities will require us to find savings of 
2.2. per cent from elsewhere in the budget. 
 
I want to make one other comment about the budget before I 
outline where a Liberal government will find the needed 
savings. Like most Saskatchewan taxpayers, I’m concerned that 
the proposed budget does not provide for any significant 
paydown of the provincial debt. And we did look at 
opportunities to increase the paydown, but determined that 
today’s economic conditions will limit our ability to deal with 
this priority in 1999. 
 
In future years, we are confident we can provide for both tax 
cuts and significant debt paydown based on two factors, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. First, resource revenues will increase in the 
future. Oil revenues will come back close to the levels of a few 
years ago plus new uranium mines will substantially increase 
resource revenues. Together these should combine to help 
produce annual resource revenues in the $900 million range — 
an increase of about 350 million from the 1999 projections. 
 



March 31, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 383 

In addition, a Liberal government will help create an economic 
climate in which small businesses will be able to grow and 
expand to help create an economic turnaround, which will not 
only increase government revenues providing opportunities for 
tax cuts but better times will reduce demands on social program 
costs. 
 
Now the cost savings. A Liberal government will not take over 
until partway through the year following the election so not all 
of the cost savings will be fully realized in 1999, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
For this reason, and because we will not form a Liberal 
government until well into the highway construction season, the 
full 47.9 million increase in the provincial Highways budget 
may not be fully implemented this year, but all of the other 
priorities will be implemented in 1999, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
A Liberal government will make budget cuts throughout 
government to save $24.7 million by eliminating unnecessary 
middle management jobs and saving other costs related to 
support services for these positions. By this means we will 
eliminate 600 middle management jobs out of a total of almost 
10,000 jobs, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The jobs we will eliminate 
are middle managers, policy analysts, spin doctors, and the like. 
No front-line staff who actually deliver needed services to the 
public, nor will field-level supervisor positions. 
 
A Liberal government will eliminate only positions earning 
more than $60,000 per year. And we also eliminate a few 
positions which support these middle management positions. 
For the latter group, the support staff, staff whose positions are 
deleted, will be given first opportunity at job openings which 
result from people retiring or leaving for other reasons. A 
Liberal government will also make sure that executive assistant 
positions in ministers’ offices will make a large contribution to 
these cuts. 
 
Next, based on figures from the ’97-98 Public Accounts, we 
estimate that a 25 per cent cut in government travel will save 
9.6 million. And a Liberal government will make sure that 
travel budgets for ministers and their staff take a big hit. We 
have telephones; we have the Internet. And ministers don’t need 
executive assistants to carry their bags when they travel. If the 
choice is health services and highways or government travel, I 
know where Liberals will place a priority. 
 
The Minister of Finance proposed a budget of 7.2 million for 
Executive Council. This will make his boss the Premier happy. 
But is it a priority? Liberals can only find about one and a half 
million in this budget that is definitely needed. So even if we 
are generous, the most the Premier’s Executive Council may 
need is about two and a half million dollars, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, resulting in a saving of at least $4.7 million. 
 
Of the proposed $49.2 million budget for the Department of 
Economic and Co-operative Development, the vast majority is 
to provide funding to organizations which actually do the job —
35.7 million goes to regional economic development 
authorities, economic partnership agreements, co-operative 
development, Tourism Saskatchewan, northern Saskatchewan, 
and similar organizations — organizations that actually do the 
work. 

The remainder goes to administration and that sinkhole of bad 
investments, the Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation. We 
have banks and other private sector financial organizations. We 
have the Federal Business Development Bank. We don’t need 
to duplicate these services and we don’t need a place to hide 
Zach Douglas and other NDP hacks. Saskatchewan 
Opportunities Corporation will be eliminated, saving $6.2 
million. 
 
The real work of economic development is done by local 
organizations like chambers of commerce and the regional 
economic development authorities and by organizations like 
Tourism Saskatchewan. So why does the NDP place priority on 
a $5 million administrative bureaucracy, a bureaucracy filled 
with high-priced NDP policy analysts and spin doctors? It will 
be cut in half as a start, saving $2.6 million per year. 
 
In 1997-98 the NDP government spent $9 million to their 
advertising agencies at taxpayers’ expense. We suspect they 
have hidden at least that much in the 1999 budget to advertise 
the NDP political through government departments. There is 
some need to provide basic information to the people of 
Saskatchewan but we don’t need $9 million worth of political 
spin, so the Liberals will save at least 7 million by cutting 
government advertising, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
In addition to the ad agencies, the NDP provides full-time jobs 
for their spin doctors in communications programs. Again there 
is some need to provide information to the public, but — but — 
we don’t need the political spin. So a Liberal government will 
cut departmental communications budget by at least $4 million. 
That’s in addition to more than 1 million for political spin that 
we already committed to cut from the Exec Council. 
 
A Liberal government will cut at least 8.7 million from legal 
fees, polling, and other consulting services. Basically we intend 
to eliminate the patronage services which are so near and dear 
to the hearts of the NDP government. 
 
Out of a total of $325 million in proposed spending for supplier 
and other payments we will find an additional saving of 20.9 
million. 
 
That’s a total of 90.6 million in cuts from NDP priorities in the 
1999 NDP budget. And the Liberal government will make those 
cuts permanent, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
For one year only, the Liberal government will also use the 
savings from Crown corporations cuts to increase the transfer 
from Crown entities by 33.8 million. For the 2000 budget, we 
will find further cuts within the provincial budget to cover off 
these required savings. Then the savings will continue at the 
Crowns and be passed on to the public through lower rates. 
 
In 1999 and future years, these Crown savings will come from 
cuts to middle management and senior management, and 
associated costs of $19.8 million; $10.4 million in cuts to 
Crown advertising budgets, including those used to advertise to 
entice the people to come in and lose their money; $3.6 million 
in legal and polling and other consulting costs. We want to 
make it clear that the foregoing are the priorities for a full year 
1999 Liberal budget. 
 



384 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 1999 

When we are elected it will not be possible to fully implement 
our highway commitments both for the Trans-Canada and the 
Yellowhead interprovincial highways twinning program and the 
provincial highways program just because it would be too late 
in the season to design and begin much of the new construction. 
These commitments will be fully implemented in 2000. The 
other priorities will all be implemented in 1999. 
 
Within 60 days of forming a Liberal government we will 
implement all of our health care commitments. 
 
Within 14 days of forming a Liberal government we will pass 
legislation and provide funding to help communities save rural 
grain elevators. 
 
Within 14 days of forming a Liberal government, we will 
provide 55.5 million in funds, funds that will be directly 
transferred to cities, towns, and villages and rural 
municipalities; funds that will assist local governments to 
maintain and repair streets and roads throughout rural and urban 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Finally the one-time capital cost of diagnostic and renal dialysis 
equipment for the 10 to 12 regional hospitals plus the mobile 
MRI equipment is estimated at $37 million. This is a one-time 
expenditure. We expect that about 4 to 6 million of this cost can 
be covered by savings from reducing the number of health 
district boards and the remainder will be covered by delaying 
approximately 25 per cent of the capital expenditures the NDP 
were planning on approving in their 1999 budget. 
 
These expenditures may be important. It is just difficult to say 
until we have more detailed information but certainly this is 
clearly a case of getting your priorities right. After all it won’t 
do a great deal of harm to delay the purchase of new 
government fleet vehicles, new computer equipment, new office 
equipment. It only makes sense to delay these kind of capital 
expenditures for one year rather than delaying purchasing health 
care equipment that could lower the risk to people’s health, 
livelihood, and perhaps even their lives. 
 
When it comes to that kind of decision, I don’t have any 
problem telling you which one gets my vote as a top priority, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. That, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the 
difference between the New Democrat budget, their platform, 
and what a Liberal government platform is going to all be 
about. And you travel throughout rural Saskatchewan, through 
the urban Saskatchewan, ask them what their priorities are and I 
think they’ll agree with us each and every time, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Their budget was nothing more than pure politics, and it’s 
showing itself for what it is when you listen to the ads and the 
thousands of dollars that are being wasted right now to promote 
what is their election platform. 
 
I’ll tell you what wasn’t explained in the budget, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. What wasn’t explained was things such as what my 
colleague from Arm River raised today in the House about a 
drug called fosamax which stops bone loss and broken bones 
and reverses the effects of osteoporosis. They had the political 
spin about the diagnostic side of that but not the treatment. 
They’re not prepared to spend money to have those drugs 

available and on the drug plan here in Saskatchewan. 
 
And another thing that wasn’t explained is my colleague from 
Melville raised questions today on behalf of nurses in Fort 
Qu’Appelle and Moose Jaw regarding the lack of incentives and 
the proper work environment and proper pay for the nurses of 
this province who have to make this health care system work. 
 
The Premier claims he should call for more tax cuts like the 
Sask-a-Tories have been doing. A 1 per cent tax cut in 
education and health tax — is that enough? Well it’s a great 
start; we applaud him for that. We think that should have 
happened. But to go further, what is he saying? Is there room or 
isn’t there room? He’s even confusing his front benches over 
there. I think what he’s doing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is doing 
nothing more than playing some politics here. 
 
(1530) 
 
And back to the nurses. You know it’s the same Premier who 
said not so long ago that he was absolutely shocked to find out 
about this nursing crisis, although he’s got an associate Health 
minister who supposedly, she claims, warned him of that a few 
years ago — told the Health minister and him. Now he’s . . . 
(inaudible) . . . but he’s saying, well we’re going to get to the 
bottom of this, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That’s what he’s telling the 
people of this province. 
 
Well I thought, well perhaps he’s telling, you know, being as 
honest as he could about getting to the bottom of this. So I 
wrote him a letter some days ago explaining a situation in 
Shaunavon where in fact because of a deficit, because the health 
district is not being provided enough funding for staff, they’re 
laying off I think it was 19 support staff and a handful of 
nurses. 
 
Well when I put the questions to the health board, the health 
district board from Shaunavon — is it the fact that you don’t 
need the nurses? Are you overstaffed? They said no, no, that’s 
not it at all. Fact of the matter is we don’t have enough money. 
In fact if we had more money, they stated that they would hire 
these people back. 
 
So I wrote a letter to the Premier. If you really and truly want to 
get to the bottom of a nursing crisis, why don’t you make sure 
the funds are going to go out there? They talk about all this 
extra funding for front-line health care workers. He won’t meet 
with the nurses. I’ve asked him by way of letter — he won’t 
respond to the letter — if in fact he’ll have this meeting and 
listen to the concerns out there. 
 
We’ve got nurses in Shaunavon that are working 60 hours a 
week. These are the ones that were laid off. They’re putting in 
those kind of overtime hours because they are run ragged, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. Yet the Premier is sitting on his hands doing 
nothing about it. 
 
When he stood up in front of the cameras that day and said, I’m 
going to get to the bottom of this nursing crisis, he was making 
a political statement, not a statement about his concern for 
health care. He was concerned about his skin. That’s what he 
was concerned about, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and no more than 
that. 



March 31, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 385 

And while this is all happening, while he chooses to ignore the 
problems that are being faced by health care workers, by people 
like those nurses in Shaunavon who on April 15 are going to 
lose their jobs if that Premier doesn’t get up and get busy and 
get at it, his friends are doing very well. 
 
You ever look at the list of his friends in government? And we 
could go on and on, and it’s a horribly lengthy list, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Every friend he’s got is in there making 150 to 
200,000 bucks a year. That doesn’t bother him at all. But when 
we’re laying off health care workers he chooses to do nothing 
about it. 
 
When we look at the travel, when we look at the travel for his 
friends in government, we can probably cut 10 million in total 
travel costs. SaskPower executives’ out-of-province travel was 
$160,000. And I say we can cut that. 
 
The Minster of Agriculture sits there, and he took, he took 
political hacks six times to places like Rome, Tokyo, China, just 
to carry his bags. 
 
The Minister of Finance took hacks twice in the past few years 
to New York, Hong Kong, and Tokyo. Political appointments 
like Diana Milenkovic, $21,000 in out-of-province travel. Don 
Ching, 43,000 in out-of-province travel. Garry Simons, the 
former CEO (chief executive officer) of the NDP Party, $9,800 
in out-of-province travel. All from SaskTel. 
 
Ron Clark, $47,000, from SaskEnergy. Zach Douglas, $14,534, 
from the Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation. Cheryl 
Barber, $5,211; Randy Heise, 18,000, from SGI (Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance). Gord Nystuen, 2,774, with STC 
(Saskatchewan Transportation Company). Brian Topp, the 
fellow who travels the rotunda out here working the press, to 
the United Steel Workers of America convention in Las Vegas 
— I don’t have the amount here. One asks . . . it begs the 
question, what was he doing? 
 
We look at advertising and communications budgets — two and 
a half million dollars in Health communications branch. That 
was representing a 340 per cent increase since 1992. SaskPower 
over a million dollars in advertising. SaskEnergy $630,348 to 
Phoenix Advertising alone. And that is all attributed to the 
Deputy Premier sitting there. 
 
Government costs, Executive Council, of 6.9 million. And 
we’re saying the Premier just doesn’t need that many people to 
carry his bags. 
 
I could go on and on about middle management in places like 
SaskTel. I tell you we don’t need one manager for every five 
employees. What about SaskPower? I think it was one manager 
for every four employees, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
That’s what priorities are all about. And the people of this 
province are going to clearly say we choose the Saskatchewan 
Liberal priorities over the New Democrat priorities. And the 
Sask-a-Tories don’t even rate in this one. 
 
Yesterday I took note that the Premier when we were talking 
about roads and highways, he and the Deputy Premier were 
sitting laughing away. Where’s your letters, where’s your letters 

to the federal government calling for more money for highways 
and such. Well little did he know we had a stack of them in here 
and I sent them across to which him and the Deputy Premier sat 
and had a good laugh because they were caught. Well they sent 
them back and then they started to heckle: so you sent letters; so 
what, you didn’t get anything. 
 
Well I look in the paper, and we’ve got a paper here that says 
Collenette plans a major overhaul of Canada’s roads, spending 
three and a half billion dollars. I say the lobbying does work. I 
say that instead of playing politics they should join with the 
people of this province in getting their fair share. But first they 
should put up — put up the kind of dollars that Saskatchewan 
taxpayers put into this government for the right reasons, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
I’ll tell you right now with what’s been going on in this 
province . . . and it’s nothing but pure politics when I see the 
people in the Wood River constituency, what they’re having to 
go through to get, to get on the waiting list for surgery for some 
of the things. And I tell you we’re fighting this stuff day in and 
day out. And what they’re having to go through when they’re 
driving on the highways in the Wood River constituency or all 
throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
In fact, a few days ago I had a wheel that was broke right in half 
on a major highway. What kind of a priority is that of this 
government to sit back and do nothing about it? They are doing 
nothing. 
 
They’ve raised the deductible for SGI (Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance) up to 700 bucks. So somebody is 
hitting these kinds of holes on this kind of highway and there’s 
a $700 deductible, which means they’re probably not going to 
ever put in a claim. And yet if they have to go out and fix the 
parts, as this person did — and we’re calling on that 
government to come forward with some money and take care of 
these problems — they even have to pay tax on it. 
 
So the government sort of gets them coming and going on this 
one, don’t they. Aw, the people are . . . they’re tired of that kind 
of treatment. They’re tired of being treated as second class 
citizens in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I think it’s time that this government just get at ’er. I say, let’s 
get at ’er; let’s call the election and let’s have it out. And let’s 
see where the people’s priorities are, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
won’t be supporting that budget because I’m sticking up for the 
people that I represent. Thank you. 
 
(1545) 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It 
really is an honour for me to get up today to speak in favour of 
our sixth consecutive balanced budget. It’s a budget that is 
moving us forward to a brighter future; it’s a budget for the 
people of Saskatchewan, moving forward together. 
 
This is the first time that I’ve had the opportunity in this session 
to get up to have a major address. And so I want to take this 
opportunity to also commend my colleagues for the fine work 
that they do in the legislature, and also to the Speaker and to the 
Deputy Speaker for the fine work that they also do, in the kind 



386 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 1999 

of work they do with school groups and citizens across this 
province to make sure that the role of democracy, the principles 
of our legislature, are protected. And I really do appreciate that 
fine work and I commend you for your efforts. 
 
I also want to take just a moment also to say just a few quick 
words too about the constituency that I represent of 
Weyburn-Big Muddy, because it is a very good constituency. 
And it’s a constituency in which I have decided that I certainly 
want to represent into the next term of office also. It’s a 
constituency that I’m very proud to represent. 
 
It’s one that consists of course of the city of Weyburn, many 
towns, many villages, and many farms. It’s a constituency in 
which of course farming is the backbone. And of course the city 
of Weyburn is the largest grain handling point in all of Canada. 
It’s a constituency that has oil and gas which is an extremely 
important part of the constituency, and of course to our whole 
province. And even though we have seen a bit of a downturn in 
some of the prices, there’s still a lot of optimism for the area in 
gas and oil. 
 
The largest economic development project that this province 
had announced in that industry was announced in Weyburn area 
on the $1.2 billion project for the CO2 project in the 
Weyburn-Estevan area. That’s good news for my area, also 
good news for the province. 
 
It’s a constituency that’s also rich, not just in natural resources 
but in its people. The people there. We have farmers; we have 
small business people; we have people that believe in 
volunteerism; we have people that believe in entrepreneurship, 
in co-operatives. They believe in a balance of public, private, 
and co-operative enterprise. 
 
It’s a constituency in which we have wonderful efforts, whether 
it’s in sports, in culture, in dinner theatres, in figure skating, in 
youth groups, for special needs people, for seniors. Everybody 
is part of the community. 
 
The churches are very, very active and they are involved in our 
constituency. Just this weekend I was able to attend the 
multicultural society’s folk-arama, because they celebrate the 
diversity of the people within our constituency, but within our 
province. I think, as the budget speech had said in the closing of 
it, “from many peoples, strength.” That is really a motto also 
not only for our province, but is certainly exemplified by the 
people within my constituency. 
 
And as I said to begin with, because of the type of people that 
I’ve represented, it has been a real honour, and it was an 
important part of my decision to run again. This is my third 
nomination that I went through, and it’s one in which every 
time — the first, second, third time — I ran as a New 
Democrat. 
 
Thank goodness I do know which party I represent, and when I 
knock on a door I can guarantee the people in that constituency 
what I campaign on is what I stand for and what I represent. 
Which is certainly a lot different than what a lot of people have 
been facing in this province with the people that they have 
elected. 
 

When you decide to run for election and for the importance of a 
democracy, you have to think about the importance of serving 
the people in your area. And it really is rewarding serving in 
elected office. It’s an honour to sit in this government alongside 
our Premier who is one of the ablest leaders in Canada, who has 
given me and influenced me in a better understanding of public 
policy in government and social democracy. Equally I’ve been 
inspired by many of my elected colleagues, both in caucus and 
in cabinet, whose dedication and commitment inspires us all. 
 
Of course as I said earlier, inspiration also comes from the 
people within our constituency, within the party members, but 
also the community people within that constituency. The people 
within our churches, our community organizations, the civil 
service in the farm and labour groups who are at the very front 
line of human service. When we look at those people it makes 
our work also easier. 
 
Another important inspiration for me in why we want to be 
government — and government is a lot different than just 
wanting to have power because government is for the people — 
it’s an inspiration for me in order to protect the interests for our 
children and our grandchildren and our youth, for their hope, 
their vision . . . their future is truly what makes our efforts all 
worthwhile. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget speaks to that type of vision for our 
youth, for our children, for our province. It’s a budget of 
balance. 
 
Another important reason in which I support this budget, and 
also the directions of our government, is the importance of 
accountability, of meeting with the people. I’ve always made 
that one of my priorities in serving the people of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy but also in serving the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
To me, the role of an MLA elected person is to bring the 
concerns and the issues of the people of your area to the 
government, and for me as a government member to bring back 
the policies and the decisions of the government to explain to 
the people. To bring government and people closer together is 
an extremely important priority for myself. And I think it’s an 
extremely important priority for our government. 
 
I’d like to quote what one of my wise colleagues, the member 
from Regina Northeast advised me, “Members get elected 
because of their ability to listen, not just their ability to talk.” 
And listening is an important priority for me as I believe it’s an 
important priority for our government. Every constituent 
deserves a response. 
 
Over the last term I’ve held numerous accountability meetings 
in my constituency but also had meetings with the health 
boards, the education boards, the local governments, farm 
groups, business groups, non-government organizations — 
many, many meetings to hear what the people are saying to us. 
 
But not only have I done that, so has our entire government 
caucus because we move our government caucus outside of 
Regina when we’re not in session. We go out to meet the people 
of this province, to hear their concerns, and for us to tell them 
what our direction is about. 
 



March 31, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 387 

In November I was really privileged to have the entire 
government caucus meet in Weyburn and our government 
committees met with local governments, business people, local 
groups, associations on health care, on education, agriculture, 
social programs. 
 
We have moved our caucus . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
That’s right — right across this province. 
 
But what I heard from the people of Weyburn-Big Muddy as we 
hear in other constituencies as well, I heard that they were so 
pleased that we were out there listening to their concerns. They 
gave us praise for those meetings. And it was not that they 
agreed with everything that we were doing, but it was that the 
government was willing to listen to the ideas and concerns of 
the people of the area. 
 
My government colleagues were also greeted with great 
hospitality from Weyburn-Big Muddy and I’m sure that they 
learned a lot from our area and the priorities that we do have. 
This fall . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Some of us keep going back. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — That’s right. We have ministers coming 
out — we have caucus members coming out — to meet in our 
constituency several times. 
 
This fall I did hold accountability meetings in asking people 
what their priorities were. And again our government did a 
budget pre-consultation right across this province, and I want to 
thank the member that went as our constituency representative 
to the provincial level of consultation, Glenn Froh. 
 
We asked the people what they wanted, and what we continued 
to hear was a balanced approach. We want investment in 
programs — health care was certainly one of those, education, 
highways — but we also want to make sure that we can still do 
some tax reduction and do some debt reduction. A balanced 
approach, and that’s what we heard from the people and that’s 
what we’ve been able to deliver with our budget here today or 
here in this session. 
 
I’ve also got a newspaper clipping before the budget had been 
released. It comes right from the Weyburn Review: What should 
government do in the budget? And they interviewed all young 
high school students. These students really had a very good 
sense. I think the members opposite could take a lot of lesson 
from what the priorities of the young people are in our 
province: 
 

Garrett Lee: They should divide their surplus between 
health, education . . . highways. 
 
Eleisha Lanz: I think there’s two main concerns they have 
to deal with; one is new programs in health care . . . 
highways, (But we also have to pay down our debt. That’s 
another) . . . main concern is the debt. Our debt is overly 
high for the number of people in Saskatchewan. 
 
Corey Leblanc: They should probably spend (some money) 
. . . on health care . . . maybe lower the debt a bit, (maybe) 
. . . spend some on highways. They could lower (the) taxes 

a bit but not a lot. 
 
Jennifer Carson: I think they should put some of the money 
onto the provincial debt (and then divide some money in 
some of the programs like health, education, highways). 
 
Cory Sterling: I’d like to see the money put into health care 
. . . (I’d also like to see some money put into 
infrastructure.) 

 
These young people had reasonable expectations. They looked 
at a balanced approach. They talk about reasonable spending. 
They talk about reasonable tax reduction and debt reduction. 
But I know every one of those young people do not want to see 
deficits, because they do not want their futures mortgaged as 
they already have been by the previous administration in this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is what we call the balanced approach. It is 
investing in programs as we put more dollars into the programs 
that the people have been asking for. But, Mr. Speaker, I also 
believe it’s more than just adding money to our budgets. It’s 
also about good planning and how that money can be spent in 
the best possible way. To me that’s what our government is also 
been about. It’s about community involvement or, as I like to 
say, community empowerment in how programs and services 
are delivered. It’s how government works with the people in 
this province. 
 
We have a tradition of working with local governments, with 
school boards, with health boards, with many non-government 
organizations. But we have also added in many new initiatives 
that I believe bring local people into greater decision making 
with the government. As I said before, more community 
empowerment. 
 
These are initiatives like regional economic development 
authority, the REDAs, which we are still supporting in this 
budget. Area transportation planning committees which are 
helping us plan for the future of the transportation challenges 
that we face. The child action plan is about government 
working with community to find solutions. 
 
Safe community initiatives, elected health boards and health 
advisory councils are all part of involving people at the 
community level in our province to deliver the programs and 
services to them. It’s how we meet the challenges of change. 
This is part of the good planning. More than just dollars — it’s 
part of the good planning, it’s part of community 
empowerment, it’s part of what a New Democratic government 
stands for. 
 
In our budget, in our balanced approach, we have certainly 
highlighted this year in the spending levels in health care. And 
that’s good news for the people of Saskatchewan because when 
we consulted with the people in Saskatchewan, as we heard 
across Canada, this is an important initiative that we need to 
tackle. And it is a number one priority in this budget — it’s for 
this government and it’s also a priority for the people. 
 
This is an unprecedented level — $1.9 billion. More than an 11 
per cent increase in health care; the greatest investment in 
health care in the history of our province. And that’s an 



388 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 1999 

investment that’s going right to the front lines, Mr. Speaker. 
One point three billion dollars for payments, for salaries and 
benefits for front-line health workers — that’s two-thirds of the 
health care budget. 
 
We’re investing $12 million to improve waiting time for key 
surgeries. We’re investing $800,000 for new programs in 
women’s health including breast cancer assessment, bone 
density programs to help fight osteoporosis. We’re adding $3.2 
million to strengthen our cancer programs to be a total of $25.6 
million. We’re investing 5.2 million for increased home care 
which is so important in rural Saskatchewan. We’re investing 
$250,000 for a mobile CAT scan, CT scanner, for rural 
Saskatchewan. Seven hundred and fifty thousand dollars for 
expanding renal dialysis in rural Saskatchewan. We’re investing 
$20.6 million for the College of Medicine and the University of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a tremendous investment in health care. 
And when I was out in my area to the South Central Health 
District, they were very pleased with this health care budget. 
And what they said about it, it was again helping them meet the 
needs of the people in our health district right across that large 
health district with a number of communities. 
 
They received a 6.64 per cent increase in their funding to add to 
our health district. And I quote from the CEO (chief executive 
officer) of that health district: 
 

This is very reassuring and positive news for our 
community and our team of health care professionals who 
provide programs and services to the people of the health 
district. 

 
Specifically the budget includes funding for a mobile CT 
scanner for southern health care districts. In addition, health 
districts will receive assistance to train and recruit nurses. I 
want to repeat that: funding for the health districts to train and 
recruit nurses and other health care professionals. 
 
(1600) 
 
He goes on to say that this: 
 

We are very pleased with this budget because it 
demonstrates the government and health district’s 
commitment to providing quality health care programs and 
services to our communities. 
 

That is the reaction that we’re getting in my health district and 
the reaction that we are getting right across this province. 
 
And when I want to talk a little more specifically on my own 
health care district, and take a little tour around, because there 
are those in the opposition that like to fear monger and try to 
scare people about the services that there are there in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
When I would leave Weyburn, I can go over to Pangman. They 
have one of the first types of integrated facilities that has got a 
health care centre with a community care home, working with 
the district and the community of people to provide needed 
health care services for Pangman and area. It’s a beautiful 

facility. It’s a facility in which many services are delivered to 
not just Pangman but to surrounding communities. 
 
Then I can go over to Bengough. They have a new health centre 
also onto their long-term care facility that provides tremendous 
amount of integrated services. They have services there; they 
have multi-purpose beds in which they can have people over in 
respite, or they can have them there for observation, or they can 
have them there for a few days before that they are . . . been 
going home. They are working together; they had a health care 
fair there. And the amount of services delivered in Bengough 
and area are greater than ever before. 
 
Then I can move over to Radville. And again they have a 
long-term care facility with a health care centre. And what 
they’re having there now is — there’s a commitment with the 
health district to work with that integrated facility there — for a 
new ambulance and new ambulance garage. Again, more 
services being delivered in rural Saskatchewan, services that 
need to be delivered in rural Saskatchewan and which I do 
support. 
 
It’s important that our health district work with those 
communities. And when I talk about, again, empowering 
people, before we did health care changes and moved to the 
model that we have now where we have a health board 
delivering all the different levels of health care services, I don’t 
recall the number of meetings that we had with the public. Our 
health district goes out and meets with the public at meetings in 
order to explain what they’re delivering and to find out what the 
gaps are and what we need to still fill in. Because we know 
there’s still things that we need to do in health care, and they 
will be listening to the people of the province, to the people of 
my constituency. 
 
So what we’ve seen in health care again in this budget is a 
recognition that there needed to be more dollars in . . . that we 
have to put more dollars into good planning and good delivery 
of services for right across this province. The people of 
Saskatchewan told us to put health care at the top of the list, and 
that’s what we have done. 
 
But again, we hear out there these discussions and sometimes I 
think misleading comments from the opposition parties. I want 
to talk a little bit about just the shortage of nurses. Again, I 
think there’s some plain facts here that have to be reiterated. 
 
We put in $9 million for 195 nursing positions in this province. 
That was adding nursing training positions to SIAST. And 
through the nursing recruitment that is happening right now — 
which is nationwide, continentwide, worldwide — we have 
recruited nurses in this province from Edmonton, from Calgary, 
from Winnipeg, from British Columbia, from Ontario, South 
Dakota, Vermont, Montana, and we’re recruiting nurses even 
from California and Texas. 
 
So we have recognized we need more nurses. We’re doing what 
we can to fill those positions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — We also hear from the opposition about 
rural physicians. You know, we have the doctors in Pangman 



March 31, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 389 

and in Coronach and in Weyburn and in Radville. We have 
rural physicians. And you know what, we have more rural 
physicians in rural Saskatchewan today than we did a year ago. 
 
About 70 per cent of our medical grads, the largest percentage 
ever of those family medicine graduates, are staying right here 
in Saskatchewan and going to rural Saskatchewan. 
 
So I think we have to continue to remind people of the facts. 
We are delivering more health care services as the Minister of 
Health is saying here, day after day, than we ever have before in 
the province’s history. 
 
Four point six million visits to the family physicians; 925,000 
visits to specialists; 9,200 nursing beds; 28,000 people 
receiving home care; 650,000 emergency room visits; 72,000 
trips by road ambulance; more than 800 trips by air ambulance; 
5,000 MRIs; 46,000 CT scans; 400,000 immunizations; over 
1.4 million tests. We are delivering health care services. 
 
There is stresses on the system. We have acknowledged that 
with our budget. We are going to meet the challenges and we 
have better services now than ever before in the history of the 
province of Saskatchewan. And by working with the nursing, 
the health care providers, the communities of this province, we 
will protect medicare; we will protect health care; and we will 
be proud of it. And Saskatchewan will again be leading Canada 
in the initiatives which we’re bringing forward in health care. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Now what do we hear from the 
opposition? We hear about freezing health care funding over 
five years. But we not only hear that; listen to what they say 
about how they deliver health care services. They talk about 
for-profit health services. 
 
Mr. Hermanson has campaigned on repealing the Canada 
Health Act which would mean an end to medicare. He’s the 
leader of the Sask-a-Tory party, Mr. Hermanson — two-tier, 
two-tier. 
 
The bottom line is that neither of our opponents want to build 
our medicare system. They both would like to see an American 
two-tiered health care system for Saskatchewan. That is not 
what the people of Saskatchewan want; that is not what this 
government is about; and that is not what we will deliver. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Health care is a priority for this 
government. It is a priority for the people of Saskatchewan. It is 
a priority that I am proud that our budget has recognized. 
 
Our budget though, it addressed a lot of other issues too. It’s 
also good news for our children and for our young people. It’s 
more than just a health care budget. It’s also an education 
budget. 
 
This budget will deliver a billion dollars in education funding 
— 400 million to kindergarten to grade 12; 208 million to our 
universities’ federated colleges; $206 million in training; $31 
million more for our Saskatchewan training strategy. Still have 

JobStart, Future Skills as important programs; entrepreneurship 
programs. These are all important services, education services 
for our young people in this province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I am so pleased that again by our 
government listening to the people of Saskatchewan, listening 
to the people within my constituency, that we will be moving 
towards a joint-use facility in Weyburn which will combine the 
regional college services with the comprehensive high school. 
This is good news for my constituency; this is good news for 
post-secondary, but also our secondary system in Weyburn and 
area. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — This kind of initiative is again what 
people said. And what we have to do is we have to use common 
sense in how we deliver services and this will make sense. And 
I’m very proud that we will be officially doing an 
announcement in Weyburn later this month to give the details 
about that announcement. 
 
But not only are we putting dollars into education, we’ve also 
had announced, again looking at the role of schools. And that’s 
important, because our schools are delivering different services 
now than they may have in the past. 
 
So again we’re consulting with the people across this province 
to look at the role of our schools to the future. To me that’s 
important because it is extremely important to have a strong 
education system in this province as we meet the future, 
because these are the young people that will be our future. And 
so we have good news in education. 
 
We also know we want to deliver good, safe communities in 
our province. That’s been part of the restorative justice 
initiative. But in this budget it also recognizes that with a 
commitment to safe communities. Seventeen million dollars 
more for our Justice department for court and correction 
facilities; for RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) funding 
in rural Saskatchewan; money to go into the serious and 
habitual offender comprehensive action plan. 
 
Even though we’re putting money though into being tough, 
tough on those offenders that we need to be tough on, there is 
more to our budget than just that. What we have to also look at 
is what are the root causes of some of these problems that we’re 
facing. Part of the review in education, the role of education, is 
also part of how we prepare our children and work with our 
communities for the future. But we have to invest in the idea 
that we can also . . . we have to attack crime by attacking at its 
roots: poverty, unemployment, family violence. 
 
And we’re proud of our programs to help people stand on their 
own two feet with our building independence program, our 
award-winning child action plan. And we’re investing $6.7 
million in the Child Benefit. 
 
Nine hundred thousand dollars in the Saskatchewan 
employment supplement to help people find the dignity and the 
stability of work. We have to believe that the best solution to 
crime is to give people — especially our young people — 
constructive, positive alternatives. That honest work beats 



390 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 1999 

dishonest work. That dishonest work does not pay. That’s our 
commitment, and that’s good news again for Saskatchewan. 
 
This budget also continues to address important issues in our 
economy, and certainly agriculture is one of those important 
issues. We are funding to our producers, to our farmers, more 
per capita than any other government in Canada. We have 
stepped up to the plate with $140 million for the 
federal-provincial AIDA program even with all of its 
shortcomings which we tried to negotiate a better deal with no 
help from the opposition. 
 
We knew at the end of the day that if we had to put our dollars 
in, rather than our producers getting 60 cent dollars, we wanted 
them to get a dollar also. So we put our 40 per cent in even 
though all of the arguments that we have said, with over 40 per 
cent of the land base, 3 per cent of the tax base — how unfair 
that cost sharing is. 
 
But not only did we put the dollars in there, we also did an 
enhancement to the NISA (Net Income Stabilization Account) 
program, in which again we put provincial dollars with the 
federal dollars, which is direct money again back to our 
producers. And every little bit, I believe, does help. 
 
We’ve provided short-term loans to help hog producers through 
tough times. Crop insurance premiums have dropped by 40 per 
cent lower than they were in 1996, and the program now has 
been expanded to cover more crops. 
 
We’ve added 3.5 million to agriculture research to a total of 17 
million so we can keep building on what is already a 
world-class record in research and development in ag-biotech, 
in diversification, in value-added food processing, which is the 
key to growth in the future. 
 
Agriculture is extremely important to my constituency but 
extremely important industry right across this province. Like 
I’ve said before, we needed to add dollars. But we have to have 
policies at the federal level that really address the root problems 
that our agriculture industry is facing in this province. Those 
problems are from a federal government that would take out a 
subsidy at a faster rate and a greater amount than ever needed to 
be met, and putting our producers in a situation to be competing 
against producers in the European market, American producers, 
in which their national governments are still subsidizing. 
 
Our farmers are good at what they do. They’re efficient at what 
they do. But when the federal policies target our farmers in such 
an unfair manner, it is very, very difficult for the province that 
has economy that agriculture is based on the most . . . our 
province’s economy is based on most, to come up with the 
dollars then to fight those initiatives. 
 
That’s why we’ve said the federal government needs to come 
up to better policies. They need to insist that the subsidies in 
other nations are gone. But they also have to be backing 
agriculture policy that will be effective for our producers. 
 
When we talk again about the economy . . . And I will get to 
Highways and Transportation because to me that’s an extremely 
important part of the economy, an important part of agriculture. 
I do want to say a couple more parts of just what our budget did 

in other economic types of incentives. 
 
(1615) 
 
Economic growth in this province . . . it also is important — the 
small business. In our budget we are moving forward together 
with improvements for the small-business loans associations, 
where we doubled the amount that those loan associations can 
handle and what can be given out to communities, to 
entrepreneurs to create and expand small businesses right across 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We changed some royalty structures for gold and base metal 
mining so that that sector could be expanded. And that follows 
up things that we’ve done in other sectors before. That’s 
important to our economy. 
 
It was very interesting today to be part, here at the legislature, 
to have the announcement of the Synchrotron. That’s good 
news for Saskatchewan. That is leading us to the future. That’s 
more jobs now and that’s more jobs for the future. That’s the 
largest investment in research in all of Canada’s history here in 
Saskatchewan. We are moving forward together. 
 
This good news is just almost too much for everybody here. 
Our economy is growing. And when I hear the opposition I 
always have to consider. Sometimes I think they’re more like 
. . . they’re almost a party from Alberta. They can’t seem to 
give credit to Saskatchewan. They’re always talking about 
Alberta — Alberta this, Alberta that. And I just want to talk a 
little bit here about what I call the Saskatchewan advantage. 
 
You know it’s very interesting in this document that I have. It 
talks about employment growth in Saskatchewan has been 
strong. Good news. Low-end jobs pay less and are more 
unstable in Alberta. Women fare better in Saskatchewan. 
Alberta shows increasing poverty amidst plenty. 
 
Now Alberta’s tax advantage, we’re always hearing that from 
the opposition. Better throw in the cost . . . better throw in the 
cost of living. When average . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
That’s interesting. One of the members opposite here just 
reminded me that the chamber of commerce from Calgary has 
just come back over there on the opposition side. 
 
But when we talk about the tax advantage, we’ve got to look at 
the cost of living. When average taxes are compared, 
Saskatchewan is very competitive. But there are taxes and 
household charges which bring even our two provinces even 
closer in line. Okay. 
 
Mix them all together. What you have is a surprising 
conclusion. Combining provincial taxes and premiums, add in 
housing, automobile, utility rates. For a family of four earning 
$50,000, the total cost in Saskatoon is $13,243; Calgary, 
$13,900. For the family earning $75,000, Saskatoon is $17,010; 
in Calgary, 16,449. 
 
Now isn’t that interesting. Where’s the Alberta advantage? It 
goes to the privileged. The Alberta advantage goes to he 
privileged. 
 
Now I do want to talk about . . . 



March 31, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 391 

An Hon. Member: — They don’t want to hear that. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — They don’t want to hear about the . . . 
they don’t want to hear about the Alberta people flocking into 
Saskatchewan. I’ll tell them about some examples that I’ve had 
just this spring. 
 
I was attending a funeral in Regina. This couple came up to me 
and they had said they’d moved into Milestone. That’s my 
home town, Milestone. Where did they move from? Calgary. 
And you know what they told me? They told me that they could 
not believe how much less expensive it was to live here, in 
Milestone, in Saskatchewan. They said their house costs . . . 
They went and did their house insurance; it was better. Then 
they went and did their car insurance; it was better. 
 
And then they said, you know we phoned in to see about 
changing our health care benefits. And we asked . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . then they asked what premium they’d have to 
pay. They’d been paying over $1,000 a month . . . or $1,000, 
no, a year in Alberta. They didn’t have to pay anything here in 
Saskatchewan. They said this is a good place to live. They 
brought three — it’s a young family — three young children 
back to the community in Milestone. 
 
Well then I’m out at a farm rally, farm meeting in Bengough. I 
have a discussion with a fellow there. Guess what he’s doing? 
— and I’ve just talked to him two or three times, just on the 
other side of Bengough — moving back, moving back from 
Alberta. He’s setting up a feedlot because he said this is a good 
place to do that. He’s setting up a feedlot on the other side of 
Bengough. 
 
Two weeks ago I’m stopped to get gas in Weyburn. See a 
fellow there, he’s got a cap on and I think he’s probably with 
the oil industry. And he says yes, he does . . . he does trucking. 
And he says you know he’s really optimistic about this spring in 
that area for the oil industry. He says it’s absolutely dead in 
Alberta. And he said I am glad to be here in Saskatchewan. He 
says I’m very optimistic with Trimension, with PanCanadian, 
with all of these good news stories for our oil and gas industry. 
 
So there is a Saskatchewan advantage. And what part of that 
advantage is, like I said, it’s more than just dollars when you 
put into a budget. It’s more than just dollars; it’s how you plan 
and work with the communities to deliver the right kinds of 
services for the people of Saskatchewan. And that is what this 
government is all about. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Speaker, I also want to again take 
some time, a little bit of a purview again within my 
constituency. But I think there’s stories like this right across the 
province because a balanced approach is about private 
co-operatives; it’s about Crown corporations all working 
together to deliver good services. 
 
I want to tell you about another little success story, a good 
partnership that again shows how we work with communities. 
 
The L’il Red Bus Lines, which I had announced here before, 
delivering services throughout the rural communities in my 

constituency. But they have now got a formal partnership with 
STC. This could work because we got shareholders that are 
seniors in Bengough. We’ve got business people in Ogema, 
Pangman, Radville, Ceylon, all contributing to this bus line — 
and it’s breaking even. But the only way this bus line can work 
is because it has a partnership with STC. This is how you learn 
to deliver good services, sustainable services to rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
You know what I hear from the opposition when they talk about 
STC? STC — gone. That would be the end of the L’il Red Bus 
Lines. That would be the end of the L’il Red Bus Lines. Those 
are kind of services that we need in rural Saskatchewan. Those 
are the kinds of partnerships that you adapt, that you work with, 
to meet the needs of communities. 
 
Now when I talked before in agriculture and . . . (inaudible) . . . 
I knew they’d want to sell STC. Yes, and that would be the end. 
Yes, that’s probably . . . That is their motto — not learn how to 
adjust, not learn how do things — just sell it off and then we’ll 
see what happens. Yes. We’ve heard that before. We heard that 
in the ’80s. We heard it in the ’80s. Yes. 
 
I am going to just right now talk about highways and 
transportation. An absolute . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The 
highway equipment. That’s right, sold off, just like that — sold 
off. Yes, sell off. Well I wouldn’t even know if that was a sell 
off. That was more of giveaway program — give away to their 
friends. Yes. 
 
I wonder who they promised this time what they’re going to 
give away the next time if they . . . But I don’t think the people 
of the province will ever forget and they’ll never get a chance to 
do a giveaway again. Because their giveaway cost everyone of 
us $2 million a day on interest payments that we’re still paying 
today. 
 
I want to get back to the importance of transportation, the 
importance of also of what’s been happening in agriculture, the 
importance of that whole issue to rural Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Speaker, we put in $2.5 billion in 1997 as a commitment over 
10 years. Now I want to do a little bit of time here to clarify 
what 2.5 billion over 10 years, because again the opposition has 
been very misleading. 
 
No one over on this side of the House, not one person has ever 
said 2.5 billion over 10 years means $250 million every year. 
It’s kind of interesting how they would finance things. If they 
were doing that with a business they’d say well this is my total 
investment in 10 years, I’m going to up it up and then be flat — 
never have anything for any increases again. 
 
It doesn’t make sense, doesn’t make sense. It doesn’t add up. 
It’s like their platform. They want to add more dollars. They’ll 
add it in one budget and then flat. That’s what they talk about, a 
freeze even there. 
 
What we have done is again put more dollars in . . . They must 
be interested. 
 
Okay I guess . . . Now hopefully the opposition will listen 
because we are putting in the dollars. We have wrapped up our 
budget since our commitment by $75 million. Since 1995 



392 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 1999 

actually our Highways budget has increased by 40 per cent. So 
that is a commitment. 
 
But part of that commitment is good planning. It is why we’re 
working with area planning committees right across this 
province. It’s why we’re working in trucking partnerships. 
That’s why we’re looking at both east-west but also north-south 
corridors in this province. And we have initiated an additional 
$5 million to a new type of partnership fund in our 
transportation and highways. 
 
The members opposite never like to listen to things that are 
called partnerships because that means co-operation — working 
together. This partnership fund is a way in which we’ve been 
starting to do business in the areas right across the province. 
And if it makes sense for the municipalities, the Department of 
Highways, to come up with some good strategies for delivering 
good transportation in an area, we’ll have some joint funding. 
 
And I give a couple of examples of that. Up in the area where 
the potato industry is in the Lucky Lake area, we've had a 
number of RMs recognizing that if they can keep the heavy 
truck haul on a municipal system, that we can save a 
thin-surfaced highway which is important for ambulances, for 
education, for other modes of traffic to be on. Therein we said 
we would put dollars in to help them with that agreement 
because we both benefit from it. 
 
But I do want to get into a really important initiative that is 
facing both agriculture . . . has been in grain transportation. We 
have within our Highways department a unit that works on 
grain transportation initiatives and short-line advisory unit. 
 
When we see the right-wing policies and the impact that they 
have had from the federal level on taking out the Crow benefit, 
the devastating effects of changes to the Canadian 
transportation Act which has transferred traffic from rail to 
road, it is incredible that the federal government has not put 
dollars into our transportation system. 
 
During this important grain transportation review in Estey, we 
as a province have taken a very, very strong role. And the three 
major things that we have said over and over and over and over 
is that if we go to a more efficient system, we have to guarantee 
that we get maximize the benefits back to producers. There is 
no use going to a system that’s consolidated and in which all 
the savings are captured by the railways and the grain 
companies. We have to ensure that producers are protected and 
that producers get the benefit of any efficiency gains. 
 
We have to say that the review goes right from farm to port and 
it has to take in the road impact. And so we were pleased that 
Estey did recognize at least that those provinces, but also that 
the federal government needs to be putting dollars into roads 
and infrastructure. That direction is positive, that direction on 
where we want to see how the branch line abandonment process 
changes. We want to see the changes that will help short lines 
be more viable within our province. 
 
But there are concerns, and the concerns that we’ve raised are 
the concerns that we hear from the people in this province, the 
farmers in this province. We do not agree that the freight rate 
cap should come off unless you’ve got an effective, competitive 

system in place. We said no to the freight rate cap coming off. 
 
We also said certainly the Wheat Board should look at 
competitive tendering as an option, but the Wheat Board has to 
remain involved in transportation, remain in the country. It’s an 
important role that the Wheat Board needs to maintain. 
 
We said that producers need to be involved in car allocation. 
We need to have producers, the Wheat Board, the grain 
companies — all an important part of that. 
 
We know that the producers need to be involved in the next 
steps. It makes me very concerned when I meet with the federal 
minister and he talks about the next steps being industry led. 
This government is going to protect the producers’ voice in 
these important issues. 
 
It was very interesting to me just recently, having the 
opportunity — I met with CP (Canadian Pacific) and CN 
(Canadian National) — and hearing that they are moving to a 
joint office into Ottawa on their communications. This does 
seem to tell me that there’s a huge lobby being waged by the 
railways to the federal government on important changes to our 
future. 
 
(1630) 
 
As a province we have said it, our Premier has said it, our 
Agriculture minister has said it, I have said it: that producers 
have to be involved in changes, they have to benefit from those 
changes, and we will lobby the federal government and we will 
stand for nothing but those protections being in place. 
 
But what do I hear from the opposition? They barely, barely 
even want to identify with these concerns and issues. I was 
pleased just being able to say that a short line is being 
announced right in my own constituency again, the Assiniboia 
Sub, in which again we were able to help with funding. We 
were able to help with technical assistance to that group in order 
that they can buy a piece of track from Pangman, Ogema, over 
to Assiniboia, run a short line there. And I’m pleased that the 
Wheat Pool will leave two elevators on that line so that the 
producers will make their commitment of volumes on that line 
and they will make it a success. That’s what we need. 
 
And we did that, we did that in spite of all of the obstacles in 
place. The Canadian transportation Act does not favour this. 
The legislation is not short-line friendly and we need those 
changes to be in place so that short lines can be a viable option 
for the farmers, for the communities, for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Red Coat Road and Rail is a success story and it’s one in which 
I am very optimistic that we can get in other places in the 
province. But we need to have changes at the federal level. It 
should not be to the degree of difficulty. We need changes in 
the ways in which you can have fair revenue splits between 
mainline carriers and short lines. We need that short-line 
changes so that we can have more friendly legislation that will 
allow producers to be empowered; like I said, to be able to take 
some of the destiny into their own hands. 
 
This budget is about good planning and more dollars, but good 



March 31, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 393 

planning and working with the communities right across this 
province. And in Highways we’ve added $15 million to our 
budget this year. And we are working on our twinning 
initiative. And we are working on primary and secondary and 
provincial and national highways. We’re working on roads in 
the North. Tomorrow I’ll be in the North announcing, again, a 
completion of a major road project on Garson Lake. We’ll be 
announcing more projects there. 
 
Would we like more money in Highways? Of course we would. 
And we’re asking that federal government to put in some 
dollars. And it’s interesting when the Liberals will say here 
today that, you know, they’re asking too — they showed us 
some letters and so on. We don’t get any response. But in their 
platform they plan to get a 50/50 cost sharing when they’re 
government. 
 
Now let me tell the members opposite, the Liberals opposite, 
we can’t wait to the next, maybe, millennium for them to be 
government to get that cost-sharing program. We’re asking for 
it now; we want it to be delivered now. 
 
We hope that the federal government — it’s given us a little 
glimmer of hope — will put their dollars where they’ve been 
saying get dollars back into a national highways program, but 
also infrastructure because of the impacts of the federal policies 
on our province. They should be putting dollars in. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in transportation there are many 
challenges. But we are working in all of these different ways, 
whether it’s on short-line development, whether it’s in trucking 
partnerships, working with the area planning committees, 
working with municipalities on partnerships, working with 
more dollars. We will deliver a top-notch transportation system 
in this province by working with the people we need. We’ve got 
partnerships with municipalities; we’ve got the province there. 
We do need the federal government to put up their fair share. 
 
I also want to just comment, in transportation not only do we 
see the dollars going into roads — and our highways is 
important — there’s also very importance in having safety 
compliance; all of those initiatives are very, very important that 
we have a safe system for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we have delivered in many, many key areas, 
in more program spending. I’m also pleased with the municipal 
government, that they have $10 million which can be shared 
with northern urban and rural municipalities for infrastructure 
— which may be roads, may be bridges, or may be other things 
that they determine are their priorities. It’s again a step in the 
right direction. 
 
But as the young people that I referred to earlier in my speech, 
it’s more than just putting more dollars in. We also looked at 
the balanced approach. And we were able to again do a tax 
reduction and that’s important to the people of Saskatchewan. 
And it’s important to us. And so our Finance minister was 
pleased to announce that the PST (provincial sales tax) would 
drop again 1 percentage point. That’s 3 percentage points now 
been delivered to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
We’ve been able to reduce income tax when we sustainably 
can. We’ve had a 10 per cent decrease in income tax, and we’ve 

had targeted tax cuts in gas and oil, in potash, now in base 
metals, but in other key areas of the economy in order to help 
rejuvenate the economy and to expand the economy and the 
jobs and the diversification in this province. These tax cuts are 
sustainable and they’re here to stay and we’re going to have 
more as we can deliver them. 
 
Another thing I think that was very important in our budget was 
that we’re going to look at the entire income tax system and 
review it to make it more responsive, more efficient. So we 
know that lower taxes certainly are an agenda that we will do 
but only in a sustainable manner. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also looked at debt and there is less debt. We 
promised to pay down debt to reduce the mortgage of our 
children’s future, and we have. Six straight balanced budgets. 
Balanced budgets, 3.4 billion in debt paid off since 1994 — 
that’s a huge accomplishment, a huge accomplishment. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this budget — I believe our Throne Speech 
also — delivers a vision for Saskatchewan and it’s a vision that 
I’m committed to. It’s a vision of a united not a divided 
community. It’s a vision of strong economic and job growth in 
our private, our co-operative, our Crown sector. A strong 
diversified economy in all of our areas of our province — north, 
rural, urban; our economy that creates meaningful, well-paid 
work; an economy that levels up not down as some members 
opposite seem to purport as the way to go. 
 
I mean when opposition will even, even criticize the increase of 
a minimum wage, you do really wonder if they ever consider 
levelling up as part of their platform. 
 
This is an economy that builds strong, vibrant, rural 
Saskatchewan with more diversification, more value-added, 
more returns to the producers. And I’m pleased that we’re going 
to be able to deliver on new generation co-ops and new 
legislation because those are the keys to the future for us; 
producer-owned short lines so that farmers have the opportunity 
to gain more for the products that they produce. That’s the 
vision that we have. 
 
We have a vision for strong, safe communities where children 
can grow up in safe families. A Saskatchewan where publicly 
funded, universal, administrated, accessible health care is for 
all. A health system where people live long and healthy lives 
but when they’re ill that there’s state-of-the-art health care 
services. 
 
It’s a Saskatchewan with strong-quality public education, early 
intervention, and lifelong learning opportunities; a 
Saskatchewan with accessible post-secondary education and 
training programs; a Saskatchewan where the environment is 
kept sustainable for future generations. That’s what I see. 
 
And it’s a Saskatchewan of balance and stability — balanced 
budgets, lower taxes, shrinking debt, quality services. That’s 
what we are building with this budget. 
 
But let no one ever forget that there is another vision over there; 
that there is the opposition and that’s not the kind of 
Saskatchewan that they see. 
 



394 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 1999 

Actually we have a party, as our Premier likes to call it, the 
Sask-a-Tories — I sometimes call them the Tory witness 
protection plan — that do everything to hide from their record. 
And they do have a record. It’s a record that we see headlines 
on, provincially and nationally. They have a record that I 
actually heard at a meeting with some of the members opposite 
at, that just brought back the politics of the ’80s in Pangman, 
Saskatchewan, like I couldn’t believe. 
 
I heard members opposite from the Sask Party saying things 
like, oh, they’ve got all that money over there in Liquor and 
Gaming, they can spend that money to help you farmers out. 
Then he said, oh yes, yes, that education tax on the land, yes, 
maybe we should take that education tax off the property. And 
then they talked about, oh yes, we can spend here, we can spend 
there. And when I said, well what about the next year after you 
do that? Oh well — you know. Who cares about the next year. 
Who cares. 
 
Our children have cared about the next year, and they’re still 
going to care because they saw what the record was of the ’80s. 
It wasn’t the people in that meeting, the Pangman meeting, that 
were from the ’80s, it was the Sask Party that went back to the 
policies, the politics of the ’80s. 
 
I even heard the rural/urban piece. Oh, urbans don’t understand 
the world. They even suggested that the communities there — 
Weyburn and Bengough and stuff — didn’t even understand the 
rural issues. They suggested there, splits again between First 
Nations and other people in our communities. It’s irresponsible. 
It’s unconscionable. It’s the policies of the ’80s; it’s the policies 
of division; it’s the policies of irresponsible spending and not 
caring about the future. It’s the policies of power, not 
government. 
 
So when you see a group of people through the middle of the 
night form a new party, and they don’t have the conscience to 
go back to those people that elected them to seek a by-election, 
to gain a new mandate — that’s again old policies. And when 
you look at that party and how they mixed together, and you 
check out the addresses and the telephone numbers and who’s 
involved, it’s pretty hard to say that they’re not the Sask-a-Tory 
party trying a name change, and think the people of 
Saskatchewan will ever forget. I don’t believe people from 
Saskatchewan will ever forget. 
 
And I believe people saw the way a person . . . If a person 
decides to leave a party, they should go back to their 
constituencies, seek a nomination, get re-elected which the 
member from Athabasca did. That set the standard high. That 
set the standard high and that’s what this government is about 
— is high standards. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . now isn’t that interesting . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. I’ll ask the 
hon. members on both sides of the House to come to order and 
allow the Hon. Minister of Highways and Transportation . . . 
Order. There’s plenty of opportunity. Hon. members will 
recognize there’s plenty of opportunity to get into the budget 

debate and I’ll encourage all hon. members to put your remarks 
on the record. They’re not necessary to shout them across the 
House. Order. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on their 
platform when I look at that Sask Party platform and I see 
division all over it. I see things too . . . when they talk about 
short line railways, it’s interesting what they think the block is. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, Why is the hon. member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Jess: — With leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Jess: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I’d also like to thank 
the Minister of Highways for giving me this opportunity. I 
would like to introduce in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, Mr. John 
Enns, Mr. Walter Enns and Norm Haryung. They are in here to 
meet with the Environment minister to discuss regional parks 
and I will be meeting with them after 5 o’clock. I’d also like to 
mention, just as we welcome them, that Mr. Haryung has served 
the Meeting Lake Regional Park as the manager for — and I’m 
not just sure of the years — it was getting close to 30 and that 
was longer than anyone else in the history of the regional park 
system in Saskatchewan. So I’d like you to welcome them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

(continued) 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Speaker, as I was saying, when I 
look over at the opposition and I looked at that Sask-a-Tory 
platform card, and I see things there again like, I just, . . . one 
example, one example on short-line railways. What do they say 
is the impediment? Successor rights. We’ve talked to the 
short-line groups. They said, oh on a list of 10, it might be 12. 
We can work through it because it is the Saskatchewan way; 
we’re getting short-line railways in this province because we 
can. Do they say that there’s any problem with the power that 
CN and CP have? Do they say there’s any problem with the 
federal legislation that’s giving difficulty? Oh, no, no. Let’s 
blame some workers somewhere as the problem. It’s always 
that divisionness that is in there. 
 
But we’ve been there, we’ve been there, and we don’t want to 
be there again. And it is the politics of the ’80s. 
 
(1645) 
 
You know, there was nothing even for education in that 
platform — I noticed that too. And of course, in health care it 
was kind of interesting. They’re going to do a value audit on 
front-line health care providers. They seem to want that 
two-tiered system where the rich can buy their way to the front 



March 31, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 395 

of the line. 
 
I don’t believe that that’s the direction the people of 
Saskatchewan want to see. It’s a party that’s afraid of its past. 
It’s a party that did not, cannot, I think, give a valid 
commitment to the people for the future. 
 
When I think about the Liberals — I’ve already talked about 
them a bit today, but I see what they’re doing — of course they 
don’t have really a balanced approach. It looks like just kind of 
spending more and maybe somehow cut government. And it’s 
interesting when they say cut government when 80 per cent of 
government is people and delivering services and jobs, so I do 
wonder what they really do intend to cut . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . And yes, their plan does change every week. 
Every day you hear a little different plan there. 
 
Again, they spend so much time amongst themselves trying to 
figure out really who is the leader or who should become the 
leader or who was the leader, and they haven’t had a lot of 
times to get their policy together. And we can understand that. 
So we’ll just kind of leave them. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, our budget, our Throne Speech, our 
government is about a plan for the future. We’re social 
democrats. We will not go back. We will go forward. We’re not 
afraid of our record. I’m not saying it’s perfect but let me tell 
you, I can carry my two platform cards around from ’91 and ’95 
and I’m not afraid to carry those with me, because we have 
delivered in most ways we possibly could to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Were there some mistakes? Yes. We will acknowledge that. But 
we’re not afraid of our record. Because we give our 
commitment, I give my commitment to the people of the 
province, as social democrats we believe in building for the 
future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am so pleased to be able to . . . I’m very pleased 
today to be able to say that I am in favour of the budget that’s 
been delivered here today. I believe it really is all about moving 
forward together. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well it’s been sort 
of an interesting afternoon listening to the ramblings and 
gambollings that we’ve had going on here. People who’ve sort 
of told what they thought they were about and what they 
thought they were going to do, and no end of misstatements and 
statements that went off in the wrong direction. And I suggest 
to you, Mr. Speaker, that maybe we need to sort of start 
reviewing some of this. And I’m going to suggest if there’s 
anyone that’s left out there in television land this afternoon . . . 
and I doubt if anyone’s got the fortitude to have listened to what 
we’ve had to put up with, especially in the last hour. 
 
But in Saskatchewan one of the things that I think we’re all 
concerned about is always job creation because, Mr. Speaker, 
that involves our kids. And I think if each one of us that’s 
watching the debate today —, whether it happens to be in the 

House or some other place in Saskatchewan — spends a little 
time and says, okay where are my family members at, where are 
my friend’s family members at in the neighbourhood, where 
have all the kids gone? 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know where they’ve gone. They’re not here. 
Because if they are here they’re probably for sure unemployed. 
Let’s look at the job creation record in Canada. Saskatchewan 
was the only province, Mr. Speaker . . . And they want to talk of 
their record. They stood up there and they yelled and they 
waved the arms as true NDP way and said, look at our record. 
We just heard the Minister of Highways saying, I’m not 
ashamed of my record. 
 
Here’s the record, Mr. Speaker. Here’s the record. The only 
province in Canada to lose jobs in the past year — the only 
province, the only province. That’s the Minister of Highways’ 
record. That’s the record of every single NDP over there. They 
made sure we were not only at zero when it comes to job 
creation — we lost jobs, Mr. Speaker. The only province in 
Canada. 
 
We have no end of funny little jokes we tell around the coffee 
shops and those sorts of places in Saskatchewan. And I think 
Saskatchewan coffee shops are a good location to find out 
what’s really going on in the province. And I think the NDP 
members should go there sometime and find out exactly what 
people are thinking. 
 
But we go down to . . . and we’ve got the Minister of 
Agriculture talking about polygraph. Well let’s just do a little 
polygraph right now. We just had the people from the NDP, Mr. 
Speaker, who told about all the jobs they’ve created. Their 
record is, we lost jobs in Canada. 
 
But as I was saying, you go to the coffee shops and you hear the 
odd little joke about this group or that group. Newfoundland — 
well they’ve been the butt of a few jokes here and there. But no 
longer, Mr. Speaker, no longer. They created 6,100 new jobs in 
that little rock. I have no idea what they managed to do to find 
work out there, Mr. Speaker, but they found 6,100 new jobs — 
6,100 new jobs. And listen to the excitement over there . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Now I think the Chair 
need not repeat the remark that he made just a few minutes ago. 
All hon. members will recognize the importance of decorum in 
the House. And I will ask that you provide that to the hon. 
member for Rosthern. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I said, it’s really 
exciting to hear the excitement and the enthusiasm in the NDP’s 
side of this House when they find out that there’s actually an 
opportunity to create jobs in a place like Newfoundland. 
 
If Newfoundland can create 6,100 new jobs, what shouldn’t we 
be able to do in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker? Oil, potash, 
uranium, farming, lumber, agriculture, all kinds of value-added 
things — manufacturing of farm equipment. And just today we 
had a fantastic announcement out of Saskatoon of something 
that’s happening that’s unique not only to Saskatchewan but 
Canada and the world. 
 
With all that happening, the Rock, Mr. Speaker, produces 6,100 



396 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 1999 

new jobs, and we lose jobs. And they have the nerve to go 
ahead and say they’re proud of their record. Well if they want to 
run on their record, let them. 
 
It reminds me of . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The member 
from Swift Current right now says, bet your life. Well it’s very 
interesting, Mr. Speaker, that the person running against him in 
the next election has won awards for economic development. 
Not an NDP, Mr. Speaker; that’s a Sask Party person. That’s a 
Sask Party person who leads in his own community with the 
creation of jobs, of economic welfare, of enthusiasm, of 
vibrancy. 
 
And how many jobs has that individual from Swift Current 
created, Mr. Speaker? None. He’s been part of the government 
that has made sure we’ve lost jobs in the last year. 
 
That’s the record, Mr. Speaker. That’s the record. And they can 
chirp from their side if they wish about polygraph. But people 
know when they look down their street, they look in their 
family, or they look out on the sidewalk and their front 
driveways at Thanksgiving, at Easter time, at Christmas, and 
look at the licence plates — look at the licence plates — we 
know where they come from. 
 
And we have the member from Lloydminster say, why don’t we 
move to Alberta? We’re not moving to Alberta, Mr. Speaker, 
because we love Saskatchewan. We have good ideas for 
Saskatchewan. And we’re going to lead this province into a 
much better world than the NDP has ever dreamt of, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
In that one year, how many fewer jobs? I had an individual 
from our newspaper ask me about this little stat, and said, how 
many jobs have we lost? And I wasn’t quite sure; I thought 
maybe a thousand or two. We’ve lost 100 jobs less than 5,000 
jobs. 
 
And I’m sure, Mr. Speaker, those people didn’t just go home 
and say, well I’ve lost my job; I guess I’ll just sit here and have 
the state take care of me, as a social democrat would probably 
want them to do, because that’s what they want to do. They 
have this social conscience where they’re hoping someone will 
be unemployed so they can take care of them. That’s why they 
create the job situation that we have. 
 
Five thousand fewer jobs in Saskatchewan, and I’m sure those 
5,000 jobs aren’t sitting in those communities doing nothing. 
They’ve gone looking for work because that’s the 
Saskatchewan way. And we know they couldn’t have found it 
in Saskatchewan because there’s fewer jobs in Saskatchewan 
than what there were. They’ve had to leave. 
 
Where have all the children gone? The NDP in this province, 
Mr. Speaker, have chased them out, not just to the east side of 
Lloyd but to the side of Lloyd that’s on the Alberta side, 
because that’s where the opportunity is. 
 
Let’s look a little bit about taxes. Because as these people are 
looking for work and as they find jobs . . . and I meet a lot of 
these because my community and my friends and my 
neighbours are in the same situation, where their children are 
elsewhere. And we’ve just had this government talk about this 

great tax reduction that they’ve done and they say, well it’s 
gone from nine to six, and they want to take credit for that. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, who brought it up to nine in the first place? 
Who brought it up to nine? Who brought it up to nine? It 
happened to be the NDP over there brought it up to nine, the 
NDP government — just zap! and there we were. Unfortunate 
the Premier in his usual way didn’t freeze it . . . (inaudible) . . . 
prepared to do something with it. 
 
Nine per cent — can you imagine that? No wonder people from 
the middle of the province, west, thought it was a good place to 
go to shop elsewhere where the tax situation is different — 9 
per cent. Finally they bring it down to seven where they had it 
originally and wanted to take some credit for that. Two steps 
back and one step ahead. Another step ahead. You haven’t 
made any progress; but yes, this NDP thinks that’s progress. 
 
Let’s just look at the situation. And over there the Agriculture 
minister is already talking about going to Alberta. Let’s look at 
Manitoba. It used to be nicknamed the postage stamp province, 
Mr. Speaker, and you’re well aware of that. That little postage 
stamp province, that little postage stamp province, last year . . . 
People that live there, a family, takes home $4,396 more in 
take-home pay than a Saskatchewan family. That’s Manitoba. 
For those people that don’t want to look west they could look 
east. 
 
Taxes are terrible. Ask the average person in an agricultural 
venture to look at his tax notice that he gets to show what he’s 
paying in property tax and he’ll tell you what’s happened in the 
last little while. While this government has talked and said, well 
they’ve balanced their budgets, they’ve balanced their budgets 
on the taxpayers of this province, the property taxpayer. And 
rural Saskatchewan has taken a major hit on education tax and 
so have the people in towns. As they look at their tax notice 
they see that education is taking an ever larger bite out of that. 
As a province, the NDP government backs off of its 
responsibility as far as taking care of education. 
 
But we need to spend a little bit of time on health. The NDP 
seem to think that they are the protectors of health care in 
Saskatchewan. Well let’s spend a little bit of time seeing what 
they’ve done with that. And I guess probably the simplest 
would be is just to ask the people out there what can you tell me 
about lineups in Saskatchewan? I’ve been to the coffee shops. I 
can tell you what they think about the lineups in Saskatchewan. 
And I think that’s something that this particular government 
needs to take care of. 
 
The longest waiting lists in the country to see a specialist or 
receive treatment — that’s their record. Everyone out there 
knows it. The longest waiting lists in the country to see a 
medical specialist and receive treatment. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I have a whole lot more to say but I see that 
it’s about 5 o’clock, and with that I would like to move to 
adjourn debate for today. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 


