





























































Hansard: December 17, 1999


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 271 
 December 17, 1999 
 
The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and good morning. 
The personal injury benefits provision of the automobile 
insurance Act is a subject of this petition and it reads: 
 

That your humble Assembly may be pleased to repeal the 
provision of the personal injury benefits contained in the 
automobile insurance Act and adopt a return to an add-on 
insurance system that would provide benefits on a no-fault 
basis to all victims without taking away the innocent 
victim’s right to seek compensation from the person 
responsible for the accident, but with appropriate 
modifications to reduce overall personal injury costs. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed primarily by people from 
Regina, the city of Regina, Cupar, and Elfros. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
a petition and this is signed by people from Gainsborough, 
Fertile areas of Saskatchewan. And it deals with an effort to pry 
this government loose and to do something on the farm 
assistance situation, and I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to assist Saskatchewan farmers by 
withdrawing from the failing AIDA program and using the 
remaining provincial AIDA funding to rebate the education 
portion of the 1999 property taxes on agricultural lands for 
one year, whereby providing farm families with a $133 
million tax reduction in 1999. 
 

I so present. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
today to present petitions on behalf of the citizens of 
Qu’Appelle, and the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the Minister of 
Education to do everything in his power and to maintain 
the quality of education of students attending school in 
Qu’Appelle; and to stop this unwarranted closure of classes 
in Qu’Appelle. 

 
And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are all from 
Qu’Appelle. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have 
a petition this morning from many people in the province of 
Saskatchewan very concerned about the agricultural crisis and 

more so probably the Saskatchewan crisis. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to assist Saskatchewan farmers by 
withdrawing from the failing AIDA program and using the 
remaining provincial AIDA funding to rebate the education 
portion of 1999 property taxes on agricultural lands for one 
year whereby providing farm families with $133 million 
tax reduction in 1999. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on these petitions come from the 
communities of Outlook, Glenside, Dilke, and others. 
 
And I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I also have a petition to present 
today on behalf of people very concerned with the automobile 
insurance Act, and the prayer reads: 
 

That your Hon. Assembly may be pleased to repeal the 
provisions of the personal injury benefits contained in the 
automobile insurance Act and adopt a return to the add-on 
insurance system that would provide benefits on a no-fault 
basis to all victims without taking away the innocent 
victim’s right to seek compensation from personal . . . from 
the person responsible for the accident with appropriate 
modifications to reduce overall personal injury costs. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Regina, 
Grenfell, and Naicam. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well on 
behalf of citizens concerned about the personal injury benefits 
in the automobile insurance Act. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

That your Hon. Assembly may be pleased to repeal the 
provision of the personal injury benefits contained in the 
automobile insurance Act and adopt a return to an add-on 
insurance system that would provide benefits on a no-fault 
basis to all victims without taking away the innocent 
victim’s right to seek compensation from the person 
responsible for the accident, but with appropriate 
modifications to reduce overall personal injury costs. 
 

Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are all from the city of 
Regina. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As well to present a 
petition, reading the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to repeal the provision of the 
personal injury benefits contained in the automobile 
insurance Act and adopt a return to an add-on insurance 
system that would provide benefits on a no-fault basis to all 
victims without taking away the innocent victim’s right to 



272 Saskatchewan Hansard December 17, 1999 

seek compensation from the person responsible for the 
accident, but with appropriate modifications to reduce overall 
personal injury costs. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the petition I present is signed by individuals from 
the communities of Elfros, Wynyard, P.A. (Prince Albert), and 
Mozart. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise today to 
present petitions on behalf of Saskatchewan citizens concerned 
about the automobile insurance Act. The petition reads as follows, 
Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to repeal the provision of the 
personal injury benefits contained in the automobile 
insurance Act and adopt a return to the add-on insurance 
system that would provide benefits on a no-fault basis to all 
victims without taking away the innocent victim’s right to 
seek compensation from the person responsible for the 
accident, but with appropriate modifications to reduce overall 
personal injury costs. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 
 

The petitioners are from Wadena, Elfros, and Wynyard. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I too rise in the Assembly this 
morning on behalf of petitioners concerned with the personal 
injury benefits provision of the automobile insurance Act. And 
the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to repeal the provision of the 
personal injury benefits contained in the automobile 
insurance Act and adopt a return to an add-on insurance 
system that would provide benefits on a no-fault basis to 
all victims without taking away the innocent victim’s right 
to seek compensation from the person responsible for the 
accident, but with the appropriate modifications to reduce 
overall personal injury costs. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from 
Wolseley, Regina, Grenfell, Kennedy, and Sintaluta. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to give a petition that 
deals with the education portion of the property tax paid by 
farmers. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to assist Saskatchewan farmers by 
withdrawing from the failing AIDA program and using the 
remaining provincial AIDA funding to rebate the education 
portion of 1999 property taxes on agriculture lands for one 
year, whereby providing farm families with $133 million 
tax reduction in 1999. 

And the petitioners are from Moose Jaw, Regina, Saskatoon, 
and Weyburn. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
also have a petition to present to deal with the disastrous AIDA 
program. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to assist Saskatchewan farmers by 
withdrawing from the failing AIDA program and using the 
remaining provincial AIDA funding to rebate the education 
portion of the 1999 property taxes on agriculture lands for 
one year whereby providing farm families with $133 
million tax reduction in 1999. 

 
The signatories, Mr. Speaker, are from the community of 
Pense. I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise to 
present petitions today. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to assist Saskatchewan farmers by 
withdrawing from the failing AIDA program and using the 
remaining provincial AIDA funds to rebate the education 
portion of the 1999 property taxes on agricultural lands for 
one year whereby providing farm families with $133 
million in reduction for 1999. 
 
And as in duty bound your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

These petitioners, Mr. Speaker, come from the communities for 
Birch Hills, Hagen, and St. Louis. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand also to 
present petitions on behalf of citizens in Saskatchewan 
regarding another school closure. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the Minister of 
Education to do everything in his power to maintain the 
quality of education of students attending school in 
Qu’Appelle and to stop this unwarranted closure of classes 
in Qu’Appelle. 
 
As in duty bound your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

The signatures are from Qu’Appelle area. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present a 
petition concerning the loss of a full-time physician for the 
Blaine Lake Medical Clinic. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
overrule the Parkland Health Board to change its decision 
and allow the Blaine Lake Medical Clinic to have a 



December 17, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 273 

permanent physician with consistent hours and days. 
 
As in duty bound your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

From the good people from Blaine Lake. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
today to present a petition on behalf of Saskatchewan citizens 
concerned about the education tax rebate farm assistance. The 
petition reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to assist Saskatchewan farmers by 
withdrawing from the failing AIDA program and using the 
remaining provincial AIDA funding to rebate the education 
portion of the 1999 property taxes on agriculture lands for 
one year, whereby providing farm families with $133 
million tax reduction in 1999. 
 
And as in duty bound your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Petitioners are from Chamberlain and Holdfast. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I’m also going to present a 
petition concerning the education tax rebate farm assistance. 
The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to assist Saskatchewan farmers by 
withdrawing from the failing AIDA program and using the 
remaining provincial AIDA funding to rebate the education 
portion of 1999 property taxes on agricultural land for one 
year, whereby providing farm families with $133 million 
tax reduction in 1999. 
 

The petitioners are from Chamberlain and Bethune. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — I too have a petition signed by concerned 
citizens regarding the automobile insurance Act. The prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to repeal the provisions of the 
personal injury benefits contained in the automobile 
insurance Act and adopt a return to an add-on insurance 
system that would provide benefits on a no-fault basis to 
all victims without taking away the innocent victim’s right 
to seek compensation from the person responsible for the 
accident, but with appropriate modifications to reduce 
overall personal injury costs. 

 
The petitioners are from Grenfell and Broadview. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
that I would like to present. It has to do with the education tax 

rebate. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to assist Saskatchewan farmers by 
withdrawing from the failing AIDA program and using the 
remaining provincial AIDA funding to rebate the 
educational portion of the 1999 property tax on agricultural 
lands for one year, whereby providing farm families with a 
$133 million tax reduction in 1999. 
 

The petition is signed by people from the Chamberlain and 
Dilke area.  
 
I do so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
stand today to present petitions on behalf of citizens of 
Saskatchewan concerned with the failing AIDA program: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to assist Saskatchewan farmers by 
withdrawing from the failing AIDA program and using the 
remaining provincial AIDA funding to rebate the education 
portion of the 1999 property taxes on agricultural lands for 
one year, whereby providing farm families with a $133 
million tax reduction in 1999. 
 

And the petitioners are from Glidden, from Kindersley. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by Saskatchewan residents concerned about the 
personal injury benefits provision of the automobile insurance 
Act. The petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to repeal the provision of the 
personal injury benefits contained in the automobile 
insurance Act and adopt a return to an add-on insurance 
system that would provide benefits on a no-fault basis to 
all victims without taking away the innocent victim’s right 
to seek compensation from the person responsible for the 
accident, but with appropriate modifications to reduce 
overall personal injury costs. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from 
Wadena and Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Mr. Speaker, I too rise to present a 
petition respecting the automobile insurance Act. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to repeal the provision of the 
personal injuries benefits contained in the automobile 
insurance Act and adopt a return to an add-on insurance 
system that would provide benefits on a no-fault basis to 
all victims without taking away the innocent victim’s right 
to seek compensation from the person responsible for the 
accident, but with appropriate modifications to reduce 



274 Saskatchewan Hansard December 17, 1999 

overall personal injury costs. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 
This petition, Mr. Speaker, is signed by the good folks of 
Leslie, Wynyard, Hendon, and Wadena. Thank you. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 

Petitions regarding the repeal of personal injury benefits 
contained in the automobile insurance Act; 
 
Petitions regarding the withdrawal from the AIDA 
(Agricultural Income Disaster Assistance) program; and 
 
Petitions regarding the closure of classes in Qu’Appelle. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 15 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Highways and Transportation: please 
name all employees of your ministerial staff hired since 
September 30, 1999; and please disclose their salaries. 
 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
a number of questions. I have two of them. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 15 ask the government the following question: 
 

And this is to the Minister of CIC (Crown Investment 
Corporation of Saskatchewan): what was the total cost for 
administrating provisions of the Crown Construction 
Tendering Agreement in 1998-99. 
 

And my second question this morning is, and I read: I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 15 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

And this is also to the Minister of CIC: please name all 
employees of your ministerial staff hired since September 
30, 1999; and please disclose their salaries. 
 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 15 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Provincial Secretary: how much in total has 
Saskatchewan spent so far on projects marking the turn of 
the millennium? 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, I have a second question. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 15 ask the government the following questions: 
 

To the Minister of SPMC: how many vehicles have been 
purchased by your department in 1999 and at what cost; 
please detail each purchase. 

Thank you. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I have two questions that I would like to present: 

 
I give notice that I shall on day no. 15 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Finance: in the 1999 fall report of the 
Provincial Auditor, it is noted that the government does not 
publish overall planning or performance information for 
the entire government and the Provincial Auditor 
recommends that the government do so, will the Finance 
minister be providing to this House and to the people of 
Saskatchewan a complete fiscal plan of the entire 
government for the next fiscal year? 
 

I also give notice that I shall on day no. 15 ask the government 
the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Finance: please name all employees of 
your ministerial staff hired since September 30, 1999, and 
please disclose their salaries. 
 

I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I also 
have two questions to ask today. I give notice that I shall on day 
no. 15 ask the government the following questions: 
 

To the Minister of Agriculture: please name all the 
employees of your ministerial staff hired since September 
30, 1999, and please disclose the salaries. 
 

The second question: 
 

To the Minister of Agriculture: how many Saskatchewan 
farmers have defaulted on loans to ACS since the 
beginning of this year? 
 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 15 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: in 1997-98, how many 
Saskatchewan residents were approved by the Department 
of Health to seek medical treatment in the United States for 
procedures unavailable in Saskatchewan; how many of 
these procedures were performed in ’97-98; and please 
name each procedure performed and the cost of each 
procedure. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll also have questions of the same nature for the 
calendar year ’98-99 and ’99-2000. I so present. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As well to give notice 
that I shall on day no. 15 ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the Minister of Social Services: please name all 
employees of your ministerial staff hired since September 
30, 1999, and please disclose their salaries. 

 
I so present. 



December 17, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 275 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too give notice that I 
shall on day no. 15 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of SPMC: please name all employees of 
your ministerial staff hired since September 30, 1999, and 
please disclose their salaries. 

 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 
15 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Justice: please name all employees of 
your ministerial staff hired since September 30, 1999, and 
please disclose their salaries. 

 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day 
no. 15 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: please name all employees of 
your ministerial staff hired since September 30, 1999, and 
please disclose their salaries. 

 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
give notice that I shall on day no. 15 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Municipal Affairs: please name all 
employees of your ministerial staff hired since September 
30, 1999, and please disclose their salaries. 

 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 15 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Premier: please name all employees of your 
ministerial staff hired since September 30, 1999; and 
please disclose their salaries. 

 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 15 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Labour: please name all employees of 
your ministerial staff hired since September 30, 1999; and 
please disclose their salaries. 

 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 15 ask the government the following question: 
 

My question is to the Minister of CIC: how much money 
has SaskPower given to Ducks Unlimited since 1995. 

 
Ms. Harpauer: — I give notice that I shall on day no. 15 ask 
the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of CIC: how much money including 
production costs, salaries, and ad buys has SaskTel spent 
on advertisements featuring the comedian, Brent Butt. 

 
Mr. Wakefield: — I have a notice of a question. I give notice 
that I shall on day 15 ask the government the following 
question: 

To the Minister of Economic Development: please name 
all employees of your ministerial staff hired since 
September 30, 1999; and please disclose their salaries. 

 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a notice of a 
written question. I give notice that I shall on day no. 15 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Post-Secondary Education and Skills 
Training: please name all employees of your ministerial 
staff hired since September 30, 1999; and please disclose 
their salaries. Thank you. 

 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day 15 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Northern Affairs: please name all 
employees of your ministerial staff hired since September 
30, 1999; and please disclose their salaries. 

 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 15 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minster of Energy and Mines: please name all 
employees of your ministerial staff hired since September 
30, 1999; and please disclose their salaries. 

 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice 
that I shall on day no. 15 ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the Minister of Environment and Resource 
Management: please name all employees of your 
ministerial staff hired since September 30, 1999; and 
please disclose their salaries. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Through you and 
to you, I’d like to introduce a number of students sitting in your 
gallery. These students are taking English as a Second 
Language at Balfour, and they’re from India and Kosovo, Mr. 
Speaker. I’d like to welcome them to our province. Also I’d like 
to also welcome their teacher Wendy Moskowy who is from 
Milestone where I grew up. We went to school together but she 
was . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Younger. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — That’s it, younger. So anyway I’d like to 
thank . . . welcome them to the legislature today and ask all 
members to give them a warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I too rise to draw to 
your attention and the attention of the members the group that’s 
seated in your gallery, who are from the English as a Second 
Language Group at Balfour Collegiate. 
 
Balfour Collegiate has about 25 nationalities represented. In this 
particular group there are two nationalities, Kosovo and India. 
And I can assure the members, after my meeting with them this 



276 Saskatchewan Hansard December 17, 1999 

morning, that these students are very well advanced in their 
English. They’re making very good progress. And we should, 
though, in the universal language make them feel very 
welcome, and that is by putting our hands together and 
extending a warm welcome. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to 
introduce a group of 47 grade 8 students from the St. Francis 
School. I want all members to join with me in welcoming them 
here today. They’re with their teachers, Ms. Folk, as well as 
Mrs. Reese. 
 
And I wonder if all members would join with me in welcoming 
them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d 
like all hon. members to join with me in welcoming a good 
friend of mine and a constituent seated in the west gallery, Mr. 
Ernest Morin. Welcome you here to the Assembly today, Ernie. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — If I may I’d like also to add my warmest 
welcomes to the students in both galleries and the Speaker’s 
gallery. And I’d also like to mention another student who is 
involved in a mentoring program with the Department of 
Environment and Resource Management that’s sitting in my 
gallery. Please welcome Shari Nichols. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Time Capsule 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
take a few moments to let you know about a great event that 
took place here in this legislative building yesterday morning. 
 
A group of grade 4 students from St. Marguerite Bourgeoys 
School, a school in my constituency of Regina Wascana Plains, 
along with their partner in education, SPMC, placed a time 
capsule in the dome of the building. 
 
Items within the time capsule, messages to the future, and 
reminders of this year were selected by the students to 
commemorate the last year of this century. What a wonderful 
way, Mr. Speaker, to both acknowledge the coming millennium 
as well as a solid partnership between these two groups. 
 
In a sense the students put a message back into the Legislative 
Building much like the message in a bottle which you will 
remember was recently found. SPMC and St. Marguerite have 
been involved in a partnership since my colleague from 
Meadow Lake established it in 1998. This partnership and many 
initiatives to arise from it are wonderful learning experiences 
for the students of St. Marguerite, and the idea of the children 
sending a message to the future generations of our province is 
very exciting for them as well. 

I commend both groups for their respective activities in putting 
this educational and interesting event together. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Cupar Elevator Fire 
 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday I rose in this 
Assembly to tell you and other members about some good news 
that was happening in my hometown of Cupar. I mentioned that 
United Grain Growers had started their $3.2 million upgrade on 
their facilities there. 
 
It is with great sadness and concern that I must report to you today 
that currently that elevator is burning to the ground. Apparently 
the fire started late yesterday afternoon and volunteer fire 
departments from both Cupar and Southey were on the scene all 
night. They called in people from the Regina fire department; they 
were unable to save the elevator. Early this morning, 
approximately at 7:30, fire broke through the roof. 
 
I have just talked to some of the people in my hometown. 
Apparently a second elevator, the roof has started to burn but they 
are hopeful that they will be able to save that one. This elevator 
that is currently burning, Mr. Speaker, is about approximately 50 
feet away from the hotel in Cupar and also about 100 feet from a 
service station. So we certainly have a grave situation in my 
hometown today. 
 
As I mentioned, the fire departments from Southey and Cupar 
and Regina are presently on the scene, and I hope that they will 
be able to contain the fire to the one elevator. 
 
It is certainly a dark day in the hometown of Cupar today. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Opening Ceremony of Sanitec Canada 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
tell the Assembly today about an opening ceremony that I 
attended in late November. 
 
It was for Sanitec, Canada’s new biomedical waste facility that 
was opened up on Industrial Drive just north of the city. Sanitec 
will be converting medical waste such as dressings and needles 
into harmless shredded products. Sanitec’s facility is the only 
one of its kind in Canada and it uses new microwave processing 
technology to not only make this waste safe, but it also reduces 
the volume by at least 20 per cent. 
 
More than $2 million have been invested in this project and it 
will create 15 full-time jobs. Right now Saskatchewan produces 
about 1,300 tons of biomedical waste each year. Now that waste 
will be dealt with in a safe and environmentally friendly way. 
 
Sanitec’s facility has been approved by SERM (Saskatchewan 
Environment and Resource Management), the City of Regina, 
the RM (rural municipality) of Sherwood, and the Regina 
Health District. So we can be assured that this facility will be 



December 17, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 277 

safe and effective. 
 
I’d like to extend my personal congratulations to the general 
manager of Sanitec, Dave Wenzel; the controller, Warren 
Hodder; the president of Sanitec, Peter Klaptchuk, on the 
official opening of their new biomedical waste disinfection 
facility. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Traffic Safety 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With Christmas 
closely approaching and the New Year just around the corner, 
I’d briefly like to talk a little bit about traffic safety. After being 
involved in traffic safety over the last 20 years, it was great . . . 
great pride to see the fatal rate drop in half over about the last 
20 to 25 years. 
 
I’m concerned though in hearing the latest news reports that our 
fatal rate has probably increased by 20 per cent in just the 
month of December here. Things aren’t going that well on our 
highways. December is traditionally the most accident-prone 
month of the year, but it’s not good to see that so many people 
are dying on our highways as we’re getting so close to the new 
millennium. 
 
So I guess, on my behalf, I’d just like to wish everybody a safe 
trip to wherever they’re going through this Christmas season, 
but take it serious and drive safe. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Assisted Living Program for Seniors in Meadow Lake 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The town of 
Meadow Lake is on top of the settled area of Saskatchewan in 
more ways than one. We have many virtues to . . . we have 
many virtues too numerous to mention in 90 minutes, much less 
90 seconds. 
 
I was proud last month to take part in another Meadow Lake 
first. I was present at the launch of the Saskatchewan assisted 
living services program at the Golden West Manor in Meadow 
Lake. And, Mr. Speaker, I was pleased to present a plaque to 
each of the tenant associations who are part of this program. 
 
This program, Mr. Speaker, will help seniors in social housing 
remain longer in their own homes. As we all know, the longer 
we can stay in familiar surroundings caring for ourselves with 
some assistance, the better off we are. Assisted living helps 
people remain self-reliant with a bit of assistance here and 
there. The program offers nutrition and exercise programs as 
well as providing laundry and housekeeping services. 
 
In addition, the co-ordinator Wendy Roste has seen to it that 
there have been several planned outings since September when 
the program began. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the assisted living has four core values by which it 
operates: independence, dignity, choice, and community. These 
values are much in evidence at the Golden West Manor because 
as Mayor Gabe Fournier said, this program is just one way to 

thank seniors for the contributions they have made to our 
community. 
 
I congratulate Wendy Roste, Mayor Gabe Fournier, and the 
Department of Municipal Affairs, Culture and Housing for 
bringing this program to Meadow Lake. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Rose Valley Co-operative Housing 
 

Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I’d like to take 
this opportunity to tell you about community spirit in rural 
Saskatchewan. The Rose Valley Community Spirit Manor is a 
level 1 and 2 co-operative housing project developed by the 
people of Rose Valley when their hospital closed several years 
ago. 
 
The project had the capacity for 16 residents but to date only 
has 12 residents. This fall the board contacted my constituency 
office for help in developing a strategy to get more funding. 
Unfortunately this government is unwilling to provide . . . to 
fund private care homes and this co-operative falls under this 
category. With the lack of support from this government to rural 
Saskatchewan these people, who are descendants of 
hard-working pioneers, did what their forefathers did in 
adversity. When they were faced with a $5,000 shortfall, they 
raised $9,379 at a silent auction at the Sask Wheat Pool annual 
supper. The money will cover the shortfall until the manor is 
filled to capacity. 
 
Congratulations to Rose Valley for your initiative. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Lake Lenore Teacher Recognized for Volunteerism 
 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 
November Wade Weseen of Lake Lenore was recognized and 
honoured by the Quill Plains Regional Recreation Association 
for his spirit of volunteerism. 
 
Wade Weseen has been the physical education teacher in Lake 
Lenore for more than 25 years, but he has been more than just a 
teacher. He has been the coach of the Lake Lenore Lancers 
basketball and soccer teams. Mr. Speaker, he coaches every 
season of every year and every summer. And he has done so for 
many years. 
 
He gives generously of his time and his resources to keep 
school athletics affordable. His team averages about 25 
weekends on the road per year and they camp out in classrooms 
with their sleeping bags and coolers to save on travel costs. He 
supervises study periods for his students on the road and most 
years the majority of his team is on the honour roll. 
 
Wade encourages his athletes to compete at many levels and 
they have been successful at both provincial and national levels. 
Mr. Weseen believes in fair play and treats opponents, coaches, 
referees, and his team with respect. 
 



278 Saskatchewan Hansard December 17, 1999 

Hard work is rewarded with playing time regardless of the level 
of talent and skills. His true measure of success is the respect he 
earns from his students and the support of the parents for his 
athletic programs. 
 
To Mr. Weseen, coaching is not an extracurricular activity, 
rather it is a way of life. And his lifelong dedication and 
commitment to education through sport is extraordinary and his 
strength of character and leadership steadfast. 
 
For Wade Weseen, there is no off-season. Congratulations, Mr. 
Weseen. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

New Exhibit at Royal Saskatchewan Museum 
 

Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Wednesday, 
December 15, I was honoured to attend the unveiling of a new 
exhibit on conserving and protecting the environment opened at 
the Royal Saskatchewan Museum. 
 
The exhibit consists of the artwork of Saskatchewan students 
and reflects their view that people need to live in harmony with 
the environment. The exhibit includes 29 three-dimensional 
panels sculpted and painted by students, and a talking mother 
earth globe. The students own voices were recorded and their 
description of each panel can be heard by pushing a tile that 
corresponds to the panel a student creates. 
 
Four elementary schools and one high school participated in the 
project. The schools are Souris elementary school in Weyburn, 
Pense school in Pense, Davin, and Marion McVeety elementary 
schools in Regina, as well as Sheldon-Williams Collegiate. The 
Optimist Clubs of Saskatchewan donated $17,000 to the 
project. I hope that all members will show their appreciation to 
the students, teachers, museum, and Optimist Clubs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Financial Support for Farmers 
 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
questions this morning are for the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Mr. Minister, yesterday the Saskatchewan Party called on the 
government to use its liquor and gaming reserves to provide an 
immediate assistance to farm families. Since that time we have 
spoken to members of the Farm Coalition and we have found 
very strong support for our proposal. Groups like SWAN 
(Saskatchewan Women’s Agricultural Network), the ProWest 
Rally Group, agree it’s time for the province to act. The Wheat 
Pool and the barley growers say a provincial contribution would 
strengthen our bargaining position. And Sinc Harrison of 
SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) has 
said that his administrators could put a program like this 
together and put money in the hands of farmers within a week. 
 
Mr. Minister, your own farm coalition is saying it’s time for the 
province to act. We heard it on the floor of the Assembly last 
week when the farm groups came to the Assembly and we 

heard it again yesterday. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you immediately convene a meeting of the 
farm coalition to discuss this proposal? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to make it clear 
to the member opposite that the farm coalition that he has been 
involved in has made it very, very clear that they believe that 
the Saskatchewan government and taxpayers have 
responsibility for a group of issues that include improvements 
to crop insurance and NISA (Net Income Stabilization 
Account). They believe that the provincial government has 
responsibility in dealing with the education portion of land tax, 
but Mr. Sinclair has also been very clear, and when he talks 
about the program being administered by the rural 
municipalities and through SARM, that he’s talking about the 
billion dollars from the federal government. 
 
There are two parts to this approach. One part is the approach of 
a billion dollars from Ottawa that we can administer in a 
number of ways, one as Mr. Harrison has appropriately 
suggested, being administered through SARM, and I agree with 
him on that, but they have been very careful to say that the 
provincial money, if it’s ripped away from provincial programs 
and put over to backstop the federal government, we will never, 
ever have the money to deal with those provincial issues, and I 
think the member knows that full well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, Mr. Minister, as you 
know full well, when the farm groups came before the 
Assembly, they said, in lockstep, one after another, that yes, the 
federal government has responsibility for a $1 billion trade 
equalization payment, but they also said, group after group after 
group, that you have responsibility. 
 
Yesterday we called for an immediate assistance plan by the 
province of Saskatchewan for $300 million of money that you 
already have sitting in your bank account in the liquor and 
gaming fund to be used to do this. And the farm groups have 
asked for that. As of yesterday they are calling for those kinds 
of things to happen. Farm families have been waiting for over a 
year for you to act. They simply cannot wait any longer. 
 
As the resolution that was passed in unanimous form here in the 
Assembly said, calling for immediate assistance before the end 
of this year, will you act on that $300 million request that we 
made yesterday and put it in the hands of farm families 
immediately? And will you also call on the farm coalition to 
meet as soon as possible to discuss this proposal? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I say to the member 
opposite that it’s very clear that the farm organizations have 
been very, very intent on where the billion dollars should come 
from that you talk about. 
 
As I quote from Hansard from the debate on December 7 — the 
National Farmers Union is one of them — and I quote: 
 

In the area of safety nets, the . . . Farmers Union is 



December 17, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 279 

supporting Saskatchewan’s request (that’s your request and 
mine and all the producers in the province) for $1 billion in 
(cash) assistance . . . 

 
And they refer obviously that it would come from the federal 
government. And it goes on and on. 
 
That’s not to take away from the responsibility that provincial 
taxpayers have to agriculture. Each individual citizen in this 
province, Mr. Speaker, pays $300 per capita towards 
agriculture, and they can probably do more. But if anyone is 
saying — as the Leader of the Opposition has suggested — that 
$300 million extra of provincial taxpayers’ money should go to 
pay into what has to be a federal program, he is then arguing for 
a $1,500 tax increase for a mom and dad and a family of three, 
and that is . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, let’s be 
very clear. Let’s be very clear what the NDP (New Democratic 
Party) is telling farmers here in Saskatchewan. They are telling 
farmers, you’re just going to have to wait. Drain your bank 
account. Drain your NISA account. Max out on your line of 
credit. Borrow from wherever you can. Do whatever you can to 
keep your head above water while the NDP sits on $350 million 
in the liquor and gaming fund that’s already there for use for an 
emergency fund and a rainy-day fund as your Finance minister 
has called it time after time. 
 
Well not only is it raining in Saskatchewan today, Mr. Minister, 
but farm families are losing their farms here in Saskatchewan. 
It’s time for you to act. 
 
Farmers have been waiting for over a year. They simply cannot 
wait any longer. Are you going to act on this proposal and are 
you going to call an immediate meeting of the farm coalition to 
discuss the idea? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I say to the member 
opposite, I want to make this clear. The farm coalition that 
we’ve been dealing with has made it extremely clear through 
communiqués that he has been involved in, that a billion dollars 
of trade equalization has to come from the federal government 
and that we are not in that business. 
 
Yesterday, what happened here in this House, when the Leader 
of the Opposition, the Minister of Agriculture separated from 
the coalition and said, we should backstop and backfill the 
federal government to the tune of $300 million or to the tune of 
$1,500 increase per family in this province in taxes to backfill 
what has been a federal responsibility. 
 
Now I understand while a member of the Reform Party, the 
Leader of the Opposition argued that a $400 million cut to 
agriculture wasn’t enough — and I’ve got the verbatim from the 
House where he recommended further cuts where he was 
moving motions for further cuts. He is now arguing that that be 
backfilled by Saskatchewan taxpayers and I say he is an 

embarrassment to the province and the people of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Minister, the only people, the only people that should be 
red-faced in Saskatchewan are the people that are sitting on 
$350 million in the liquor and gaming fund and won’t spend 
one cent of that slush fund to help farm families in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Yes, yes, Mr. Speaker, we support the call for $1 
billion and we support the farm coalition on it. But they are also 
supporting the Saskatchewan Party’s call for $300 million of a 
top-up to immediately help farm families here in Saskatchewan 
now. 
 
Mr. Minister, you said that you’re just a heartbeat away from 
getting a billion dollars from Ottawa, but there’s absolutely no 
evidence of that whatsoever. The Prime Minister refuses to hold 
a first ministers’ conference. The WTO (World Trade 
Organization) talks have fallen apart. The Chair of the ag 
committee says any new program must be cost shared. There’s 
no evidence whatsoever that you are close to doing anything to 
help farm families. 
 
Mr. Minister, farm families can’t wait any longer. On the front 
page of today’s paper, we see the Chair of SWAN losing their 
farm. We must act now. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you act on our proposal, and will you act on 
the call for a meeting with the farm coalition to discuss the idea 
further? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I want to indicate obviously how 
this government works, and that is by working with farm 
groups, and we have a number of meetings. Mr. Speaker, two 
days ago in this House, that member said that the symposium 
on agriculture — talking about this very issue — was a waste of 
time. Today, he comes here and says, let’s get together and talk 
some more. 
 
But I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that yesterday the process of 
negotiation that all the farm groups have been involved in, was 
severely undermined. Without any consultation — with no 
consultation with anyone. Not one farm group was consulted 
before they made the announcement that they were pulling out 
of the coalition. And I say to those members, they should 
apologize to the taxpayers and the farmers for jeopardizing the 
negotiations that are ongoing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, these people are not learning 
anything. This is exactly the same negotiating strategy of Eric 
Upshall. Just hang tough, don’t put up any money, don’t go to the 
table, just sit there and do nothing. Blame the federal government. 
And what did we get — AIDA. A program that doesn’t work and 
we still had to cost share 40 per cent. 



280 Saskatchewan Hansard December 17, 1999 

Mr. Minister, haven’t you learned anything yet? Leroy Larsen told 
us that he thinks the provincial contribution would strengthen our 
bargaining position. When are you going to listen? Will you help 
farm families today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
members opposite, that when the AIDA program was being 
negotiated, when it was being negotiated, we came to a crucial 
point in the negotiations, we came . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Well he may have been in Mexico, but at least he was here for the 
session. I’ll tell you that; I’ll tell you that. At least he was here for 
the session. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
members opposite, when the chips were down in the negotiations 
on AIDA, those members opposite insisted and demanded that we 
put our money into AIDA because they believed it was a good 
program. 
 
Now they say, pull the money out. And when we get to the same 
negotiating point on this arrangement, they undermine the process 
again. They’re an embarrassment to the taxpayers of the province 
and have cost us millions, as Grant Devine did back in the ’80s, 
and you’re headed back there following this policy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I haven’t been here very long and 
I’m still learning. But I always thought that it was the government 
that was supposed to come up with the new ideas and the 
opposition that’s supposed to criticize them. So far we’ve had 
one ag debate — a Saskatchewan Party idea. We’ve passed one 
Bill — a Saskatchewan Party idea. 
 
And now there’s a new plan on the table to help families, and 
where did it come from? The Saskatchewan Party. And what 
does the government do? It criticizes, condemns, and points 
their fingers. But you don’t have any solutions of your own. 
 
Mr. Minister, if you don’t like what the Saskatchewan Party is 
proposing where’s your idea? Where’s your idea to help farm 
families now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I say to the member opposite that 
we have insisted with the federal government, with the farm 
coalition, for a payment of a billion dollars. And I want to say 
to the members opposite that, as Mr. Harrison said coming back 
from Ottawa last week, that movement has been made. That’s 
what Mr. Harrison said. That’s what Mr. Harrison said. 
 
He will be shocked and surprised that these people without 
consulting anyone have left the coalition, undermined the 
process and likely cost the taxpayers of this province several 
hundred million dollars which will add to the tax that members 
in this society will have to pay, just as Grant Devine in his 
negotiations back-filled for the federal government. 
 
Now that doesn’t surprise me coming from the member from 
Kindersley who supported Grant Devine over and over again 
and cost us billions. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Tax Revolt in Rural Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question’s for the Minister of Education. Mr. Minister, this 
week another rural municipality in the Humboldt area voted to 
join the property tax revolt. They join a long and growing list of 
RMs that are refusing to pay the education portion of their 
property tax. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you would think an educational . . . education tax 
revolt might cause some concern for the NDP Minister of 
Education. But judging from what the minister is doing, which 
is absolutely nothing, it’s hard to believe he even knows there’s 
a problem. Mr. Minister, the problem is the NDP’s government 
has cut K to 12 education spending by almost $400 million 
since 1991. 
 
Mr. Minister, back when you were a Liberal candidate you 
promised to increase education funding by $32 million 
immediately. Will you make a commitment to this House today 
to follow up on your promise, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Certainly 
we talk about the tax revolt situation in rural Saskatchewan, and 
there has been, I think, close to 20 meetings that have been held 
in rural Saskatchewan. I have attended some; my officials have 
attended most. And we are deeply concerned about the farm 
crisis and the impact. 
 
The talk about education tax on farmland is one that has been 
brought up at SARM for some 15 years now. And I have made 
the commitment to look into this issue and to see what we can 
do. 
 
We have reassessment coming up in 2001; that’s when the final 
solutions will be brought forward. But right now things are on 
the table for a Made in Saskatchewan solution, we are looking 
at some type of education tax relief. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. But, Mr. Minister, 
by 2001 half our farm families could be gone. It’s too late they 
need help today, before Christmas. 
 
Mr. Minister, in case you hadn’t noticed, farm families in this 
province are in dire straits. They’re in trouble because of your 
former Liberal colleagues in Ottawa that they don’t care. And 
farmers are in trouble because your new friends in the NDP 
government obviously don’t care either. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’m going to read you something that should 
sound familiar to you: 
 

Because the NDP government has failed to negotiate and 
implement the farm income stabilization program they 
promised, Saskatchewan is now facing a farm crisis. 

 
Remember that, Mr. Minister. You should, because those were 



December 17, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 281 

your words less than three months ago. 
 
Mr. Minister, farmers are still struggling and they’re refusing to 
pay their education tax in protest. What are you going to do 
now? Not two years from now — now — to help those 
struggling farm families. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As 
mentioned in the first question, we are working on all avenues 
to deal with the farm crisis in rural Saskatchewan in a Made in 
Saskatchewan solution. And if a component of that is to provide 
relief on the education tax side we will look at that. 
 
But I must say, when you talk about education, where was their 
platform on education? Zippo for education. Not one penny — 
not one penny. And now we’re talking about pulling 300 
million and still improving education. Well we can’t have it 
both ways. It doesn’t add up . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Minister, this Premier spent good taxpayers’ dollars buying 
your Liberal Party. Let’s see some action out of you. Show us 
how this coalition’s going to work. Back up your promises, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, the former Liberal leader 
reminds me of the lion in The Wizard of Oz. He needs someone 
to help him find some courage, because he can’t go on hiding 
behind this lame-duck Premier forever. 
 
Another snap quiz to the former Liberal leader. I’m going to 
read you something you said three months ago. Mr. Speaker, 
I’m quoting from the Liberal leader’s election platform, and I 
quote: 
 

We need long-term solutions but we can’t risk losing 
20,000 farm families to foreclosure over the next six 
months because Roy Romanow hasn’t stood up to Ottawa. 
 

Mr. Minister, do you still feel that way and will you at least do 
your part to assist farm families? Will you table your plan and 
what you propose to do to help farm families and back up your 
campaign promises? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, we all agree in this 
Assembly about the farm crisis. We’ve all agreed that the 
federal government is responsible for the export enhancement, 
that it is a trade issue. But we also agree that there needs to be 
some Made in Saskatchewan solutions. 
 
But we also have to balance a budget. Something that these 
people cannot do. A balanced budget fiscal responsibility is 
important to the people of Saskatchewan . . . 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, please. Order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. I certainly was not able 
to hear the entire response to the question. The Hon. Minister of 
Education is entitled to continue his reply or . . . Next question. 
 
(1100) 

First Nations Fund 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for the 
Minister of Municipal Affairs, Culture and Housing. Mr. 
Minister, the Provincial Auditor has been requesting access to 
review and audit the First Nations fund. Once again he has been 
denied. 
 
Mr. Minister, millions and millions of dollars of provincial 
gaming profits have gone into this fund. These are dollars 
contributed by Saskatchewan taxpayers. The First Nations fund 
is a Crown agency with trustees appointed by cabinet. You are 
responsible for this fund. You are responsible to answer to the 
public. 
 
Mr. Minister, why has the Provincial Auditor being denied 
access to the records of the First Nations fund by your 
appointed trustees? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
want to say to the member opposite that first and foremost that 
the funds in the First Nations fund are currently being audited. 
They’re being audited by the private audit and they have been 
audited by the private audit for the past three years. I want to 
say to the member opposite that on all of those audits that were 
performed by the private audit, never has there been any 
sighting of discrepancy in the expenditure of that fund. 
 
I want to say to the member opposite that today we’re 
negotiating that agreement with the First Nations fund; their 
five-year agreement period is terminating at the end of April . . . 
or at the end of March. Within this new round of discussions 
that we’re having with the First Nations folks, we’re 
encouraged that we’re going to see in the future a broader audit 
of that by the Provincial Auditor. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Mr. Speaker, this is really unacceptable. 
 
Mr. Minister, your department calculates the amount of money 
required by this fund. You request this allocation from the 
Assembly. You are ultimately responsible for this fund. Why 
are the provincial taxpayers not allowed to know how this 
significant amount of money is being spent? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 
Nations) trustees say that this is a jurisdictional issue. They say 
under their agreement with your department, they don’t have to 
open their books. 
 
Mr. Minister, it is a jurisdictional issue. It is the jurisdiction of 



282 Saskatchewan Hansard December 17, 1999 

the Provincial Auditor under the Provincial Auditor’s Act to 
look at the records of this fund. He is responsible to report to 
the people of this province and this legislature. You are 
responsible to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Will you directly request the First Nations fund trustees to open 
their books? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I want to respond to the member by saying 
that as I’ve already indicated, that the audit of the First Nations 
fund in our view has never been cited through the private audit 
as having any concern about the way in which the expenditures 
are being made. 
 
I want to say to the member opposite that if you’re taking issue, 
Madam Member, if you’re taking issue with who it is, then I 
have some concern about that. And I’d be interested in knowing 
why it is that you’re pressing this particular group of people 
whose funds are being audited by the province because Madam 
Minister, because Madam Minister, today the provincial 
treasury provides money . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. Order, please. I 
would ask that you allow the hon. minister to . . . Order, please. 
Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I’m interested in why this 
question is being directed to this particular group. Because 
today, Mr. Speaker, there are provincial funds that flow to 
municipalities. There are provincial funds that flow, Mr. 
Speaker, to school boards. There is provincial funding that 
flows, Mr. Speaker, to health boards. And they’re all audited by 
private audit. 
 
And I say to the member opposite: why are you choosing and 
picking on one particular group in this community of 
Saskatchewan for a public audit when in fact all of the other 
jurisdictions today are accepted, are accepted, Madam Member, 
by an audit of the private, of the private bar? 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Mr. Speaker, the First Nations fund trustees now 
say they are going to run newspaper ads. They’re going to 
explain how the money is being spent in the media. Mr. 
Minister, is using a newspaper ad appropriate? 
 
If the First Nations trust . . . fund trustees were so concerned 
about an open and transparent process, why will they not let an 
auditor review their records? 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is not appropriate at all. Mr. Speaker, why 
should money be spent on buying newspaper ads to explain 
their position? Is this taxpayers’ money as well? Is money being 
taken from the First Nations fund for the purchase of these ads? 
 
Mr. Minister, do you condone the purchase of newspaper 
advertising to explain the expenses of the First Nations fund? 
And is this money coming out of the First Nations fund? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First I want to 
say that in our view and in my view the auditing firm of 
PKMG, Mr. Speaker, are very respected and highly, highly 

touted accounting firms in this province. And they do, they do 
accounting for hundreds and hundreds of organizations and 
agencies and government departments in this province. 
 
And I don’t understand, Mr. Speaker, why it is that the member 
opposite is critical of the firm of PKMG because, because PKM 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . KPMG, because in fact they do, 
they do the audit for more than one organization in this 
province. 
 
I want to say to the member opposite that, that in the 
negotiation of this agreement with First Nations we’re 
encouraged that we’re going to see a broader audit of the, of the 
account. But I say to member the opposite: why are you picking 
on the First Nations organization today and not municipalities 
and school boards and hospital boards, Madam Member? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Ruling on Bills Relating to Same Subject 
 
The Speaker: — I will recognize the member before orders of 
the day. I have some business that I would like to attend to, if I 
may first. 
 
I want to draw, before orders of the day, I want to draw to the 
attention of members that on December 15 this Assembly had 
two Bills before it with substantially the same purpose. 
 
Bill No. 209 - The Agricultural Implements Amendment Act, 
1999 under the name of the member for Kindersley and Bill No. 
12 The Agricultural Equipment Dealerships Act under the name 
of the Minister of Agriculture. Both Bills have the object of 
providing protection for Saskatchewan farm equipment dealers, 
Prairie implement manufacturers, and farmers. These two Bills 
have essentially the same purpose even though the form of the 
Bills and the means used are different. According to Erskine 
May, 22nd Edition, page 499: 
 

There is no (general) rule or custom which restrains the 
presentation of two or more bills relating to the same 
subject, and containing similar provisions. But if a decision 
of the House has already been taken on one such bill, for 
example if the bill has been given or refused a second 
reading, the other is not proceeded with if it contains 
substantially the same provisions; 

 
I would also like to direct members to rulings of the Chair of 
this Assembly of May 27, 1996; May 17, 1990; May 9, 1994; 
and June 1, 1994 on the same question ruled in respect to Bills. 
It was ruled that once the Assembly has given or reviewed 
second reading on one Bill, the Speaker then must prevent any 
further consideration of the other Bill. 
 
Bill No. 12 passed all stages and received Royal Assent on 
December 15, on Wednesday, December 15; consequently, and 
in view of the foregoing, it is necessary that Bill No. 209 be 
removed from the order paper. 
 

PRIORITY OF DEBATE 
 



December 17, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 283 

Trade Equalization Payment 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 
move a priority of debate motion under rule 19 which I 
informed you of earlier this day. I move, seconded by the 
member from Cannington: 
 

That this Assembly urges the provincial government to use 
its reserves in the liquor and gaming fund to provide an 
immediate trade equalization payment of $300 million to 
Saskatchewan farm families through a payment mechanism 
determined through consultation with the Saskatchewan 
farm coalition and that the provincial government use this 
payment to assist in negotiating a further $1 billion trade 
equalization payment from the federal government. 

 
The Speaker: — This morning the Opposition House Leader 
provided notice for priority of debate to the Office of the Clerk 
as is required under rule 19(2). The notice was distributed 
pursuant to the provisions of that rule. 
 
Having reviewed the case made by the member, I’m now 
prepared to rule on the matter. It is the Speaker’s responsibility 
to determine whether the matter should receive urgent 
consideration. The question is whether the matter is sufficiently 
urgent for the Assembly to set aside all other business to discuss 
this matter now. 
 
On this question, the Assembly itself has provided some 
guidance. To date, this session has focused mainly on 
agricultural crisis facing this province. The extreme importance 
of this issue has been cited as the reason for the convening of 
the twenty-fourth legislature on December 6. Since that date, 
the Assembly has underscored the importance of this matter by 
the extraordinary lengths it has gone to allow opportunity to 
debate various aspects of the issue and to find solutions to the 
crisis. 
 
The Assembly has already set aside its business to debate 
emergency resolutions. For the first time since 1953, the 
Standing Committee on Agriculture was appointed specifically 
to deal with this crisis. The Assembly took the unprecedented 
step of allowing the committee to have its hearings in the 
Legislative Chamber in order to demonstrate the serious 
importance of this issue and the urgency to debate this issue. 
And on Wednesday of this week, the Assembly passed a farm 
Bill on agricultural equipment through all stages in one day. 
 
The question is: in the face of this evidence that the Assembly 
itself feels this issue is of urgent public importance, should the 
Speaker deny the request? Rule 19(6)(e) states that “the motion 
must not revive discussion on a matter which has been debated 
in the same session.” 
 
The motion of the member proposes to move involves the use 
of liquor and gaming funds as a source for an immediate 
payment to farm families. This question is distinct from the 
other resolutions that have come before this Assembly on this 
matter. 
 
Rule 19(5) states in part that the Speaker should pay “regard to 
the probability of the matter being brought before the House 
within reasonable time by other means.” In past instances when 

requests of this nature have been made, the order paper did 
contain numerous other opportunities to debate the issue at 
hand. In this instance, those opportunities do not exist. 
 
On the other hand, unless this session is adjourned sooner, there 
will be a private members’ day on Tuesday, December 21. I 
find at this time, however, that there is not sufficient probability 
that the member’s motion will take precedence on the Tuesday 
order paper. 
 
And for those reasons, I find that pursuant to rule 19(7) this 
matter is proper to be discussed and the member may proceed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we can’t 
say how much we are pleased to see that this debate is 
proceeding, and the importance of the debate I think cannot be 
underscored. 
 
The farm families of Saskatchewan indeed are calling on this 
provincial government to act. And in an absolutely 
unprecedented fashion, this session has been called to bring this 
issue to the floor of the Assembly and before the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
(1115) 
 
And if you look back, Mr. Speaker, and I would ask the 
Minister of Agriculture and the Premier to certainly pay some 
attention to the fact that this has been something that the 
Saskatchewan Party has been calling on right from the outset of 
the election campaign. We have been saying to the people of 
Saskatchewan that it is extremely important that this issue be 
debated. 
 
And it even goes back further than that, if you want to look 
back through the record of . . . the public record, through the 
newspaper and media accounts. We’ve been calling right since 
last spring approximately — approximately March or earlier of 
last year — saying that there is a need here in Saskatchewan to 
address this very, very important issue. And we have been 
saying that that was something that was of a critical nature. 
 
And what we saw at that time was the Minister of Agriculture 
. . . the former minister of Agriculture, I should say, Mr. 
Upshall, saying that there was no farm crisis in Saskatchewan; 
there was no need to debate this further. 
 
And in fact he went so far I recall on one occasion to say that 
after the Canadian Wheat Board had announced an interim 
payment, which is in effect advancing farmers a little bit further 
on the amount of money that is owed to them prior to a final 
payment, it came out to about 19 cents, if I recall, a bushel. And 
he was saying that that ended the farm crisis here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And I can’t imagine any farmer at that time looking at their 
books and thinking to themselves that 19 cents a bushel was 
going to make a whole lot of difference. On many farm 
operations it wouldn’t have amounted to much more than a few 
thousand dollars. In essence, what it amounted to was helping 
them pay the grocery bill for the next month. 



284 Saskatchewan Hansard December 17, 1999 

And the minister of Agriculture at the time stood before this 
Assembly and stood before the people of Saskatchewan and 
said the farm crisis is over. And we continued at that time in 
opposition and said that this was a crisis and had to be moved 
on as quickly as possible. At the time we were saying that there 
needed to be help for some cattle operations. The leases of 
operations were coming up at that time and we are saying that 
this is the last time in the world that we should be increasing 
costs to farmers and ranchers here in Saskatchewan, yet this 
government proceeded with those increases in costs. 
 
Since that time we’ve been calling continually for this 
government to move in an effort to try and provide some relief 
for farm families. During the election campaign our leader 
spoke numerous times to farm groups, to farm delegations, to 
people all over this province, and each and every one of the 
people that campaigned on behalf of the Saskatchewan Party 
when they knocked on the doors of farm families, it was clearly 
an issue for those farm families. They said this is the most 
important issue facing Saskatchewan today. There needs to be a 
move to try and address this problem. 
 
And the Saskatchewan Party did. We said that there needed to 
be a convening of the legislature as soon as possible. There 
should be an all-party delegation move together as soon as 
possible to go to Ottawa and make the case, to go to Ottawa and 
say to them that we cannot as a province sustain this kind of 
problem ourselves; that there needed to be an immediate cash 
payment to Saskatchewan farmers, and indeed all of western 
Canadian farmers. 
 
And we were met at that time by the Minister of Agriculture 
and the Premier saying that no, we didn’t need that. It simply 
wasn’t the case. There was no need for an emergency session of 
the legislature, a fall session of the legislature. No need 
whatsoever. 
 
And at that time you will recall, Mr. Speaker, we were saying to 
the farm groups and the farm leadership here in this province 
that we thought that there should be, and in a very 
unprecedented fashion, the farm leaders coming before the bar 
of this Assembly and speak their mind, lay before the province 
of Saskatchewan, the people of Saskatchewan, indeed the 
people of Canada, what the problem was. 
 
And again the Minister of Agriculture and the Premier rejected 
that call. Rejected that call saying to the farmers of 
Saskatchewan that it wasn’t a problem, was not necessary. 
There was all kinds of issues that the people of Saskatchewan 
are faced with, but this one simply wasn’t high enough on the 
radar screen to register for the Executive Council of this 
government. 
 
And then we take the trip down to Ottawa. And yes, we took 
part in that. We believe that the farm coalition was right. We 
support the farm coalition. We continue to support the farm 
coalition. We continue to try and put forward ideas to try and 
address the problem. Yes, Mr. Minister, maybe they aren’t 
perfect, but at least it’s a step in the right direction. 
 
If you have any ideas at all in this area, I think it’s time that you 
said something on the issue. Try and, try and at least give us 
some direction of where your government is headed with 

respect to this. The silence is absolutely deafening from this 
government. No plan, no ideas, no direction, absolutely nothing 
except pointing their finger at everybody else. 
 
Yes, we agree, yes, we agree with the call for $1 billion of trade 
equalization payments and don’t anyone ever mistake the fact 
that we are onside with that call. But here in Saskatchewan, 
here in Saskatchewan . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Here in Saskatchewan we have an obligation to 
try and do what we can ourselves. This is the pioneer spirit that 
built this province. Just as that kind of spirit pervades this 
province as it did years and years ago, it is there still today. The 
pioneers of this province built this province because they 
believed that they could do something themselves, take charge 
of the issue, do what they could collectively and individually to 
try and build the province that we are so proud of here today. 
 
Just as they said yes, we have to do what we can, they always 
believed in their heart of hearts in the government and 
responsibility, and the role of government is to do what they 
can as well. And if you look back through the history of this 
province —. and a great deal of that history was made up of 
governments from that side of the House — they at least tried, 
they at least tried. And we’ll give them credit, we’ll give them 
credit for at least trying to build the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
But yet what do we see in the last number of years from this 
administration? Nothing. Nothing. Nothing whatsoever. Right 
after . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Tommy Douglas at least tried. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — At least Tommy Douglas tried, yes, with respect 
to agriculture and a number of issues. Most of the time he was 
off base but nevertheless he tried, nevertheless he tried to help 
Saskatchewan build. 
 
The fact of the matter is since 1991 when this government was 
elected, we have seen the systematic stripping of agriculture 
support here in this province. 1992 — you will recall this, Mr. 
Speaker, — 1992, this government brought in the most 
draconian legislation we have ever seen, absolutely the most 
draconian legislation we’ve ever seen to strip the rights of farm 
families here in Saskatchewan. Every single farmer . . . and I 
was a farmer at that time and many, if not all, of the members 
on this side of the House held permit books at that time and 
they said to the . . . they held contracts, legitimate, they thought 
legitimate contracts with this government. And those contracts 
laid out an insurance program — the gross revenue insurance 
program. 
 
Yes, it wasn’t perfect and no one has ever said it was. But what 
it did for the first time in Saskatchewan’s history, it provided 
Saskatchewan farm families with an insurance program, an 
income program that allowed them to have a guarantee of return 
on their investment here in Saskatchewan. 
 
And yes, I said, and I continue to say, it wasn’t perfect and no 
one ever said it was perfect. And this government 
systematically, deliberately, and in a very, very, determined 



December 17, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 285 

fashion and very immediately after taking office came before 
this Assembly with a piece of legislation to strip that contract 
from farm families. 
 
In Saskatchewan, in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, you will know 
that many people do business on a handshake. Many people 
believe in accepting the word of the person you’re conducting a 
business deal with. And I’ve done many of them, and all 
members of this House probably has as well. 
 
You go in and negotiate the purchase of something and you 
shake hands with the dealer opposite you and you say to them, I 
agree to that price and they agree to the delivery of that product. 
And that’s the way a lot of business is conducted, always has 
been conducted, continues to be conducted here in 
Saskatchewan today. And we accept people at their word with 
respect to things like that. 
 
But what happened, what happened? The most blatant and most 
obvious and the most draconian type of legislation you could 
ever imagine was presented by this administration at that time. 
They came in and rather than being an example to the people of 
Saskatchewan and saying you can trust us, you can accept our 
word, and most certainly, you can accept us because you have a 
contract with us, they came in and said to the farm families of 
this province, no, you don’t any longer. 
 
In fact the legislation said that they deemed that the contract 
never even existed. Never even existed, and they extinguished 
the rights of people to take it to court. They extinguished the 
rights of the people of this province, the farm families that 
thought they had a contract with this government. They 
extinguished their rights to go to the courts to try and hold this 
government accountable to a contract that was signed on behalf 
of the government with every farm family in this province that 
took up that contract and entered into that program. 
 
And what happened ever since then, what happened ever since 
then? We’ve seen a continual decline in net farm income to the 
people of Saskatchewan. We’ve seen our problems just get 
worse and worse and worse in terms of agriculture. And 
absolutely no plan. 
 
And I recall the minister of Agriculture of the day, a minister 
from Rosetown-Elrose constituency, it was known at that time, 
standing before this Assembly and saying this was the right 
thing to do. This was the best thing that they could do to help 
farm families in Saskatchewan, get them out of this terrible 
program that they were involved in that provided them for the 
first time in anybody’s memory in Saskatchewan with at least 
some stability in agriculture. 
 
That’s what they did. At least it was bankable. At least it was 
predictable. At least it was something that gave farmers some 
degree of hope in Saskatchewan and they stripped it from the 
farm families and have never once — have never once — 
acknowledged that it was a mistake or never once have admitted 
or apologized to the farm families of this province that it was 
wrong to do that. 
 
In fact if you look back, Mr. Speaker, you will recall the 
legislation — it was so draconian. In fact they made sure that 
you couldn’t even take them to court to challenge them on it. 

You couldn’t even do that. You couldn’t bring suit against any 
minister, any member of Executive Council, or any member of 
the legislature with respect to that. 
 
I think that was probably, at least in my memory, the first time 
in Saskatchewan that we’ve had that type of a clause in any 
kind of legislation because it was so draconian that you had to 
be sure that people couldn’t sue you on it. You had to be sure 
that that couldn’t happen. 
 
And I think it made people in Saskatchewan and made the 
business community in Saskatchewan absolutely recoil at the 
idea that somehow or another after you’ve signed a legitimate 
contract with a government, a duly-elected government, trusted 
by the people of Saskatchewan to the point that they elected you 
into office and stripped them of that kind of contract. It was 
wrong then, it is wrong today, and it will be wrong long into the 
future. And I tell you people opposite, that is the reason why 
you have not a single member in your legislative caucus that 
represents any significant portion of agriculture. 
 
It is clear that the farm families of this province completely 
distrust you. And it starts way back then and it continues right 
through to today. They absolutely distrust you because you’ve 
taken every time you have opportunity, you stifle any 
opportunity in agriculture. You rip up contracts with farmers. 
You continue to say that you support agriculture here in this 
province when it flies in the face of all evidence — absolutely 
flies in the face of all evidence here in Saskatchewan. 
 
The Premier and the Minister of Agriculture continue to say 
that we support agriculture at a higher level than anybody else 
in this per capita stuff that they always want to talk about. And 
yet when you read from the Provincial Auditor’s report, the 
1999 fall edition report, volume no. 1, page 29, Mr. Speaker, 
and you talk about what is happening here in Saskatchewan 
today and the importance of our motion that’s before the 
Assembly, you look at the government’s contributions to 
agriculture. It amounts to $323 million. 
 
If you use that raw figure and divide it by approximately a 
million people here in Saskatchewan, you come up with a figure 
that the Premier always likes to talk about of level of support 
per capita being higher than anyone else. 
 
But what is that funding in agriculture made up of? And I think 
we need to spend a little bit of time talking about that funding in 
agriculture and what it’s made up of. Because I think it is wrong 
for the Premier, it’s wrong for the Minister of Agriculture, and 
it’s certainly wrong for the Minister of Finance to continue to 
use that line when he knows full well that the province of 
Saskatchewan does not fully contribute $323 million. 
 
And the Provincial Auditor in his report to the Assembly this 
. . . in the fall of 1991 said that the federal government . . . or 
pardon me, the contributions to the budget for the Department 
of Agriculture are made up of federal government and producer 
transfers towards cost-shared programs and are recorded as 
revenue by the provincial government. 
 
Funding provided by the federal government in millions 
amounted to 99 . . . pardon me, $91 million for 1999, and it 
amounted to . . . the funding by producers amounted to $76 



286 Saskatchewan Hansard December 17, 1999 

million. 
 
So when you add those two amounts together, $91 million that 
is contributed to the budget of Saskatchewan for agriculture, 91 
by the federal government, and $76 million by producers, which 
would be by farmers, by the farmers of this province, which 
would be largely through payments to Crop Insurance for 
insurance premiums, it comes to $167 million. 
 
So when you take away $167 million, when you subtract $167 
million from the $323 million budget that you people opposite 
like to talk about as your funding for agriculture, you come up 
with a net figure of 160 . . . or $156 million, or approximately, 
or approximately half of what, a half of what you people say 
you contribute to agriculture. 
 
(1130) 
 
And you continue to stand in this Assembly, day after day after 
day, and say you fund $323 million when exactly about half is 
what you put into it. 
 
And that’s about what the farmers of this province have got 
used to accepting from this government in terms of anything. 
About half of what you say you’re going to do, you do. And in 
fact in the recent months and since the election campaign, they 
have come to expect the sum total is zero from you. Because 
that’s what you’ve done to this point. 
 
Yes, you’ve convened all kinds of meetings. And the member 
from Regina and others will know, because I’ve attended many 
of them. Yes, they’ve scheduled all kinds of meetings, they’ve 
booked all kinds of halls, and we’ve had all kinds of lunches, 
and we’ve had all kinds of trips, and we’ve done all of those 
kinds of things. And we’re not for a moment suggesting that 
they shouldn’t be doing them to bring forward new ideas from 
the farm community, but have you once yet, in this Assembly or 
in any one of those meetings, have you once . . . And I’ve asked 
a new member from Regina — what’s your seat, sir? Regina . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Qu’Appelle. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Qu’Appelle. I would ask you, have you once 
detailed . . . once detailed in any way, shape, or form, any new 
initiative, any new plan, any new idea whatsoever? No you 
have not. And that’s why the farm families of this province 
simply don’t trust you on the issue any longer. 
 
And that’s why when we come forward with new ideas, your 
minister gets up and stands. When we came forward with the 
new idea at the SARM convention earlier this fall of trying to 
help farm families in some fashion with the education tax 
reform, but did the minister stand up? Did he stand up and say, 
it’s something that we think we can do? No, he stands up and he 
makes light of it; he makes fun of the proposal. He says that it’s 
written on the back of a cigarette package, that kind of rhetoric 
that we continue to hear from the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Does anyone in this Assembly or anyone in Saskatchewan 
believe that that elevates the debate? Does anyone in 
Saskatchewan believe that somehow or another that is helpful? 
Does anyone in Saskatchewan believe that somehow or another 
that’s the kind of conduct that we should be looking at here and 

expecting from the parliamentarians of this legislature — the 
legislature here? No. 
 
I would say to the farm families of Saskatchewan, they were 
looking for something. They’re saying to you day after day after 
day, and they’re saying to us in opposition day after day after 
day, we have to do something. And if a new idea comes 
forward the least you can do — member from Regina . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Qu’Appelle. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Qu’Appelle. The least you can do for the farm 
families of this province is say to them: we’re going to look at 
it; we’re going to discuss it; we’ll take it before the farm 
coalition; we’ll take it back to caucus; we’ll take it to cabinet; 
we’ll take it to the farm leaders of this province; and we’ll take 
it to the entire province to discuss it. And we’ll look at it, and 
we’ll try and refine it, and we’ll try and come forward with 
some new initiative in this area. 
 
But no, we get the minister standing up and saying it’s a 
hackneyed type of knee-jerk reaction written on the back of a 
cigarette package; tries to make light of it, make fun of it, do 
everything he can in his power to somehow or another seize the 
agenda back. When he knows full well that the Saskatchewan 
Party and the opposition — the loyal opposition, the official 
opposition — has been the only ones in Saskatchewan at all that 
have brought forward any kind of new initiatives. And we 
continue to do that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — We continue to do that. We will continue to do 
that. We are the ones in Saskatchewan that clearly are driving 
the agenda with respect to agriculture, and we will continue to 
do that. And the reason is really simple — each and every 
member of this Assembly was elected to do that. We were told 
by the people of Saskatchewan in a very unprecedented fashion 
something that you should take a great deal, a lesson from, that 
we have the right to speak on this issue and we’ll continue to do 
that. 
 
And everyday that the Minister of Agriculture gets up and says 
we’re breaking ranks with the coalition, it demonstrates to the 
farm community and the farm leadership here in Saskatchewan 
that they have no new ideas and no plan, and all he can resort to 
is ridiculing somebody else’s plan rather than coming forward 
with one of his own. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — And it simply isn’t good enough. It simply isn’t 
good enough. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to members 



December 17, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 287 

of the Assembly, I just noticed, and had a moment just a few 
moments ago to chat with, a gentleman from the Fleming area, 
Mr. Les Freeman. And I know Mr. Freeman has grown up in 
the farming situation. He knows a lot of what we’re talking 
about, just on his way back from a visit to his family. And we’d 
like to welcome him to the Assembly this morning. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

PRIORITY OF DEBATE 
 

Trade Equalization Payment 
(continued) 

 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And the farm families 
of this province continue to despair. They continue to be 
frustrated. They continue to be worried. 
 
I would ask any member of your caucus over there: have you 
ever laid awake at night when the thunderstorm is rolling over 
and the hailstorms stop . . . start dropping, and you’re thinking 
to yourself how am I going to manage now? How am I going to 
put together the financing that’s necessary to get this farm 
through another year? 
 
Have you ever looked at a storm cloud and wondered what this 
is going to do to your operation? Have you ever looked in the 
. . . got up at 5:30 in the morning on a cool, cool day in about 
the latter days of August, the 27th or something like that, and 
think to yourself, if this temperature drops another degree or 
two there goes my crop? Have you ever done anything like 
that? I don’t think for a moment you even understand the kind 
of concerns that farmers have in this area. 
 
Well I’ll tell you that each and every member of this Assembly, 
on this side of the Assembly, knows exactly what that feeling is 
like. Knows exactly what it is not to be awoken by an alarm 
clock at 5:30 in the morning but to be awoken in a cold sweat 
because they know very well that it’s going to be close. It’s 
going to be razor-thin close to whether or not the temperature 
has dropped down to the point that their crops freeze. 
 
And I can remember so many times in my life getting up at that 
time of the day and then going to the kitchen table and sitting 
down at the kitchen table and pulling out the calculator and 
thinking to myself, how much did our farm lose today? How 
much did our farm lose today? 
 
And I look at other members of this Assembly and I know very 
well they have spent a lot of time thinking about those very 
kinds of things. Wondering to themselves, what are we going to 
do now? And there isn’t a single member on that side of the 
House, I would venture to say, that has spent a moment thinking 
about those kinds of thoughts — not a moment thinking about 
those kinds of thoughts, with the possible exception of the one 
member from Yorkton, with the possible exception of him. 
 
The fact of the matter is farm families spend a great deal of time 
despairing about the kinds of concerns that they have. What are 
we going to do about transportation? What are we going to do 
about highways and roads here in Saskatchewan? What are we 
going to do about grain prices? What are we going to do about 
that field down the road that I haven’t had a chance to spray yet 

or haven’t had a chance to cultivate that field? How am I 
possibly going to get to that job when we’ve got a million other 
jobs that have to be done. 
 
Waking up and thinking to themselves, what am I going to do to 
try and patch that combine together to get it through another 
season? What am I going to do to try and fix that tractor to get it 
through another season? How am I possibly going to go in and 
say to my dealer, you got to help me on this one because I don’t 
have the money to buy that new fuel injection pump, don’t have 
the money to put that new water pump on the combine. I can’t 
afford that $500 small belt that has turned from a $500 belt to a 
$1,500 belt in the course of a couple of years. That’s the kinds 
of things that farm families are faced with. 
 
Our paycheque doesn’t fall out of an envelope. Our paycheque 
in rural Saskatchewan in agriculture doesn’t fall out of an 
envelope and it’s not signed by somebody else. In fact the fact 
of the matter is in agriculture, Mr. Speaker, and you will know 
this, that the farm families, they go to an elevator and they sell 
their crop or they sell their specialty crop or they go to an 
auction mart and sell their cattle. And then they get a cheque for 
the kind of labour that they have done to bring together some 
degree of hope for their farm family. And that’s what happens 
in Saskatchewan on a daily basis. 
 
Are any of you on that side of the House even aware of the 
kinds of things that happen on a daily basis in agriculture? 
Auction marts all over this province buying and selling cattle 
and hogs and all of those kind of things — commodity 
exchanges in Winnipeg, trading commodities on behalf of 
farmers, speciality crop dealers buying and selling product 
every single day, farmers delivering grain every single day to an 
elevator. 
 
Have you ever experienced, have you ever experienced the joy 
of cutting into a new crop? Have you ever experienced that? 
Have you ever experienced cutting into a new crop, seeing the 
grain drop into the hopper of your combine, and saying to 
yourself, this is good? If you have experienced those kinds of 
things, if you have experienced those kinds of things, why then 
are you not speaking out for farm families here in 
Saskatchewan? Why are you not doing that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — If you’ve done any of those kind of things — and 
there’s members on the opposite side of the House, Mr. 
Speaker, nodding in agreement that they’ve done that — if 
they’ve done any of those circumstances, how then can you 
support a party that has systematically stripped support for 
agriculture here in this province? How can you do that? 
 
Have you looked back, have you taken for one moment, Mr. 
Member from Regina Qu’Appelle, have you taken a look back 
through the budgets, successive budgets going back over the 
last number of years and seen the erosion of support for 
agriculture here in this province? It used to be $1.2 billion when 
you took over here in Saskatchewan. That’s what the budget 
was here in Saskatchewan. That’s what it was here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And now the budget of Saskatchewan is $323 million of which 



288 Saskatchewan Hansard December 17, 1999 

one-half of it is made up by producer premiums for crop 
insurance and other programs and for the federal government 
contribution. One half of that made up by other people, and they 
stand before this Assembly and they stand before the farm 
families of this province day after day after day and say, we 
contribute the most on a per capita basis of any province in 
Saskatchewan. When they know full well, they know full well, 
it is not true. 
 
They know full well it’s not true. And now we’ve seen the 
auditors expose them in this area just as they’ve been exposed 
in so many areas before with respect to agriculture. Every time 
we get up and see the Minister of Agriculture speak on these 
kinds of things, they want to use those terms. They want to talk 
about $323 million. 
 
And I would ask some of you new members like the one sitting 
at the back from Saskatoon, I would ask you, look through the 
auditor’s report. Try and understand it. Read it or have someone 
read it to you. — 1999 Fall Report, Volume 1. And that’s a line 
that I didn’t make up myself. That’s the kind of line that we 
used to expect, and we continue to get from the Minister of 
Agriculture. 
 
I don’t know how many times in this Assembly he has said that 
to me. And you think it is insulting when I say it to you. Well 
we think it is insulting when he says it to us. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — But that’s the kind of rhetoric and I would ask 
you, Madam Member, to go back through the Hansard of this 
Assembly, and find the many, many occasions when he’s got up 
and said those kinds of things to members of this Assembly. 
Exactly that. Read it or have someone read it to you. 
 
That’s the kind of degrading kind of speeches that this . . . and 
comment that this minister makes when he knows full well, his 
department knows full well, the Premier knows full well, the 
Minister of Agriculture and Finance, and the entire executive 
branch of government — the cabinet — knows full well, that 
their contribution to agriculture amounts to exactly half of what 
they continue to tell the people of Saskatchewan that it does. 
 
So when you take out the federal government’s contributions 
and you take out producer contributions, I wonder how you 
stack up in terms of per capita spending compared to the rest of 
Canada. 
 
And we will be doing some analysis on that. You can be sure 
we’ll be doing some analysis on that because we believe what 
you are saying is not true, not right, and simply is unacceptable 
to the farm community. 
 
And indeed it should not be acceptable to anyone here in 
Saskatchewan. And I have said, and many members, all of our 
members of this side of the Assembly . . . And I look at the 
member from Weyburn-Big Muddy. She continues to bring 
forward those issues of concern. And I look at the member from 
Humboldt bringing forward issues of concern about agriculture 
in our caucus on a daily basis. And members from every region 
in this province that represent agriculture, they continue to 
bring forward those kinds of new ideas and say, we cannot, we 

cannot just simply allow this province to dwindle and continue 
to go down the drain because this is a government that doesn’t 
care or understand agriculture. Because it’s not just . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1145) 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Because, Mr. Speaker, as you know, this is not 
just a farm problem. It’s quickly becoming . . . it’s quickly 
becoming a Saskatchewan problem. And all you have to do is 
talk to the retailers of this province as we draw closer to 
Christmastime . . . as we draw closer to Christmastime and they 
are saying to us, all over Saskatchewan, including Regina and 
Saskatoon, sales are down; they’re worried. Farmers aren’t 
coming in and spending any money. And I’ll tell you the reason 
why. Because they don’t have any. 
 
And the member — my seatmate, the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena — said to me the other day. You know 
what one of her farmers called and told her what their 
Christmas present to their family was going to be? What they 
were going to do to try and provide something for their family 
on Christmas Day? They were going to pool their money and 
buy one single Christmas present. And that single Christmas 
present was to pay the power bill — was to pay the power bill 
— so that the lights would be on, and the heat would be on, on 
Christmas Day for their family. That was the extent of the 
Christmas that this farm family was going to be having at their 
home. That’s the kind of problem that farmers are faced with. 
 
Now I look through farm families all over Saskatchewan. The 
minister continues to like to stand before people here in 
Saskatchewan and say there’s all kinds of farmers that are doing 
pretty darn well here in Saskatchewan and we have to recognize 
that. Well I would say, I would say to the member from Albert 
south that’s nodding his head, if you really knew the true story 
about what’s happening out there you wouldn’t be thinking that 
was the case. 
 
Yes, there are lots of farm families out there, here in 
Saskatchewan, that are saying to themselves we’ll get through 
this because we’re good managers and because we have been 
able to over the last number of years of decent grain prices, 
been able to put some savings away in registered retirement 
plans, been able to put some money into NISA plans, and been 
able to put some money into other savings types of plans for 
themselves. 
 
But I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, each and every single one of 
them, they know very well that they’re pulling it out day after 
day after day after day. And they’re looking at next year, and 
they’re looking at next year and they’re saying to themselves, 
now that my NISA account is empty, now that my RRSPs 
(Registered Retirement Savings Plan) have all been cashed in, 
now that all my savings have been cashed in, and how am I 
possibly going to put in next year’s crop without one single cent 
after I’ve disposed of all of my savings. And that’s what they’re 
saying to him. They’re saying to the people of Saskatchewan, 
that’s what’s happening. 
 
But yet there’s still one account that the farmers of 
Saskatchewan, and indeed all of Saskatchewan, have 



December 17, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 289 

contributed to over the last number of months and the last years 
here in Saskatchewan, that isn’t empty. The only problem is, is 
that they don’t have access to it because this government holds 
that dearly to their heart — and that’s the liquor and gaming 
fund. The fund — the emergency, rainy-day fund as the 
Minister of Finance likes to talk about all the time in this 
Assembly. And saying how prudent they are at managing that 
fund and how important it is that we have that for emergencies 
here in Saskatchewan and that it’s a rainy-day fund. 
 
Well I’ll tell you, Mr. Minister, that it’s raining out there right 
now. The rain has turned to pouring and it’s turned to cold, cold 
winter days for farm families here in Saskatchewan. Just step 
out of the legislature and hop in a car or a truck and go out to a 
farm family just right out here west of Regina, or take a trip 
even more likely to talk about despair a little bit south of 
Regina where they didn’t get a crop in. And talk to the farm 
families of this province and see what they say to you. 
 
Yes, our family farm may survive because we’ll do everything 
we can to cut and cut and cut right to the point where we won’t 
even buy Christmas presents for our kids because we’re going 
to survive. We’re going to do what it takes to survive, in spite 
of — in spite of — the fact that this government won’t move 
one inch to try and support them. 
 
Every single one of you on that side of the House should be 
ashamed of the fact that you have money in that account and 
won’t do anything with it. 
 
And we look at the headlines in today’s newspaper, “Farm 
activist now a casualty.” And, Mr. Speaker, The Leader-Post of 
today talks about a farm family here in this province that has 
lost their farm in the last few days, a representative of the 
Saskatchewan Women’s Agricultural Network here in this 
province that is now one of the casualties. 
 
And I quote from the article. The lady’s saying, Carolyn 
McDonald saying: “I am (now) one of their casualties . . .” And 
I think when she says “their casualties,” she’s not referring to 
herself, she’s referring to the provincial government and the 
federal government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — This couple, this couple, who started in . . . this 
farming couple who are in their early 40s, 40 years of age, have 
farmed 1,500 acres near Richard, which is in the Battleford 
area, for approximately 15 years. And I dare say if we contacted 
those people, that farm probably was in the hands of their 
parents and in the hands of their grandparents before them, and 
perhaps even their great-grandparents before them. 
 
Has anybody on your side of the House actually owned 
anything in their entire lives for more than a few years? Well 
these farm families have owned these kinds of operations for 
generations — generations. 
 
And I can’t help but think the number of farmers in 
Saskatchewan, the husbands and wives that are out there right 
today in Saskatchewan that are bawling their eyes out at the 
thought that they’re going to lose the family farm that their 
grandfather and their great-grandfather and their father and their 

mother and their grandmother and their great-grandmother built 
up over the years to try and provide them with some sort of 
economic stability. 
 
And I can’t tell you the amount of despair that farmers feel 
when they think to themselves that they might be the one that 
loses that operation that’s been built up perhaps over a hundred 
years. And there’s many farm families here in Saskatchewan 
that have that little sign out in front of their door that they 
operate a heritage farm — one that’s been in existence here in 
this province of Saskatchewan for 100 years. 
 
And we look back about this province with a great deal of pride 
as we should, the formation of this province dating back to 
when we came into Confederation, and yet these farmers have 
been in existence in many cases since before that, since before 
that. Would we allow that kind of an attack on our province? I 
would say, no we would not. But yet we allow it on our farm 
families. 
 
We allow the farm families of this province to be subjected to 
this type of government initiatives, this type of stripping of farm 
programs, and we just stand by idly and say somehow or 
another it’s acceptable. And I can’t help but think back to when 
the farm families of this province . . . and there were numerous 
ones of them that took this government to court to try and bring 
back some sanity into contracts, try and fight this government 
on stripping them of their GRIP (gross revenue insurance 
program) contract. And what did this government do? Or what 
happened in the courts, I should say, Mr. Speaker? We had a 
judge — and I cannot believe that that happened — that said 
that this was in the public good. That this was somehow or 
another in the public good. 
 
Well I’ll tell you a little bit about public good. I think the public 
good is having farmers on the land. I think it’s having small 
family farm operations. I think it’s having larger operations. I 
think it’s having young kids getting on a bus in the morning and 
going to school at a community that’s viable here in 
Saskatchewan. I think it’s having a hospital in your community. 
I think it’s having a church or churches in your community. I 
think it’s having a rink in your community. I think it’s having a 
school in your community. I think it’s having a thriving 
business sector in your community. I think it’s having all of 
those kinds of things, and each and every one of the members 
on this side of the Assembly know exactly what I’m talking 
about. 
 
They know and they remember going to town on a Saturday 
afternoon and you couldn’t even get a parking spot in front of 
the local store because everybody . . . that was a part of being in 
small town Saskatchewan. You came to Saskatchewan to 
support your community. That’s the kind of things that I 
remember as a child in Saskatchewan, going uptown on a 
Saturday afternoon . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Going uptown on a Saturday afternoon with my 
father and my mother and my brother . . . my sisters, I don’t 
have any brothers. I remember going uptown with them on a 
Saturday afternoon and talking to our friends and our colleagues 
and our neighbours because they were all there. They were all 



290 Saskatchewan Hansard December 17, 1999 

there. And I like to think of them all as brothers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Because they were all there. They were all there 
because there was a sense of community that people had at that 
time. And I look back at those communities all over the district 
out there where I come from, and every single member on this 
side of the House will know what I speak of when I say many 
of those communities don’t even exist today. 
 
I remember as a kid, Mr. Speaker, and I think you probably will 
as well, I remember going to communities and playing baseball, 
and playing hockey, and going to dances, and going to fowl 
suppers in communities that don’t even exist today. I remember 
going to places like Madison — not even on the map. Going to 
Snipe Lake — not even on the map. Going to places like Tyner, 
where I met my wife. Going to places like Lacadena and 
playing hockey. Going to places all over my area. Those 
communities don’t even exist today, don’t even exist, and they 
were vibrant little communities. Yes they were small, but they 
had heart. 
 
They had heart. They had people in them that believed in the 
sense of community. They believed in things like shopping at 
home. They believed in buying your groceries right from the 
person that is a friend and neighbour of yours. They believed in 
going to church. They believed in getting up every day, a hard 
day’s work. They believed in all of those kinds of things 
because that’s what made up the fabric of rural Saskatchewan in 
this province; and it continues to, in spite of the attacks that we 
see from governments, successive governments, mostly this 
government and the federal government currently. 
 
And the good news in all of this is we will survive in rural 
Saskatchewan. The unfortunate thing is many farmers won’t. 
And I just look around on my community and I look around 
other communities here in Saskatchewan and I think to myself, 
how many have to lose their operations? How many people 
have to lose their entire livelihood, lose that heritage farm that 
their grandparents and their great-grandparents and their parents 
have built up over the years to satisfy somehow this need that 
seems to have developed in Saskatchewan to say to people, well 
it’s just too bad. It’s just too bad. Nothing we can do. 
 
That’s the attitude of this government that we see in this 
Assembly in the last number of days — nothing we can do; it’s 
just too bad; I’m sorry, you’re going to have to do something 
else; you’re going to have to pick up whatever little you have 
left, move to the city, move to somewhere else. 
 
Most often it’s move, and the first thing they see when they 
enter Alberta — at least the first thing they hope they see when 
they enter Alberta — is the Calgary tower, because at least they 
know that in Alberta there’ll be opportunity for them. And I 
can’t help but think of the number of farm families here in 
Saskatchewan in the last number of years that have picked up 
what little they have left and have gone to places like Alberta 
and Calgary and other places, to try and find a job and provide 
some hope, some stability, some plan, for their family. 
 
In the Kindersley constituency we have a highway, Highway 
No. 7, leading through it. And I looked at the member from 

Cypress Hills that has a major highway leading into Alberta as 
well, Highway No 1. If you sit at that highway, Mr. Speaker, for 
not more than an hour you will see, as we have seen for years 
and years and years, the first thing you might see go by is a load 
of cattle. And do you know where they’re heading? They’re 
heading to feedlot alley in Alberta because we can’t somehow 
or another get together on agriculture strategy here in this 
province, to feed them in this province. They’re heading down 
there. 
 
And the next thing you might see going by, the next thing you 
might see going by is a young family heading out to Alberta, 
often to the same place, following that load of cattle to feedlot 
alley — to Lethbridge, to Taber, to Medicine Hat, to all of those 
kinds of places — and getting a job in that very feedlot. 
 
And the next thing you might see going by is a semi-load of 
grain heading for . . . a semi-load of feed grains heading for that 
exact same feedlot to feed the cattle that we just finished 
sending to them, that we backgrounded here in this province, 
and to support the kids that we just finished shipping out there 
to feed those cattle, to go to the university in Calgary, to go to 
SAIT (Southern Alberta Institute of Technology), to go to all 
kinds of job opportunities. 
 
And all of those kinds of things we see on a daily basis, heading 
out through Highway No. 1, heading out through Highway No. 
7, heading out through the Yellowhead, through Lloydminster. 
All of those kinds of things we see on a daily basis and this 
government wants to bury its head in the sand and say, we can’t 
help that, can’t do anything to address this. All we can do is 
point our finger eastward, as you always do whenever there’s a 
problem here in Saskatchewan, and say it’s not our fault, 
nothing we can do, blame it on somebody else, don’t care about 
the problem, aren’t concerned about the problem, don’t 
understand the problem, and aren’t worried about the problem. 
 
And that’s the kind of thing that we have come to expect here in 
Saskatchewan and that’s precisely the reason why there isn’t a 
single member of that side of the House that represents in large 
measure an agriculture community. And the member from 
Yorkton shakes his head. Yes, he represents some degree of 
farm community and we understand that; but in large measure 
there isn’t a member over there that represents much of 
agriculture here in Saskatchewan. 
 
(1200) 
 
We look at these kinds of headlines in The Leader-Post here 
today and it makes our hearts grieve for the kind of problem 
this farm family has been faced with and now is going through 
and working through. Can you imagine the amount of despair 
that this family must be going through? Can you imagine the 
kind of heartache that they must be going through? Can you 
imagine for a moment the sleepless nights that this family has 
gone through wondering whether or not they might be able to 
survive this crisis; waking up in the middle of the night in a 
cold sweat because they know very well that they can’t make it, 
can’t manage. 
 
This lady has spoken on behalf of the farm crisis here in 
Saskatchewan all over this province and, indeed, I would 
suggest, all over Canada trying to somehow or another convince 



December 17, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 291 

governments — and your government is no exception — that 
this problem has to be addressed. 
 
She says that she’s going to look for a job while her husband 
turns his full attention to a side business, a hunting camp. 
 

This business will keep us afloat right now, but the farm is 
eating up a lot of (the) profits and there’s (very little) left 
for us (meaning their family). It makes you wonder why 
you’re doing it. 

 
And that’s exactly what farm families are saying to us and I 
hope they’re saying to the Minister of Agriculture and the 
Premier and all you people that represent constituencies other 
than rural constituencies, I hope they’re saying to you, those 
exact kinds of things. What is the use? 
 
We look at the farming community in my constituency, as an 
example, Mr. Speaker, the RM of Chesterfield, and after this 
story, you’ll understand why it was probably named the RM of 
Chesterfield. The fact of the matter is in that RM, that 
municipality in my constituency, which is in the Eatonia area of 
this province on the west side of Saskatchewan, that community 
when they did a survey to find out the average age of the farmer 
in that constituency, it was 67 years of age last year — 67 years 
of age. 
 
At a time, at a time when those people should be enjoying their 
retirement, they’re still trying to eke out a living on those 
farming operations, still trying to pass that farm on to a son or a 
daughter or someone within their family or a brother or a sister, 
still trying to do that, still wondering to themselves: how can we 
possibly make this thing work. And the average age is 67. 
 
Those people should be enjoying their retirement, and yet these 
are the same people that we put through the agony day after day 
after day of wondering how they’re going to pay their fuel bill, 
wondering how they’re going to pay their fertilizer bill, 
wondering how they’re going to pay the chemical bill, 
wondering whether or not they’re going to be able to make the 
. . . wondering whether or not they’re going to be able to make 
the land payments and, most importantly, wondering whether or 
not they’re going to be able to pay their grocery bill. That’s the 
kind of thing that farm families are being faced with here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And we have a government opposite that has $350 million in a 
bank account, slush fund, set aside for emergencies and is 
unwilling or uncaring, unable to, whatever the reason seems to 
be, to try and do anything to help the farm families. 
 
And this is a larger problem than in just agriculture. 
Communities all over this province — whether you’re a grocery 
store owner, whether you operate a drugstore, whether you 
operate any kind of operation whatsoever, a little restaurant; 
whether you operate a dress shop, whether you op a farm 
implement dealership, whether you operate a hardware store, 
whether you operate anything in rural Saskatchewan right now 
— they’re all looking at agriculture and they’re all saying to 
themselves: how possibly, if the farm community doesn’t 
survive, am I going to survive? 
 
I talked to a business owner in my constituency here a little 

while ago, a fertilizer chemical dealer in my constituency here a 
little while ago, Mr. Speaker, and he said to me I had last spring 
$1 million — I topped it for the first time — $1 million of sales. 
That sounds I’m sure to the people on the other side like a 
tremendous amount of money, and it is. And he was very, very 
proud of the fact that over the last number of years — he had 
started out this fertilizer and chemical dealership about 10 years 
go — that he had achieved $1 million in sales. 
 
But he said to me you know what the startling fact is? Do you 
know what the cruel reality is? That while he achieved a million 
dollars in sales, $900,000 of it is on the books. He’s not being 
able to be paid. The farm families in that constituency, in that 
area that he deals with, simply do not have the resources to 
meet those kind of obligations that they are faced with. They 
haven’t been able to come in and make their payments — not 
through any fault of their own. They just simply don’t have the 
money, simply don’t have the money to do it. 
 
And the fact of the matter is, is that we’re facing unprecedented 
low commodity prices here in Saskatchewan, all over Western 
Canada, and it has nothing to do with anything that any farmer 
is doing. It has everything to do with international trade. It has 
everything to do with things that are completely out of their 
control. And we have a federal government and now a 
provincial government that says you’re just going to have to 
suffer through it. You’re just going to have to manage on your 
own. 
 
And that’s why we’ve been saying to the farm families and to 
the government and to the federal government and the 
provincial government that something has to happen. It’s 
supposedly a brand new day here in Saskatchewan and yet there 
hasn’t been a single plan put forward. 
 
Well I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, at least the Saskatchewan Party 
has some thoughts in a number of areas. At least somebody is 
driving this issue. We have some thoughts in terms of a 
short-term package for agriculture. We have said, and we have 
supported the call, and we’ll continue to support the call for a 
$1 billion trade equalization payment because it is, it is right. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — We’ll continue to support that because it is right. 
It is the right thing to do. 
 
And we’ve spoke numerous occasions. We went with the trek to 
Ottawa to try and convince them down there. All of our 
members have spoke time and time and time again in the 
Throne Speech and in this debate in the Assembly to try and 
bring this to the floor, to try and convince the government here 
in Saskatchewan and in Ottawa that something needs to happen. 
 
Put forward some thoughts in terms of the education. We put 
forward some thoughts in terms of, you didn’t like that one, you 
could go with the NISA option; if you don’t like that one, pull 
some money out of liquor and gaming. At least try and do 
something. Try and do something. 
 
The long term in the Throne Speech . . . you look at the 
government’s plans in terms of the Throne Speech. What did 
they say about long term? What did they say about a long-term 



292 Saskatchewan Hansard December 17, 1999 

solution for agriculture, Mr. Speaker? I know this isn’t a Throne 
Speech but it speaks a lot to what this government’s plans are 
for agriculture. What they said in terms of that was: 
 

In addition to negotiating with the federal government for 
enhanced safety net programs in the short term, my 
government will pursue a long term safety net program . . . 

 
That’s all we can expect. We’re going to pursue it, we’re going 
to pursue it. Since 1992 here in this province, since 1992 we’ve 
had absolutely nothing in terms of a safety net for 
Saskatchewan farm families. And now this government has 
given the commitment to pursue it. 
 
And I would dare say, if you look back through all of the 
Throne Speeches, that this government has made since they 
came into this Assembly, if they even mentioned agriculture, 
which is doubtful, but if they did they would say something 
similar to that — that we’re going to continue to pursue a 
long-term safety net program. 
 
Absolutely no thoughts whatsoever in this area. No plan. No 
thoughts whatsoever. 
 
Just the other day in the Assembly here, Mr. Speaker, after the 
Assembly adjourned for the afternoon, we had a group come 
and speak to us about an income assurance program. It may not 
be perfect. It may not be the right plan for Saskatchewan farm 
families, but at least it’s an idea. At least it’s a step in the right 
direction. At least there’s some farmers out there trying to 
figure out what we’re going to do to address the problem. 
 
Do you people on the opposite side, in caucus, ever talk about 
long-term safety net? Do you have an ag caucus any longer? 
You used to at one time have an ag caucus. My guess is it 
would be made up of people that have no interest in agriculture 
whatsoever. No interest whatsoever. 
 
And the member waves from the back. Do you know what a 
quota book is, sir? Have you got a quota book? Have you got 
one of those things? Do you understand what that is? Do you 
know what a Canadian Wheat Board quota book is? Have you 
had one signed up? 
 
The fact of the matter is they don’t. And it’s little wonder that 
they’ve come forward with no plans. And I guess it should be 
understandable. If you don’t understand agriculture, why would 
you care about it, why would you try to address the problems? 
Well at least these farmers are coming forward with some ideas, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I want to quote from the presentation . . . the literature that 
they left with us because I think it’s very important. “This 
program was developed with these kinds of thoughts in mind,” 
it leads off by saying. “This program was brought forward to 
keep the family farm a way of life, not a dream.” 
 
Not a dream. A lot of farmers out there right now are thinking 
to themselves, it’s a dream if I get through this — it’s a dream if 
I get through this because they got a nightmare out there, right 
there, that they have no idea how they’re going to manage and 
make their way through this. When a producer has a disaster 
whether it’s production or commodity prices, he can recover his 

cost of production. In other areas of the economy that’s 
something that you expect. 
 
When you put a . . . when you open a retail store the last thing 
that you expect to do is sell a product below your cost of 
production, below your cost of acquisition because you can’t 
stay in business if you do. And everybody understands that that 
has any degree of business activity in their entire life. You can’t 
sell a product for less than what it costs you produce it or 
acquire it, or it won’t be long and your operation will be done. 
 
And the fact of the matter is that’s what happening to many 
farm families here in this province they’re buying a product 
which they have no control over — inputs that they have no 
control over the cost of them whatsoever — and then they’re 
selling a product into to marketplace that they have absolutely 
no control over, and at the end of the day they see a negative 
return. 
 
An Hon. Member: — And they pay the cost. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — And they pay the freight both ways as a 
colleague says from behind. 
 
Promote better farming practices, that’s another initiative that 
they want to try and address because the farm families in this 
province they all know that they have to be stewards of the 
land. Look after the land and the land will look after you. How 
many times did your grandparents say that to you or your father 
or mother say that to you? Look after the farm and the farm will 
look after you. I can’t count the number of times that I had that, 
at the knee of my father or grandfather, told to me. 
 
They’re looking for income assurance versus bushel coverage. 
They’re looking for a plan that’s more bankable. They’re 
looking for a plan that they can take to the bank and say, I think 
this might be something that’ll get me through the next year. 
And it won’t surprise me for a moment, it won’t surprise me for 
a moment if the banks of this province and the credit unions 
look upon that bankable guarantee as skeptical coming for a 
government that has ripped up contracts in the past. And it 
would be, it’d be a logical conclusion to come up with that we 
simply won’t have a bankable plan because this government has 
ripped up contracts in the past and who would trust them about 
a bankable program now? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — In claim years, coverage stays the same and 
premiums will change and that’s part of their plan. 
 
They understand the important part that they have to . . . that 
farm families recognize is they have to take responsibility for 
part of their operation in terms of these plans as well. And that’s 
why tripartite plans have been developed over the years in 
things like crop insurance, and in things like NISA and other 
programs that at least have been working for farm families. 
That’s why they’ve been developed that way because producers 
say, yes, we have an obligation to pay a premium for these 
programs. And they understand that and they have no argument 
with that, no quarrel with that whatsoever, because they believe 
in protecting themselves doing what they can in terms of risk 
management — risk management. 



December 17, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 293 

When you get up in the morning on the opposite side of the 
House, does that term ever enter your conscious? Risk 
management. Well I’ll tell you it certainly does in the farm 
community. They wake up each and every single day and the 
first thing they think about is: what bills do we have to pay 
today? What income do we have to meet those obligations 
today? What kind of risk management do we have to address 
today? 
 
And I looked at . . . I was told a little story in my constituency, 
Mr. Speaker, about a fellow, a farmer who won a lottery in my 
constituency. Won a hundred thousand dollars, a lot of money, 
obviously a lot of money. And a reporter came to him and said, 
what are you going to do with the hundred thousand dollars? 
And he said, I’m going to pay some bills. And he asked him, 
what are you going to do with the rest? And he said, well 
they’re just going to have to wait. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1215) 
 
Mr. Boyd: — That’s true. That’s true. Farm families, while 
they’re exposed to these kind of things, at least have a sense of 
humour. At least they’re trying to do something. 
 
You go to the curling rink today, you go to the rink today, you 
go to the fowl supper tonight, and you’ll see farm families. At 
least they have a spirit of trying somehow or another to pull 
themselves out of this quagmire that they’re in, trying with 
hope, trying with some measure of understanding to figure out 
why governments simply don’t want to move in this area. 
 
I can’t understand for a moment — and I’m hoping that a 
member on the opposite side of the House will tell us sometime 
through this legislative session that we’re involved in today in 
the next number of days and perhaps weeks — why are you not 
willing to help? Why are you not willing to help? Why is it that 
within your power you have the resources to help and you are 
unwilling to do that. What is possibly the reason why? 
 
And I would ask members of this side of the House to try and 
give me some reasons why they don’t want to help. I don’t 
understand it. I don’t understand it. They have no plan and they 
don’t care whatsoever. 
 
The income assurance program that the farmers presented to us 
the other day felt that they had to have some protection in terms 
of things like cost that they face every single day. Things like a 
fuel bill, things like a fertilizer bill, things like a chemical bill. 
Has any of you members on the opposite side ever had a fuel 
truck pull into your yard and drop off 2,500 gallons, or 
whatever that is in litres — 10,000 approximately — litres of 
diesel fuel and wonder to yourselves, how am I going to pay for 
that? How am I going to pay for that? 
 
But yet on the other hand you know full well that that’s what 
it’s going to take to put that crop in. That’s what it’s going to 
take tomorrow when they pull the tractor up in front of those 
fuel tanks and fill it up. That it has to have that in order to go 
out and put that crop in. 
 
The fact of the matter is, is those are the kinds of things that 

farmers are faced with every day and that’s the reason why 
they’re coming forward with plans like this and saying that 
there has to be some help in agriculture. 
 
They’ve come forward with a plan that says we’ve got to have a 
basic premium that’s manageable. They’re talking about a 
premium level of about $5 an acre for 50 per cent coverage; $7 
an acre for 70 per cent coverage; $8 an acre for 80 per cent 
coverage; and they’ve worked in a program . . . they worked 
into this program that they have developed a surcharge 
premium for when they have lost years because they recognize 
that yes, the plan has to be sustainable and, yes, you have to 
stop people from farming the farm plan. 
 
That’s always been a criticism of farm plans over the years. 
How do you stop those very, very few farmers out there — and 
they are very few and far between — that will want to try and 
take advantage of these types of programs. And they’ve brought 
together a plan that has those kinds of things in it. 
 
They presented this plan, incidentally, to the Premier of 
Saskatchewan. Are any of your members opposite aware of the 
fact that this plan was presented to the Premier of 
Saskatchewan? My guess is that it’s no. 
 
They brought in a plan where they said that there should be a 
surcharge premium on collected amounts on this plan. They 
said that there should be a surcharge on wheat of 10 per cent on 
a 50 per cent plan; 14 per cent on a 70 per cent plan, and 21 per 
cent on a 80 per cent plan. Because as I said, we don’t want to 
have farmers farming the farm program — can’t have that. We 
want a responsible plan, we want a responsible program, and 
we most certainly want a responsible agriculture here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And they have developed a plan in a number of areas, Mr. 
Speaker. They talk about developing an IPI, an income 
protection insurance program. They’re talking about developing 
risk areas. They want to narrow it down so it’s not large crop 
districts but narrower risk areas, municipal yield averages that 
all farmers know are available and crop insurance has all of that 
kind of information. 
 
And farmers have taken great pride in trying to increase their 
levels of production because that’s what they feel is the only 
thing that’s going to keep them and try and help them survive 
this income crisis. 
 
An Hon. Member: — The best in the world in doing it. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — The best in the world, indeed, in doing it. And 
that’s why the farm families have been able to provide here in 
Saskatchewan because they’ve employed absolutely the best 
technology. 
 
And I think back to the dealer purity issue that came before this 
legislature and the importance of that piece of legislation. And 
that’s why all you have to do is look back to the election again; 
that’s why we brought it up in the election campaign; that’s 
why we talked about it in terms of first piece of legislation, one 
of the first pieces that were introduced by the official opposition 
because it was a critical issue. 
 



294 Saskatchewan Hansard December 17, 1999 

Are you aware of where all the innovations in agriculture lately 
in Saskatchewan and indeed dryland farming have come from? 
They have come from, mostly from the farm community 
directed up through manufacturing operations, the prairie 
implement manufacturers here in Saskatchewan, and then it 
goes to the farm level after that, after it’s sold by dealers. 
 
And the fact is, is all of the new innovations, and I think about 
air seeder technology, is one of those types of innovations that 
came forward from Saskatchewan. A Saskatchewan farmer 
developed that and he developed it from there into a major farm 
manufacturing opportunity in the Kelvington-Wadena area. 
 
And all of agriculture now entirely, all of the new seeding 
technology — and in the world itself — started right here in 
Saskatchewan because it was an innovation that was right. It 
made it cheaper to put in a profit, made it more convenient, it 
made it less difficult, rather than fighting with old darn diskers 
that they used to fight with on the farm, and old drills. And all 
my colleagues would know all about those kinds of things — 
wondering how you’re going to transport this piece of old 
equipment down the . . . transport this piece of equipment down 
the road to get to the next field. And anyways you looked back 
out of the tractor window and this old disker is tied together, 
with another one dancing along behind, you wondered how 
long it was going to be before that thing hit the ditch in a heck 
of a wreck. You would know all about that, members on this 
side of the Assembly, because those kinds of things happen. 
 
I remember one time, Mr. Speaker, I was 15 years old . . . and 
farmers on this side of the House know all about that. Fifteen 
years old and skipping school, or not really skipping school. 
Your dad, your parents, said to you . . . your father said to you, 
we need some help on the farm today. You are going to have to 
miss school today. You are going to have to go out and get that 
old 830 Case and that 18-foot Massey disker going to try and 
put . . . to try and help out . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well 
you guys go back a lot further than I do . . . to try and help to 
put the crop in. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s why it’s called a family farm. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — That’s why, exactly. That’s why it’s called a 
family farm. It employed all of the family. You employed them 
all. I remember my sister, at 16 years old, driving out to the 
farm . . . driving out to the field with meals — sandwiches and a 
fresh-cooked meal — to try and help you out at seeding time 
and at harvest time because it was their responsibility to do 
whatever they could. And then they took their turn on that old 
830, going around the field, while you sat and ate a few cold 
sandwiches. 
 
We know all about that on this side of the House, I’ll tell you. 
And I remember, 15 years old, moving from the northwest of 
5-24-20 up to the home place and watching that old disker as 
the pin broke, skid off the road and hit a telephone pole and 
wrecking it. And then my father coming up to me and saying, 
what did you do now? Don’t you understand how important this 
was to keep this thing together? 
 
And me pleading with him for forgiveness for something that I 
had no control over whatsoever. And then he finally recognized 
it and said the same dang thing happened to him 20 years ago 

himself. 
 
And I remember going by the old Pearson farm and watching a 
neighbour of mine. The old boy was out on the harrows trying 
to help out at seeding time because it was important in a family 
farm to do those kinds of things, and Dad and I driving by the 
old Pearson farm and seeing old man Pearson swinging the 
harrows out — and he was about 85 years old at the time — 
hitting a granary and cutting that granary wide open, and grain 
pouring out onto the ground because he was trying to do what 
he could to help. I can just imagine the conversation that went 
on when his son drove up and seen 500 bushels of wheat out on 
the ground because he hit the darn granary with the harrow as 
he was swinging by. 
 
Trying to help out — 85 years old. My guess, he couldn’t see 
the end of the harrow drawbar, let alone operate the harrow 
drawbar. But he was doing what he could because it was the 
right thing to do. He was trying to help out, trying to help out, 
trying to do something to help out. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — And we’ll all remember the kinds of things you 
did at harvest time on family farms here in Saskatchewan. 
Waking up in the middle of the night, raining like heck outside, 
looking at yourself and your father screaming down the stairs 
and saying, we’ve got to go put a tarp on that combine because 
we left grain in the tank. And somehow we’re not going to 
allow that grain to spoil just because we’re too lazy to go and 
put a tarp on. And slipping around on the old . . . I remember 
plain as day on our farm, my dad getting up at 4 o’clock in the 
morning and doing exactly that, going out and putting a tarp 
over the 914 International because we’d left the grain tank full 
because we wanted to harvest as late as we could. 
 
And I remember slipping off that combine and darn near 
breaking my neck, catching my arm on the way down — and I 
still have the scar to prove it — on the sheet metal as I go down, 
ripping myself wide open and dad saying . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . no I’m not going to show you. And I remember 
my dad saying to me, just put a rag around it, we haven’t got 
the tarp tightened down yet; we’re going to get up there and get 
that job done and then we’ll go get you stitched up. 
 
And I remember being 12 miles from home one time and 
locking myself out of the grain truck as my father left with the 
combine going up the field and thinking to myself, now what 
am I going to do? Twelve miles from home, the combine’s 
headed the other direction, what’s dad going to say now? And I 
remember thinking to myself, the only thing that I had between 
a certain spanking, a certain lecture from my father, was this 
ball-peen hammer I have in my hand and knowing full well that 
the only thing that’s going to save me and keep me from 
walking 12 miles home is smashing out that little side window. 
And that’s exactly what I did. Because at 3 o’clock in the 
morning when the frost is nipping at your heels and your dad’s 
moving the combine home and the storm clouds are coming up 
in the West and your dad’s saying to you that we’re going to 
harvest that last 50 acres tonight, you’re saying to yourself I’m 
going to be there to help. I’m going to be there to help. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



December 17, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 295 

Mr. Boyd: — I’m going to do my part. I’m going to do my 
part. I’m going to be there to help. I’m going to do what I can to 
help this operation take off that last little bit of crop so that it 
doesn’t stay out all winter. 
 
On our farm, on our farm, we take great pride in the fact that we 
have never once lost a crop and left a crop out over harvest. 
And I count that as a serious blessing. And I know other areas 
of the province that don’t have that same fortunate record 
because they’re a little further north than I am or those kind of 
things. And thinking to themselves as the swathes lay out all 
winter long — all winter long — wondering how the heck 
we’re going to survive the winter. Can’t get at the crop because 
the snow is two-feet deep on top of those swathes. And thinking 
to themselves, how are we going to feed those cattle that we got 
out there right now, because we have no feed because we didn’t 
get the crop off. Those are the kinds of things that farm families 
wake up to every single day. 
 
And every single time that that happens, what happens in your 
community? I’ll tell you what happens in your community — 
when you’re finished combining, you hop on that combine, you 
fill it up with fuel, and you drive down to the next field, and 
you just pull in and start. You just pull in and start. You don’t 
even own the field but you pull in and start, and as you go by 
the other guy in the combine you wave to him and you say, 
we’re here to help. We’re here to help. We’re here to do our 
part. We’re here and try and help you out and get your crop off 
so that you won’t have to wake up in the middle of December 
when there’s two feet of snow on the ground and you haven’t 
got the crop in. Haven’t got the crop harvested. And that 
happens time after time after time in Saskatchewan. 
 
And it’s that spirit, it’s that spirit, it’s that kind of commitment 
to agriculture that the farm community has. And I think the 
farm community deserves better than a government saying we 
can’t do something to help as well. This is a government that is 
uncaring, unwilling, or simply does not want to accept the 
responsibility in this area to help out. 
 
And I can just imagine how many farm families out there in 
Saskatchewan today that didn’t get the crop in this spring 
because they were flooded out; I can’t even imagine that as a 
farmer, Mr. Speaker. It’s never happened on my farm, thank 
God, and I have pity — absolute pity — for the people in 
Saskatchewan that had that happen to them this past year. 
 
I was in southern Manitoba this summer and had opportunity to 
talk to a number of farmers about the flooding that they 
experienced. We had opportunity in the last number of days in 
this Assembly to talk to farmers from that southeast part of the 
province, that came in and talked to us about the flooding that 
they were experience . . . had experienced in their area. And 
talked to farmers and said to themselves, you know what I got 
for a farm right now? I’ve got 1,500 acres of three-foot-high 
cattails on their farm. That’s the kind of thing that they are 
faced with right now. 
 
And they’re going out right now throughout Saskatchewan and 
renting tandem discs and ploughing down them, trying to make 
a decent seed bed for next year, trying to do something so they 
can put in next year’s crop, and they have a government, and 
they’re employing all of their neighbours to help with the effort 

in those areas. 
 
And yet they have a government that says, no, we can’t help. 
No, we can’t help. No, we have no plan. No, we have no 
direction. No, I’m sorry, even though we have $350 million 
sitting in a slush fund account that you guys are always famous 
for building up, trying to hide them so no one knows that they 
exist so that whatever hare-brained scheme you come up with 
lately in terms of things like SPUDCO (Saskatchewan Potato 
Utility Development Company) and whatever else that you 
want to spend money on, you have money to do it with. And yet 
at the same time there’s farmers at home that are despairing 
because they don’t have any money to deal with these 
problems. 
 
(1230) 
 
And what is your solution to these problems? Call another 
meeting. Yes, we have no problem with going to the meetings. 
Yes, we believe there’s value in the farmers talking to the 
government. Yes, we believe there’s value in the farm groups 
coming together and trying to develop a plan. 
 
And you come out with a program and you say to the farmers, if 
you were the government what would you do? That was the 
latest initiative by the Minister of Agriculture. And we 
supported that initiative because we think it’s important that we 
talk about the problem but we also think it’s important that we 
do something about the problem. 
 
When you look down the agenda, you look down the agenda, 
the world’s eye view of Saskatchewan agriculture, global 
trends, trade padding, emerging markets. Absolutely important, 
yes. You got to look down the road; got to look down the road 
and try and figure out where we’re going to market our crops in 
the future. What crops we should be growing, all of those kinds 
of things. But at a time when you’re thinking about survival, 
what’s going to happen 10 years from now isn’t a lot — isn’t 
the kind of thing that’s on your mind right at the moment. 
 
It’s how am I going to make the payment January 1 that so 
many farmers have right now to make. Wondering whether or 
not they’re going to be able to pay their taxes. Wondering 
whether or not they’re going to be able to pay the fuel 
dealership that’s been calling them every other day and saying 
to them you’ve got to try and bring your account into line. 
Wondering about the grocery bill and all those kinds of thing, 
and this government wants to talk about trade patterns and 
emerging markets well into the future. 
 
In addition to that, Mr. Speaker, they bring forward a gentleman 
that had an excellent presentation at the luncheon that the 
government hosted. A gentleman that we had occasion the last 
number of years, the last number of days I should say, to speak 
with. He’s the chief executive officer of Poundmaker Ag 
Ventures. 
 
We had a good discussion with him that day and he made an 
excellent presentation talking about the need for a plan, the 
need for direction, the need to develop a solution right here at 
home, a made-in-Saskatchewan solution because that was so 
critically important. And we had from there leading throughout 
the day all kinds of discussions about what needed to happen. 



296 Saskatchewan Hansard December 17, 1999 

And this government’s plan with respect to how we develop 
that plan. 
 
I don’t know anything about this, you know, this psycho babble 
that they bring forward, but they have someone come in and 
they say that the important thing that they wanted to do that day 
was have the farm leaders tip their head back, close their eyes, 
and visualize how they’d like the future of agriculture to 
emerge. 
 
I understand that kind of thing works in terms of sports. I 
understand that that’s a critical component of winning when it 
comes to developing a strategy in a basketball game or in a 
hockey game or an Olympic sprinter — all of those kinds of 
things — seeing themselves dash down the line and cross the 
hundred yards with their arms outstretched, winning the race, 
feeling the tape go across. But the fact of the matter is is while 
that may be important in some of those other areas — it may be 
even important in agriculture — I’m sorry but I don’t think it’s 
going to develop the plan that we need. I don’t think it’s going 
to pay the bills. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — I don’t think it’s going to pay the bills. I don’t 
think it’s going to do what’s necessary in terms of agriculture 
here in Saskatchewan. What should have been discussed are 
things like a long-term strategy — yes. A short-term strategy — 
yes. How can we help in agriculture today? How can we help in 
terms of marketing? How can we help in terms of keeping the 
input costs in line? How can we help farmers that are faced 
with, with drought or faced with loss of production as a result of 
not being able to get a crop in? 
 
How can we address those kinds of concerns is what we should 
have been talking about rather than saying, Mr. Speaker, to the 
people of Saskatchewan that this isn’t somehow or another 
important, and that we have to look to other solutions, look to 
the areas of Ottawa for a solution to our problems. 
 
Well I say to the people of Saskatchewan, it’s time in this 
Assembly that we . . . It’s time in this Assembly that we 
develop our own solutions. 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Leave to introduce guests, please. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to introduce in 
the west gallery my wife Linda, who’s been my wife now for 25 
years. We celebrated our 25th wedding anniversary this year. I 
really thank her for all the years of support that she’s given me. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, we have . . . visiting us is my daughter 
who has come in from Amsterdam to come back to this great 
province, my daughter, Koonu, who has been there for some 
time, as well as in London. And I’d like to also introduce the 
youngest of the family, Danis, who is working in the film 
industry in the province, and her partner also works in the film 
industry, Tony Elliott. Please. 
 

PRIORITY OF DEBATE 
 

Trade Equalization Payment 
(continued) 

 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Some of the things that 
they talked about at the ag symposium, they developed some 
thoughts in terms of a mission statement and it was very 
important and we understand the importance of that. I’m trying 
to direct some attention to the area. 
 
They talked about things like social sustainability, farm family, 
producer, rural, potential, visions, choice. That’s an interesting 
. . . That’s an interesting word coming from an NDP 
administration — choice — it’s an interesting word coming 
from an NDP administration. What choice did you have as a 
farmer not to have your GRIP contract ripped up? What choice 
do you have in terms of marketing your products today? What 
choice do you have when it comes to this government helping 
you out? What choice do you have in a whole number of areas 
from this administration? Absolutely none. 
 
Environmental sustainability, and yes we believe in 
environmental sustainability on this side of the House. And I 
look at a number of members on this side of the House, in fact 
virtually all of them, that know all about sustainability when it 
comes to things like zero tillage, trying to sustain the viability 
of land here in Saskatchewan. And trying to promote a good 
product and good husbandry in terms of land management and 
animal good husbandry. We know all about that on this side of 
the House. 
 
We all know about a unified lobby effort and that’s why we 
supported a unified lobby effort and we continue to do that. We 
all know about labour supply and I talked a little bit about that 
where you got the answer to a labour supply in rural 
Saskatchewan was: get that young kid to work. That was always 
the labour supply and that’s how you addressed it. Have you got 
a brother or sister out there that can run a tractor? If you got a 
brother or sister that can run that combine, well get them on it 
and teach them how. Because that’s the labour supply that 
we’ve always dealt with in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
We look to the future for things like value added. Absolutely. 
That’s a critical thing and it’s been built by the farm producers. 
When you look at the value-added industries here in 
Saskatchewan, when you look at the value-added industries and 
the specialty crop marketing areas, when you look at the value 
added in terms of hog initiatives, when you look at value added 
in terms of cattle feeding operations here in Saskatchewan, it’s 
all been driven at the farm gate level. 
 
Why every single time that there’s any diversification by 
government it ends in almost . . . almost in every occasion it 
ends in absolutely spectacular bankruptcy. When you look at 
things like SPUDCO as a classic example of that. My in-laws 
have a home over on Hitchcock Bay not far from those big 
potato storage facilities over there. And you walk into those 
potato storage facilities today and it looks like you could play 
football in them. You could put Taylor Field right in the middle 
of those places and have an indoor stadium here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 



December 17, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 297 

Can you imagine how many fans we’d get to a game at Taylor 
Field if we had it enclosed. We could have it out . . . the only 
problem is, is how would we possibly organize the number of 
buses to go to Beechy, Saskatchewan, because that’s where 
those facilities are located. You look into them and you yell and 
you hear nothing but an echo in those facilities because there 
isn’t a thing in them, except bankruptcies — 36 million, I 
believe it was, somewhere in that neighbourhood. 
 
I can think of a number of graphic ways of describing that, that 
your parents talked about wasting money and how there were 
kinds of ways of wasting money and how they described those 
kinds of things, that when you wasted money how they’d put it 
in terms, very, very graphic terms that we can’t say in the 
legislature. But the fact is, is those are the kinds the things that 
farmers are faced with here in Saskatchewan today. 
 
And I want to close, I want to close, Mr. Speaker, and allow my 
colleague to second the motion here coming up. But I want to 
close with something that the minister said that struck me as 
part of the problem here in Saskatchewan. The minister when 
he wrapped up the symposium, the farm symposium that was 
held here in Regina, he closed by reciting a quote from Will 
Rogers: 
 

Even if you’re on the right track, if you sit still you’re 
going to get run over. 

 
Well what’s happening in Saskatchewan today? Are we moving 
forward? Are we in danger of seeing the light of that big train 
coming down the track and running over us if we don’t do 
something. Yes, we are. Are we in the middle of having the 
biggest wreck in agriculture that we ever had? Yes, we are. 
 
Are we prepared to do something on this side of the House to 
address that. Yes, we are. 
 
Are we prepared to put forward a plan to try and address the 
agriculture community and the concerns that they have. Yes, we 
are. 
 
Have we put forward a plan dating back to the spring of last 
year? Yes, we have. 
 
Have we put forward a plan in the election campaign that 
resulted in member after member on this side of the House 
being elected? Yes, we did. 
 
Have we come up with a plan since then to try and help farm 
families? Yes, we did. 
 
And I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, that on this side of the House 
we’ll continue to do that. That is our responsibility. That’s the 
reason why we bring forward the initiatives that we have 
brought forward, that’s why we’ll continue to do that. That’s 
why the farm community looks at us for leadership here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
That’s why they do not look at the Premier or the Minister of 
Agriculture for leadership here in Saskatchewan because they 
are prepared to sit and do nothing. Sit on the tracks and wait 
and hope that that inevitable train is not coming down that’s 
going to crush agriculture. 

And I say to the farm families of this province, we will, in 
opposition, we will not allow that track to be occupied by the 
NDP government and allow that train to come down with at 
least not speaking on their behalf. We will not allow it to 
happen. 
 
And that’s why, Mr. Speaker, we move . . . I move the 
following motion, seconded by the member from Cannington 
and the motion reads as follows: 
 

That this Assembly urges the provincial government to use 
its reserves in liquor and gaming fund to provide an 
immediate trade equalization payment of $300 million to 
Saskatchewan farm families through a payment mechanism 
determined through consultation with the Saskatchewan 
farm coalition, and that the provincial government use this 
payment to assist in negotiating a $1 billion trade 
equalization payment from the federal government. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I move this, seconded by the member from 
Cannington. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’m very pleased to rise today to second this motion because it 
is an extremely important motion not just to agriculture in 
Saskatchewan but to all the people in Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s very important that this money, the $300 million 
that we have asked for in this motion be distributed as soon as 
possible to farmers across rural Saskatchewan because, as my 
colleague said, it’s the right thing to do — the right thing to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, clearly this debate is being 
done in a very timely manner. This whole session has been 
about the need to address the emergency situation in rural 
Saskatchewan. This whole issue . . . this whole session has dealt 
with that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — To introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
(1245) 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Through you 
and to members of the legislature, I note we have a very timely 
visit here from someone I recognize because I’ve sat on his 
knee — I don’t know if others of you have had that privilege — 
and one of his elves as well. 
 
And I understand that these are representatives as well in the 
shared parenting association. So I just ask the members to 
welcome them today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



298 Saskatchewan Hansard December 17, 1999 

Ms. Draude: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to join 
with my colleague, the Minister of Labour, to introduce a very 
special person in the House today. Santa Claus is in the House. 
And I think that I would like him and his friends to know that 
there are no grinches on this side of the House. 
 
And that Santa Claus has got with him a least one gentleman 
that I recognize, Mr. Blaine Collins. He’s with the National 
Shared Parenting Association. And they’re here with a message 
for the Premier — make sure that the children all get gifts this 
year from Santa Claus, the ones that Santa Claus can’t give 
himself, and he’s talking to the Premier about children who are 
of divorced parents. 
 
So welcome to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

PRIORITY OF DEBATE 
 

Trade Equalization Payments 
(continued) 

 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I was 
saying, this is an extremely important measure, not just for 
farmers in rural Saskatchewan but for everyone across rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I’m sure that each and every one of us have been contacted by 
someone in the business community — a farmer, a farm wife — 
someone in agriculture, someone related to agriculture across 
this province has bought it to their attention that there is indeed 
a crisis and an emergency. 
 
It’s not just a crisis of the farm; it’s a crisis of the hardware 
store in town. It’s a crisis of the grocery store in town, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — To ask for leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like 
to join my colleague, the member from Cumberland, in 
welcoming his two daughters here today. 
 
I understand he hasn’t done justice to his daughters as any 
proud parent will. He’ll simply sit back and say here are my 
daughters and sit down. But I want to point out that one of his 
daughters is involved with acting and the other lives in 
Amsterdam. And it’s hard to believe but the they’re certainly a 
great credit and probably more exciting people than their father 
is, and it’s certainly a credit, it’s a credit to him. 
 
In particular, I am really quite pleased to see that they have a 
wide variety of interests, and of course acting is one of them. 
And that’s what the Sask Party is doing here today, so they can 

take a lesson from what they’re doing. 
 
And to also point out, to also point out, Mr. Speaker, that at one 
time I was supposed to be part of the cast of Dances With 
Wolves, but at the last minute I was cut because I was so 
homely even the wolves wouldn’t dance with me. So, Mr. 
Speaker, my acting career was cut short. 
 
And thank you so much for being a contribution to the 
Aboriginal people, especially the Metis. And welcome once 
again. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

PRIORITY OF DEBATE 
 

Trade Equalization Payments 
(continued) 

 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
we hear the Deputy Premier and the Premier on the opposite 
side saying that this is going to cost taxpayers money if they 
were to take the money out of the liquor and gaming fund to 
provide this assistance for farmers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is absolutely wrong. In fact I have, Mr. 
Speaker, with me the Province of Saskatchewan 1999-00 
Mid-Year Financial Report that outlines what’s happening with 
the budgets of the Government of Saskatchewan. And it says on 
page no. 7 that the government’s own source revenues are 
currently projected to be 340 . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to ask leave of the 
Assembly to introduce a guest. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Yates: — I’d like to introduce to you and through you to 
the other members of the Assembly, Mr. Bob Lee who is in the 
government gallery. Mr. Lee has been a long-time New 
Democrat and a friend of this party. And I’d just like to wish 
him the very best and a Merry Christmas. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

PRIORITY OF DEBATE 
 

Trade Equalization Payments 
(continued) 

 
Mr. D’Autremont: — The government has this money, Mr. 
Speaker, in their funds. In fact, they have $343.9 million more 
in revenue than expected. They got in $270 million of 
additional money through the oil and gas revenues, and they 
left, Mr. Speaker, an additional $150 million in the liquor and 
gaming fund because they had those additional revenues. 
 
Those revenues, Mr. Speaker, are available. They’re in the 
liquor and gaming fund today. Those taxes have already been 



December 17, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 299 

paid, Mr. Speaker, so why doesn’t the government want to 
access them? 
 
We wonder why they’re trying to keep them from getting them 
to farmers? Are they saving it — like they do every time, Mr. 
Speaker, for their election campaign promises? The money that 
they were talking about pulling out of liquor and gaming was 
presented prior to the last election. It was their election budget, 
Mr. Speaker, and that’s the reason why they don’t want to pull 
that money out now. They’re saving it for their election slush 
fund, Mr. Speaker. And that’s why they don’t want that money 
going out to farmers. 
 
They won’t be able to make their fancy promises. They won’t 
be able to run around like they were doing prior to the August 
election, Mr. Speaker, putting out a little bit of money in this 
community, and a little bit of money to that group, and a little 
bit of money . . . you know, Mr. Speaker, the members across 
this province . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order please. Members of the 
Assembly, in accordance with the Assembly rules, rule no. 
19(8), it is required of me to interrupt proceedings and forthwith 
put the question that’s before the Assembly. 
 
The division bells rang from 12:51 p.m. until 12:53 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 22 
 
Elhard Heppner Julé 
Krawetz Draude Boyd 
Gantefoer Toth Eagles 
Wall Bakken Bjornerud 
D’Autremont McMorris Weekes 
Brkich Harpauer Wakefield 
Hart Allchurch Stewart 
Kwiatkowski   
 

Nays - 27 
 
Romanow Trew Hagel 
Van Mulligen Lingenfelter Melenchuk 
Cline Atkinson Goulet 
Lautermilch Thomson Kasperski 
Serby Belanger Nilson 
Crofford Kowalsky Sonntag 
Hamilton Prebble Jones 
Yates Harper Axworthy 
Junor Wartman Addley 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I was wondering if it would be 
possible to, and it’s a little unusual, but ask for leave to stop the 
clock. We have several second reading speeches that I need to 
get off today, and I just ask leave to do that. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, from an open, accountable, 
and responsible government, I submit the answer to question 26 
. . . 36. 
 
The Speaker: — Question no. 36 is answered and tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 9 — The Child and Family Services 
Amendment Act, 1999 (No. 2) 

 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise 
today to move the second reading of The Child and Family 
Services Amendment Act, 1999 (No. 2). 
 
Mr. Speaker, anyone who has raised children knows that they 
do not just wake up on the morning of their 18th birthday to 
find that they have somehow been transformed from dependent 
young people to mature independent adults. 
 
As parents and adults we know that the transition from youth to 
adulthood is a gradual process. It is a time of life when the 
young person may be very independent in one situation and 
then rely heavily on the advice, opinions, and quite often the 
financial assistance of his or her parents in the next. It is a time 
of choices, decision making, and often confusion and 
frustration. It is a time when young people, although they want 
to be on their own, still like to know they have somewhere to 
turn for assistance and support when the need arises. 
 
For most young people that assistance and support comes from 
parents and extended family. Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, not 
all young people are so fortunate. For those who are permanent 
or long-term wards of my department, it is the government who 
plays the role of parent. And for these young people, with the 
exception of a very small number who are continuing their 
formal education, the transition from youth to adulthood 
happens the day they celebrate their 18th birthday. And because 
they have grown up in foster care, they are less likely to have 
the support of immediate or extended family enjoyed by other 
young people. 
 
The Child and Family Services Act currently allows the 
department to continue to provide a range of supports to these 
young people until they reach the age of 21 but only if they are 
completing their education. For many youth this provision is 
too restrictive. As members of this House are aware, Mr. 
Speaker, not all young people have the capability to pursue 
what we would consider to be a formal education. At 18, others 
may simply not feel ready. 
 
On the other hand, Mr. Speaker, youth may need support or 
assistance to prepare them for further education at a later date. 
Others may need help while they look for employment or attend 
a training course. Still others need some help learning to live on 
their own. Given the current legislation, the only option for 
many of these youth is to turn to income support programs — a 
choice I don’t believe any of us would view as positive. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, we will amend The Child and Family 
Services Act to expand the range of services which may be 



300 Saskatchewan Hansard December 17, 1999 

provided to youth between the ages of 18 and 21 years, who are 
in the care of the minister. 
 
(1300) 
 
The amendments would extend support to those who are 
continuing their education; do not plan to continue their 
education immediately but who require interim support to help 
them prepare for further education; are intellectually challenged 
and require constant care or day programming such as sheltered 
workshops, that does not fall within the usual definition of 
education; or, plan to enter the workforce but require additional 
support to find and keep a job. 
 
As is currently the case, the minister may provide shelter, care, 
counselling, treatment, and family services, or any combination 
of these, based on individual need. For example, a young person 
may want to go back to complete high school but first needs to 
get counselling and treatment for his substance-abuse problem. 
Or perhaps for a variety of reasons, the young person may not 
have had the opportunity to learn to do some of the things we 
tend to take for granted, like how to do laundry, care for a 
home, cook, pay bills, and apply for a job. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we believe the government, through my office, 
has a responsibility to provide support and assistance to young 
people who have been in long-term care, in the same manner as 
a parent would do for their children. Mr. Speaker, this 
amendment should not be viewed as providing for an alternative 
form of income support. It is not that. It is simply a plan to 
assist fewer than 60 additional young people each year who 
have grown up as wards of the province. They, like thousands 
of other young people, may need some help as they make the 
transition to adulthood and independence. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, because of their childhood experiences, 
many of these young people have suffered developmental 
delays and a profound sense of loss. Combined with the fact 
that they’ve spent a large part of their childhood living away 
from their homes and families, their need may well be greater 
than that of the average 18-to 21-year old, and they may require 
additional support for a period of time. And for some the 
tragedy of fetal alcohol syndrome or fetal alcohol effect adds to 
the problems they face. 
 
As is presently the case, services will not automatically be 
provided to every child in care who turns 18. A young person 
would need to apply to have the department services extended 
for a specified period of time and be able to provide details 
describing his or her immediate and longer-term plans. If the 
plan is realistic and falls within the parameters outlined, he or 
she would then enter into an agreement with the department. 
 
The agreement sets out the services, including financial, that 
would be provided by the department and the objectives of the 
plan, along with the responsibilities of the young person in 
meeting those objectives. Should the young person fail to abide 
by the conditions of the agreement, the agreement could be 
terminated. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Children’s Advocate is currently conducting a 
review of the foster care system. As part of that review she has 
raised concerns around the issue of providing adequate support 

to children who have grown up in long-term care and has 
suggested increasing the range of services and flexibility 
provided in section 56. 
 
As well the National Youth and Care Network strongly supports 
providing extended benefits for permanent and long-term 
wards. Mr. Speaker, we believe there’s no better investment 
than an investment in our province’s young people. We further 
believe that the amendments through section 56 of The Child 
and Family Services Act allows us to make that investment in 
young people who have grown up in foster care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The Child and Family 
Services Amendment Act, 1999 (No. 2). Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Having had just a short 
period of time to review the legislation before us, I have taken 
some time, and I’ve been listening to the minister as he has 
been giving his reasons and presenting to us the arguments for 
this piece of legislation. And I would have to suggest that from 
what I’ve heard and what I see in the legislation on the surface, 
there are certainly some . . . there’s some sincerity and a need 
out there in the community in regards to the legislation in front 
of us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s no doubt that individuals who have grown 
up in foster care . . . and sometimes young people move maybe 
four or five times in that period of time. It makes it a difficult 
environment for them to really become that whole person that 
other people may have the privilege of as a result of a stable 
home environment. And as a result, Mr. Speaker, I certainly 
want to commend the minister for recognizing the fact that 
there may be a period of time where the department has to give 
some guidance and direction and even some monetary control, 
rather than saying that you’re out on your own and apply to 
Social Services now for assistance if you can’t find a job. 
 
I think that’s what I’m hearing here. The department is in a way 
trying to recognize that there’s a need beyond that they haven’t 
recognized before and see if they can establish an avenue and 
an opportunity for young people to indeed develop that 
character and develop the work habits or the education that’s 
needed to really move forward in society. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would be remiss though if I allowed this 
particular piece of legislation just to move directly to 
committee. I think it should be reviewed a little more carefully 
and we would look forward to discussing it further at a later 
date. Therefore I move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 3 — The Health Labour Relations 
Reorganization Amendment Act, 1999 

 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
move second reading of The Health Labour Relations 
Reorganization Amendment Act, 1999 and I will so move at the 
end of my remarks. 
 



December 17, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 301 

This Bill, I think, is one that we can all support. We can all 
support it because it’ll help achieve something positive in our 
province — labour relations stability in the health sector. 
 
What the amendment does is extend the moratorium prohibiting 
Labour Relations Board from changing what are referred to as 
the Dorsey regulations. This moratorium was brought in to 
provide stability in health care labour relations while health care 
restructuring was underway. The moratorium will expire on 
January 17, 2000, and the legislation before us has the effect of 
extending that moratorium until January 17, 2003. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to begin by sharing the background on this 
legislation with the Assembly. Spending a moment on the 
circumstances leading up to this Bill will be helpful in 
understanding what it does, why it does it, and how it will 
benefit the health care system. 
 
The roots of the legislation before us go back to the early ’90s. 
Health reform brought together a variety of local health services 
under single, local health districts rather than each being 
administered separately. As a result, the members of different 
unions found themselves working side by side under a variety 
of collective agreements. They asked the government to 
develop a process to aid in the transition to the new system. 
 
Acting on their request, Commissioner James Dorsey was 
appointed to develop a process to reorganize health labour 
relations. The unions requesting the Dorsey Commission 
included the Canadian Union of Public Employees, CUPE; the 
Saskatchewan Government and General Employees’ Union, 
SGEU; and the Service Employees’ International Union, the 
SEIU. 
 
The commission was given the task of developing a new 
structure for collective bargaining in the health sector. At the 
time, Mr. Speaker, there were 538 bargaining units in the health 
sectors and it was clear that something had to be done. From the 
outset, it was vital that both employers and employees be 
involved in the process and we believed then and we believe 
now that the people who would have to live with the outcome, 
would make it work on a day-to-day basis, were the people to 
work with Commissioner Dorsey on the restructuring. As well 
involving the stakeholders from both sides of the bargaining 
table meant each would have a significant degree of ownership 
on the outcome. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was clear from the outset arising from this kind 
of reorganization that this would take some time to resolve. It 
was that reason that section 8 of The Health Labour Relations 
Reorganization Act, 1999 prohibited the Labour Relations 
Board from making any order that changed the Dorsey 
regulations for a period of three years. Now that three-year 
period will expire in January 17 of 2000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in considering the amendment before us we 
should be mindful of what the Dorsey Commission and The 
Health Labour Relations Reorganization Act and the regulations 
flowing from it have accomplished. I think it’s fair to say that 
the commission, the Act, and regulations, have brought 
significant benefits to the health care sector. 
 
The health unions requested the legislation establishing the 

Dorsey Commission and private meetings with all the 
stakeholders were held on an ongoing basis during the process. 
Public hearings were also held in Regina and Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Dorsey regulations reduced the number of 
bargaining units from 538 to less than 45 today, and that was no 
small accomplishment. The process was also accomplished with 
a minimum of disruption for the men and women who provide 
the health care services that we depend on. 
 
The Dorsey regulations maintain all the existing collective 
agreements until the new ones were negotiated. The seniority of 
employees moving into new bargaining units was preserved, 
and non-union employees moving into bargaining units had 
their years of service recognized for seniority purposes. 
 
Over all, Mr. Speaker, the rationalization of labour relations in 
the health care sector through The Health Labour Relations 
Reorganization Act and the Regulations is consistent with the 
health reform process. The new structure addresses the new 
employment relationships that have been created in the health 
care sector, and it promotes integration and delivery of health 
services. 
 
And that’s not to say the whole process has been easy or that 
there haven’t been bumps along the road. Nor has the health 
care sector been free from labour disruptions, but today all the 
major unions in the health care sector representing over 33,000 
employees have negotiated new collective agreements. Mr. 
Speaker, viewed in that context, the system has worked very 
well. 
 
So we arrive at the situation we have today — the three-year 
moratorium on changes to Dorsey regulations is about to expire. 
However, new employment relationships are still being defined. 
Within the new system, collaborative initiatives between union 
and management are also underway. The Saskatchewan 
Association of Health Organizations — SAHO — the health 
unions, and the province are working together to implement a 
new classification plan. The plan will address things like pay 
equity, the intermingling of diverse groups of employees with 
inconsistent classifications, and the framework for the creation 
of new positions. 
 
The amendment before us therefore supports the original intent 
of the legislation — the rationalization and stabilization of 
labour relations in the health sector. Mr. Speaker, the legislation 
we are proposing maintains the status quo by extending the 
Dorsey moratorium. Extending the moratorium will ensure 
continued stability while health care labour relations are more 
fully established. 
 
For example, a number of affected unions are working with the 
government and the Saskatchewan Association of Health 
Organizations on long-term employment issues in the health 
sector, such as the new classification and compensation plan I 
just mentioned. 
 
In addition, all health unions have signed new contracts in the 
past year. Extending the moratorium gives them an opportunity 
to implement the agreements and establish their relationships 
with their new members. This will all maintain stability in the 
health sector and help us to continue to build a strong health 



302 Saskatchewan Hansard December 17, 1999 

system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with this legislation we’re attempting to 
accommodate the stakeholders in this issue. The Saskatchewan 
Association of Health Organizations, SAHO, supports 
extending the moratorium as does the Department of Health. 
The Canadian Union of Public Employees, the Service 
Employees International Union, and the Saskatchewan Union of 
Nurses all support extending the moratorium. In fact, unions 
representing about 86 per cent of the affected workers support 
the moratorium and they have good reasons for wanting to see it 
extended. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we are putting this legislation forward because 
we want to continue working with both the employer and the 
employees as new health sector agreements and employment 
issues are addressed. This amendment therefore extends our 
support of the original policy intent of The Health Labour 
Relations Reorganization Amendment Act. The intent was and 
remains to foster stability and harmony in the health sector. 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, is something that all hon. members can 
support. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, there’s a couple of points I would 
ask members to keep in mind as we consider this Bill. 
 
First, there is broad support among the unions for extending the 
moratorium. The employers, SAHO, and the Department of 
Health also support an extension. 
 
Second, the original moratorium expires on January 17, 2000. 
Extending it will insure stability as the reorganization of the 
health sector continues. 
 
And Mr. Speaker, I have also talked about how within the new 
streamlined structure that has been created for the health sector 
there are new and developing employment relationships and 
joint union management initiatives that we want to see the 
outcome. 
 
The amendment therefore will give all these things some extra 
time to develop and will allow the new labour relations 
structure to become fully established. Labour stability in the 
health care sector is something we all want and need to see. 
 
I hereby move second reading of Bill No. 3, The Health Labour 
Relations Reorganization Amendment Act, 1999. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker in response 
to Bill No. 3, The Health Labour Relations Reorganization 
Amendment Act, 1999 and listening to the debate that’s been 
presented by the minister, we certainly want to acknowledge the 
fact that there was some merit in the piece of legislation that we 
have before us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I must also reiterate the fact that when the Dorsey 
report was commissioned. Dorsey was commissioned to review 
the numbers of unions and come up with some 
recommendations. We had, or at the time the party I was part 
of, became involved in the debate and certainly suggested that 
this might be a positive move and that was a feeling I was 

getting from many of the people who were working in the 
health field at the time. Even before health restructuring, there 
was a feeling that they just didn’t know exactly who they were 
always dealing with. It just seemed that there was . . . you were 
one . . . the member of one union or another union and you were 
wondering if your voice was really being heard. 
 
And I appreciate the fact that the government would like to give 
a little more time before it’s thrown open for, I believe it’s a 
review, but an opportunity for the unions to really establish 
where they are, or not the unions but the members, the 
membership, to establish the union bargaining groups that they 
are part of, Mr. Speaker. And with that I don’t have a problem. I 
think it’s imperative that we do that. 
 
I think if there is a situation that has been brought to our 
attention, and this is something that we would certainly want to 
know from the government, is the fact that as a result of the 
agreements that were arrived at last spring a number of union 
members are still wondering where the contracts are, where 
everything is sitting in regards to the contracts and the 
fulfillments of those contracts? 
 
And that, I think, is going to have to be dealt with and 
established and finalized as far as payment out there so that 
union members feel that the union executive are certainly 
working for them. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think this piece of legislation is certainly 
good. We just want an indication . . . there’s a feeling that that 
voice really hasn’t been heard. We’ve been waiting for our . . . I 
believe the contract has been finalized in agreements, but I’m 
not exactly sure the total . . . the suggestions that have been 
coming out and why there has been a delay in implementing 
and moving forward those agreements. 
 
But it is a . . . while that is separate from this debate, I think it is 
something that will take part . . . will take place as unions 
certainly look at this piece of legislation and say, well, we’re 
waiting for the government to move on some of the contracts 
we’ve already signed. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, this piece of legislation, I think, needs 
some more research. The minister has indicated that unions and 
SAHO are certainly in favour of it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it would be appropriate for my colleagues 
and I, as well, to not only talk to union membership . . . and I 
know my colleague the member from Melfort, our health critic, 
has already been talking to organizations like SUN 
(Saskatchewan Union of Nurses) and like SAHO and some of 
the other health groups and has been getting some . . . asking 
them for some feedback and for some input. And it would be 
appropriate for us to take the time to indeed do a little more 
in-depth research in regards to this piece of legislation and how 
it will significantly impact those groups, especially the 
members of the different unions involved. 
 
And I believe that the minister would certainly want us to do 
our homework so we know where we’re coming from as well in 
addressing some . . . if there are concerns out there or just 
making sure that we have followed the legislation carefully, and 
if there’s something brought to our attention that people feel 



December 17, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 303 

may have been missed that we can bring to the minister’s 
attention when we get to Committee of the Whole. 
 
So at this time, Mr. Speaker, I would move to adjourn debate on 
Bill No. 3. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 11 — The Electronic Information 
and Documents Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased 
to rise today to move second reading of The Electronic 
Information and Documents Act. 
 
We’re all familiar with the speed at which new methods of 
communication are becoming part of our society and it’s 
evident that these developments are having a significant and 
growing impact on business and on our economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, commercial activity on the Internet is expanding 
at a phenomenal rate. Industry Canada estimates that Canadian 
Internet commerce will grow to $70 billion US (United States) 
by 2003 up from $5.5 billion US in 1998. 
 
The advent of new communication media, however, threatens to 
outstrip the legal rules that have traditionally supported 
commercial relationships. The law supporting legal 
relationships and associated communications was developed 
with a paper-based medium in mind. 
 
As new forms of communication such as the Internet and e-mail 
evolve, paper is giving way, as we know, to newer forms of 
electronic-based communications. It’s clear that the rapid trend 
toward electronic communication will continue. 
 
What’s not clear, Mr. Speaker, is whether electronic 
communications will satisfy traditional, paper-based statutory 
rules requiring writing, signature, or original documents, for 
example. Nor is it clear the extent to which the intention to 
contract is evidenced by symbolic actions such as clicking an 
icon on a computer screen. 
 
To address many of these uncertainties, the United Nations 
General Assembly adopted the United Nations model law on 
electronic commerce in November 1996. The UN (United 
Nations) model law then formed the basis for the Uniform Law 
Conference of Canada work in this area. The Conference 
approved a uniform Act in August, 1999, entitled the uniform 
electronic commerce Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Bill before the legislature today is a further 
refinement on the work of the Uniform Law Conference of 
Canada. And it has several important features, which I’ll briefly 
mention. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it applies to commercial relationships and all other 
legal relationships requiring documentation. It adopts an 
approach whereby rules of capacity — can I do this? — are 
transformed into rules of proof — have I met the standard? It 
doesn’t mandate the use of electronic communications but it 
allows for their use, provided parties consent. It’s media 
neutral, applying to paper-based and electronic 

communications, and, Mr. Speaker, it’s technologically neutral 
in that certain technologies or software are not favoured over 
others. 
 
The Act, Mr. Speaker, has five parts. Part I provides for basic 
rules that ensure equivalent treatment of electronic and 
paper-based documents and information. 
 
Part II contains general principles or concepts that will apply to 
electronic communications. 
 
Part III sets out the rules for particular electronic transactions 
including the formulation and operation of contracts, the use of 
automated transactions, correction of errors, and presumed time 
and place of the receipt of messages. 
 
Part IV contains special provisions related to the carriage of 
goods permitting electronic documents in a field that depends 
on paper and the use of unique documentation, and part V 
contains the provisions respecting the making of regulations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m proud that Saskatchewan is the first province 
in Canada to introduce legislation that will provide a basic legal 
framework for electronic-based commercial relationships. By 
introducing this Bill, it’s the government’s intention to widen 
public awareness and seek further comments and input into its 
further development. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with that, I move second reading of An Act 
respecting Electronic Information and Documents. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in regards 
to Bill No. 11, The Electronics Information and Documents 
Act, certainly it’s an issue, I think, that is going to become very 
important, and it is already important. 
 
We are aware of the fact that with the advent of the computers 
and now the Internet that significant actions can be taken, and 
certainly we’re seeing now trade taking place in regards to the 
Net. Mr. Speaker, if a person really wanted you could do all the 
shopping you wanted. You can even buy and sell a vehicle by 
the Net. 
 
And I think what the minister is attempting to here is to set 
some guidelines in place. I guess the question will be at the end 
of the day whether or not you’ll be able to police the Net or 
access to some of the trade and commerce that will be taking 
place as a result of the advent of computers and access to the 
Internet. 
 
But it’s certainly an area that I think needs to be looked at — 
governments need to take the precautionary measures of 
moving ahead and trying to address some of the concerns that 
are already being brought to their attention. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, there’s no doubt a lot we could get into on 
the debate of this at this time. However, Mr. Speaker, I’m more 
than prepared to move adjournment of debate and allow for 
debate at a further date once we’ve received and reviewed the 
Bill a little closer in order to make sure that the Bill meets the 
requirements of the need that is out there. 
 
Debate adjourned. 



304 Saskatchewan Hansard December 17, 1999 

Bill No. 6 — The Mentally Disordered Persons 
Amendment Act, 1999 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
move second reading of The Mentally Disordered Persons 
Amendment Act, 1999. Under the Act, Mr. Speaker, certificates 
of incompetence are issued for persons who are unable to 
manage their financial affairs. When this happens the Public 
Trustee or another person is appointed as property guardian. 
This ensures that the person’s financial affairs are administered 
and, in some cases, provides protection for people who are 
vulnerable to financial abuse. 
 
The intention of these amendments, Mr. Speaker, is to address 
two specific areas of concern. If a certificate of incompetence is 
issued under The Mentally Disordered Persons Act, the 
individual who is subject of the certificate, or a family member 
on his or her behalf, may appeal to a review panel. The decision 
of the review panel may be appealed to the Court of Queen’s 
Bench. 
 
It’s important that a ruling respecting competency is made when 
an appeal is made to the Court of Queen’s Bench, and if there is 
no ruling, family members or professionals concerned about a 
person’s competence must try to restart the certificate of 
incompetence process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s often difficult to get the individual in question 
to submit to a new examination as part of the reapplication 
process, especially when he or she is under the control of a 
person who may be taking advantage of them financially. 
Unfortunately, the result can be further depletion of the 
person’s financial resources. Two aspects of this Bill will 
address this issue. 
 
First, the Bill will provide that when a decision of a review 
panel regarding a person’s competence is appealed to the Court 
of Queen’s Bench, the court may require the person to submit to 
a psychiatric examination. It will require that the court make a 
finding as to the person’s competence. 
 
Second, Mr. Speaker, the Bill will allow for an appeal of a 
decision of the Court of Queen’s Bench to the Court of Appeal 
on a question of law or jurisdiction, with leave of a judge of the 
Court of Appeal. This means that a Court of Appeal judge must 
be convinced that there’s merit in proceeding with the appeal 
before it may go forward. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the second area of concern is the immunity of 
review panel members. Under The Mental Health Services Act, 
review panels are appointed to hear appeals with respect to 
persons who have been certified to receive involuntary 
treatment as in-patients, persons who are the subject of a 
community treatment order, or individuals who are subject of 
transfer orders. 
 
Under The Mentally Disordered Persons Act, however, Mr. 
Speaker, the same review panels hear appeals with respect to 
individuals who are seeking . . . subjects of certificates of 
incompetence respecting financial matters. But people 
performing duties under this, under the . . . a lot of people 
performing duties under The Mental Health Services Act, 
including the members of review panels, have immunity from 

liability with respect to actions carried out in good faith under 
that Act. The Mentally Disordered Persons Act does not 
provide the same immunity. 
 
Review panel members are concerned that, given the sensitivity 
of the matters on which they rule, actions may be brought 
against them with respect to the decisions taken by them in 
exercise . . . in the exercise in good faith of their duties. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this amendment will ensure that persons acting in 
good faith under both The Mental Health Services Act and The 
Mentally Disordered Persons Act will be treated in the same 
way. It will protect people performing duties, exercising 
powers, or carrying out responsibilities in good faith under the 
Act or regulations from civil action. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to 
amend The Mentally Disordered Persons Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this piece 
of legislation, I think, has some significant impact on our 
society in some . . . a number of ways. 
 
Certainly, Mr. Speaker, I don’t intend to be long because I’m 
not exactly sure I want to put my colleagues in the position at 
this time of the day of maybe falling into that category we’re 
talking of here, but we will pass that by. And, Mr. Speaker, 
suggest that it might be appropriate for us to debate this 
legislation somewhat further at a later date. And therefore I 
move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(1330) 
 

Bill No. 4 — The Saskatchewan Pension Plan 
Amendment Act, 1999 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise to 
move second reading of a Bill to amend The Saskatchewan 
Pension Plan Act. 
 
The Saskatchewan Pension Plan has almost 30,000 members 
and $173 million under trusteeship. This plan is an integral part 
of the retirement savings plans of the people of Saskatchewan 
and in particular the 30,000 members. The plan is the only tax 
deferred plan available to people who don’t qualify for an 
RRSP. 
 
Member funds are professionally managed and the plan has 
generated a competitive rate of return averaging 11.2 per cent 
over the past 10 years. So it’s doing quite well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There are no minimum contributions or fixed-payment 
schedules. The money is protected from seizure, claim, or 
garnishee by creditors. The plan is administered by a board of 
trustees appointed by the Lieutenant Governor in Council and 
presently consists of five members, three of whom are plan 
members themselves. 
 
The changes announced in this Bill, Mr. Speaker, are designed 



December 17, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 305 

to clarify the duties and powers of the board of trustees and are 
administrative and housekeeping in nature. 
 
So I move second reading of An Act to amend The 
Saskatchewan Pension Plan Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, here again 
we have a piece of legislation that would certainly take some 
time to debate. 
 
We want to acknowledge however, Mr. Speaker, that the 
Saskatchewan Pension Plan has been working very well for the 
people who have become part of that pension plan. And I think 
at the end of the day, maybe the Minister of Finance, and 
certainly the federal Minister of Finance, will be pleased to see 
that there are individuals who decide to plan ahead for their 
future. 
 
It was just unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, that the government 
moved away from supporting people in that plan. 
 
But I think it’s imperative for us to, and certainly important for 
us to acknowledge, that the plan is working very well and for 
that I give the government credit. After a lot of lobbying by the 
people involved in the plan the government decided at least let 
the plan function. And it’s just showing how well a pension 
plan can work and how well it can work for itself and its 
members if given that opportunity. And in that regard, Mr. 
Speaker, we certainly are very supportive of this plan. 
 
However it would be important that we review the legislation in 
front of us as well to make sure that it doesn’t infringe on 
members of the plan, that it certainly continues to offer, as the 
minister indicated, support, and protect the members of the 
plan. 
 
And here again, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s imperative that we 
take the time for the debate. And so at this time, I move to 
adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
Bill No. 7 — The Student Assistance And Student Aid Fund 

Amendment Act, 1999 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — I thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
am pleased today to outline to all members of the legislature the 
key provisions of the proposed amendments to The Student 
Assistance and Student Aid Fund Act, 1985. 
 
Student financial assistance is an important element in 
providing access to post-secondary education. This access is 
important for the economic and social development of 
Saskatchewan as well as for the personal fulfillment of 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
Members will know that we are conducting a province-wide 
consultation in January focused on improving student financial 
access. As well, the commitment of the government to greater 
public accountability, as outlined in the Speech from the 
Throne, underlines the importance of having clear, effective 

legislation in this area. 
 
The Department of Post-Secondary Education and Skills 
Training has a strategic plan which identifies student financial 
assistance as an important priority. Most of the amendments I 
am introducing in this Bill are of a housekeeping nature. This 
includes eliminating gender-biased language through the Act. 
These amendments include updating terminology, for example, 
the phrase “consolidated fund” is changed to “general revenue 
fund”. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will also be repealing sections that are made 
redundant by the amendments and restating other sections to 
clarify the provisions. 
 
We will be adding two new definitions — financial assistance 
and borrower — and incorporating those definitions throughout 
the Act. These terms are widely used in the Saskatchewan 
lender finance student . . . the Saskatchewan lender finance 
Saskatchewan student loans regulations. These are regulations 
for the lender financing agreement that became effective August 
1, 1996. This is our first opportunity since then to amend the 
Act. 
 
Three of the amendments are more substantive. They are all 
relating to having the appropriate legislation in place to accept, 
hold, and pay money, such as the Canada Study Grant. Given 
that the new authority to hold trust money and conditional grant 
money and the amendments extends . . . excuse me, Mr. 
Speaker, let me state that again. Given that new authority to 
hold trust money and conditional grant money, an amendment 
extends the authority of the trustees of the fund to invest this 
money in the same manner as they would any other money in 
the fund. In practice, the investment of these funds is handled 
by Saskatchewan Finance. 
 
One other amendment gives all regulation-making authority to 
the Minister. 
 
There is also a new immunity section that restricts an action 
being taken against the Crown, the minister, trustees, 
committee, or minister’s designate for any loss or damage 
suffered by reason of anything being done in good faith. This 
immunity provision is considered necessary because the trustees 
have the authority to invest money held in the fund. 
 
These amendments will help provide better service to 
Saskatchewan students through more streamlined 
administration. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask for support of the legislature for amendments 
to The Student Assistance and Student Aid Fund Act, 1985. I 
move that Bill No. 7 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in regards 
to the student assistance and student aid fund, certainly there are 
. . . over a period of time, all members of the Assembly have 
received requests or calls in regards to this fund. And I think it’s 
an issue that crops up in every MLA’s office on an on-going 
basis. It’s an issue that has to be looked at very carefully. 
 
I’ve been listening to the speech by the minister and certainly 
there’s some areas that we would agree with the minister. I 



306 Saskatchewan Hansard December 17, 1999 

think it’s an issue that we need to look at very carefully. We 
need to certainly take the time to review the piece of legislation 
and address it appropriately. And with that in mind, Mr. 
Speaker, I would now move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 10 — The Department of Health 
Amendment Act, 1999 

 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of The Department of Health Amendment Act. 
These amendments are largely housekeeping in nature but they 
speak to some of the defining values of our publicly 
administered universal health care system. 
 
As members of this House know, the Canada Health Act 
provides the foundation for a seamless health care system 
across the country, a system that’s comprehensive, accessible, 
and portable for all citizens. We know as Canadians we can 
count on receiving the health services we need no matter where 
we travel in Canada. 
 
If someone from Alberta or Manitoba wants to come to our 
province and needs immediate medical care we provide it. To 
support this principle, provinces and territories agree to pay for 
insured hospital or physician services received by their citizens 
wherever they may be. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan these measures are currently 
outlined in two Acts, The Saskatchewan Medical Care 
Insurance Act and The Saskatchewan Hospitalization Act. 
These Acts allow Saskatchewan to recover from other 
governments reimbursements for services or benefits provided 
to the residents. 
 
The Act also contains an important bookkeeping measure. They 
allow us to simply report these payments as a refund to the 
health budget, not as new revenue. This process called “refund 
to vote” also applies when insurance companies repay health 
costs as part of a liability claim. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amendments before the House today will 
consolidate those measures into one Bill, The Department of 
Health Act. These amendments have no financial impact. They 
simply clarify the authority that is in the current legislation and 
they consolidate these related measures into one updated Act. 
 
Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I now move second reading of The 
Department of Health Amendment Act, 1999. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In regards to the 
amendment or the legislation that’s before us today, certainly, 
Mr. Speaker, I think we all acknowledge the importance of 
reciprocal agreements between provinces and the recovery of 
those funds. I represent a constituency that borders the province 
of Manitoba, Mr. Speaker. Anyone along either the east side or 
the west side acknowledges that we certainly have a lot of 
residents who do receive care in Manitoba, vice versa, and it’s 
important that we have the opportunity not only to receive that 
care but for the funds to the province to recoup for the funds for 
the cost of that care or when they provide care for somebody 
else. And, Mr. Speaker, it certainly is important that we have 

these agreements. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think this piece of legislation is certainly quite 
simple and straightforward but it also begs for us to take the 
time to review it in a little more depth and therefore, I move at 
this time adjournment of debate on Bill No. 10, The Department 
of Health Amendment Act, 1999. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 5 — The Parks Amendment Act, 1999 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll be 
moving second reading of The Parks Amendment Act, 1999. 
 
The SERM’s park amendment Act considerations will create a 
new protected area in Christopher Lake nature area. It will also 
correct minor errors in legal descriptions for Clearwater River, 
Buffalo Pound, and Good Spirit Lake provincial parks. New 
protected areas, which are approximately 97 hectares, will be 
better protected and represent important ecosystems within the 
province. 
 
The surrounding areas have seen a lot of developments by 
forestry industry and cottage and residential construction. It’s 
very important, Mr. Speaker, to protect the area’s natural 
attributes and to provide compatible recreation and outdoor 
opportunities. 
 
Protected area designation will allow this area to be preserved 
for the benefit and enjoyment of present and future generations. 
There’s a strong local community and RM support for the 
designation. As well, Mr. Speaker, there are minor amendments 
to parkland descriptions. It will correct errors and allow for 
more efficient management and administration of the parks’ 
lands affected. 
 
So, in conclusion, Mr. Speaker, there will be in these 
amendments . . . will ensure Saskatchewan’s provincial parks 
provide a better representation of our natural ecosystem and 
they support the government’s commitment to an enhanced 
park systems. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I now move second reading of The Parks 
Amendment Act, 1999. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in regards 
to The Parks Amendment Act, 1999, there’s no doubt that in 
this province we’re truly blessed with some real resources and 
terrific parks across the province that people enjoy and have the 
privilege of enjoying. 
 
We just listened to the minister’s second reading speech and I 
think there’s a few areas that we need to address and give my 
colleague, the critic responsible, an opportunity to review the 
legislation a little more in depth. 
 
I move that we adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

MOTIONS 
 



December 17, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 307 

Special Committee on Rules and Procedures 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, by leave, I move, 
seconded by the member for Saskatoon Idylwyld: 
 

That a special committee composed of you, Mr. Speaker, 
as Chair, and members D’Autremont, Higgins, Hillson, 
Kowalsky, Krawetz, McMorris, and Thomson be 
appointed to examine such matters as it deems advisable 
with respect to the rules, procedures, practices, and powers 
of the Legislative Assembly, its operations, organization, 
and the facilities and service provided to the Assembly, its 
committees, and its members. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker: 
 

That this special committee be instructed to include in its 
report, drafts of proposed rules to give effect, if adopted by 
the Assembly, to any change or changes that may be 
proposed by that committee. 
 
That the committee have the power to sit during 
intersessional periods, during session except when the 
Assembly is sitting; and that the committee would have the 
power to send for persons, papers, records, and to examine, 
under oath, witnesses, to receive representations from 
interested parties and individuals, and to hold meetings 
away from the seat of government in order that the 
provisions in other legislatures can be studied; 
 
That this committee be instructed to report to the Assembly 
with all convenient speed. 
 

I so move. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
(1345) 

House Adjournment 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 
the member from Riversdale, the Premier, by leave: 
 

That when the Assembly adjourns at the end of this sitting 
day, it shall stand adjourned to the date and time set by Mr. 
Speaker upon the request of the government, and that Mr. 
Speaker shall give each member seven clear days notice, if 
possible, of such date and time. 

 
I so move. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, if you would endure a 
few moments of words that I would just like to say before we 
vote that would basically thank all the members of the 
Legislative Assembly for what has to be described as a lively 
and exciting session. And I just hope that for the many new 
members that they agree with me when I say it was lively and 
productive. I thought the debate was good and that the 
co-operation was excellent most of the time. 

But I want to say that most of all, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank 
you for your first session in the elected position as Speaker. 
Thank you very, very much for the work that you have done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I also want to thank the Opposition 
House Leader and the Leader of the Opposition and the member 
. . . also the member from Cannington for his excellent work in 
helping to put the House together each day. 
 
I thank the Clerk of the Assembly and the staff — Gwenn 
Ronyk and her staff, Greg and Meta; also Monique and Kathy. I 
want to say a special thanks to you, Patrick, for keeping us on 
the straight and narrow. You do an excellent job, and I just wish 
you and your family the very best at Christmas. 
 
To our pages, thank you for all the work that you have done, 
and if you could relay on our behalf to the other member of the 
page group, our thanks. Also to the Hansard staff who kept 
record of everything that went on in the Chamber. Thanks to the 
Journals staff, the visitors staff, the Law Clerk, Ken Ring, And 
a special thanks to the SPMC (Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation) staff for keeping us and keeping this 
place running. 
 
I would be remiss, and I’m sure other members would agree, in 
not thanking the library staff, the cafeteria, the financial 
services, and Mr. Ward and his crew who keep the cameras 
running and the broadcasts going out. And I think that was of 
particular interest this session because of the live broadcast that 
was carried of the emergency debate and for the first time when 
farm leaders and farmers were allowed to come on the floor of 
the Assembly. 
 
I want to thank the staff in ministers’ office as well as staff in 
opposition, caucus, the constituency office who serve us now in 
session and between sessions, as well as the commissionaires in 
the building. 
 
And finally and most of all, again, I want to thank all the 
Members of the Legislative Assembly and wish you a very, 
very heartfelt Merry Christmas, and I really hope that we all get 
a chance to relax a little bit, take some time off. But be ready 
for the next session because if this one was lively, I think the 
next one may be even more so. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — With leave also to make comments. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it is my pleasure to respond on behalf of the official 
opposition on this side of the House to indeed a very important 
time in our lives — the coming of Christmas. 
 
As the Deputy Premier has indicated, it indeed has been a great 
learning experience —I’m sure not only for the new members 
here in the House, but also for some of us who have had the 
pleasure for being here for one term or many more than one 
term. 



308 Saskatchewan Hansard December 17, 1999 

And I think we’ve had the . . . we had the ability, Mr. Speaker, 
to raise issues on behalf of Saskatchewan people in a short 
session. We’ve had the opportunity to have new members 
experience not only question period and the workings of the 
House, but in fact the carrying of a Bill right from its initial first 
reading through to . . . through Royal Assent, and dealing with a 
very important issue for people in Saskatchewan. And I think 
it’s been an experience that many of the newly elected members 
I’m sure are grateful for to be able to see that the House can do 
a number of things. 
 
As the Deputy Premier has indicated, and I will not repeat all of 
the people that we want to thank, that we want to express 
indeed our Christmas wishes to, to all of the staff here in the 
Legislative Assembly right from the people that are working 
right within this Chamber to those that are working within the 
building and ensuring that the function of the Legislative 
Assembly continues on from day to day. 
 
On behalf of the official opposition, I want to extend to the 
Premier and to all members on the government side of the 
House and to everyone in the province of Saskatchewan a very 
Merry Christmas, an opportunity to enjoy some time with your 
families. 
 
And we look forward to the next session. And as one of my 
colleagues said, if you would like to start January 5, we’re more 
than willing to go. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Thank you. Hon. colleagues, before I put the 
question, I wonder if I might beg your indulgence for a couple 
of moments to add my sincere best wishes. I believe you all did 
very well. And I want to also extend sincere best wishes and 
remind us all of what the spirit of Christmas brings, and so we 
put aside our differences and remember the purpose of the 
season. 
 
And I so hope sincerely that you’re able to spend time with 
your friends, with your loved ones, with your families and that 
the spirit of hope will continue taking us into not only the new 
century, but into the new millennium. 
 
The very best to everybody that’s behind the scenes that makes 
our lives easier, and in that respect to all the people that we 
serve in this great province of ours — the people of 
Saskatchewan — a very, very, Merry Christmas to everybody. 
Thank you. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 1:52 p.m. 
 



 

 


