





























































Hansard: March 16, 1999


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 7 
 March 16, 1999 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s my pleasure to present a petition on behalf of 
residents of the city of Saskatoon. The petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to end 
its unfair tendering policies and immediately cancel the 
Crown Construction Tendering Agreement. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, I also have petitions to 
present today. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to have the workers’ 
compensation board Act amended whereby benefits and 
pensions are reinstated to disenfranchised widows and 
whereby all revoked pensions are reimbursed to them 
retroactive with interest to April 17, 1985. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

These petitions come from the Kamsack, Saltcoats, Regina, all 
around Regina, Mr. Speaker, throughout Saskatchewan. I so 
present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present today. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide sufficient funding to properly staff and operate the 
dialysis machine located in Yorkton. 
 

The petitioners and signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are 
from the community of Spy Hill. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I too rise on behalf of people 
of the province concerned about the Crown Construction 
Tendering Agreement. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to end 
its unfair tendering policies and immediately cancel the 
Crown Construction Tendering Agreement. 

 
Signatures on this, Mr. Speaker, are from the city of Regina. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
to present today: 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to add 
chelation therapy to insured services covered under 
medicare. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

The people that have signed this petition are from Hudson Bay, 
Kelvington, and Tisdale. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition as well 
to present to the Assembly this afternoon. The prayer is as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to end 
its unfair tendering policies and immediately cancel the 
Crown Construction Tendering Agreement. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

This petition comes from the city of Regina, and residents that 
have signed it are exclusively from the city. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
a petition with reference to our well-known highways, and I 
read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call on federal and provincial 
governments to dedicate a significantly greater portion of 
the fuel tax revenues for road maintenance and 
construction so Saskatchewan residents may have a safe 
highway system that meets their needs. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

I so present. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad you do. 
I’m happy to rise today to present a petition on behalf of the 
people of Saskatchewan: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call on federal and provincial 
governments to dedicate a significantly greater portion of 
fuel tax revenues toward road maintenance and 
construction so that Saskatchewan residents may have a 
safe highway system that meets their needs. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition has been signed by the folks in the 
Arcola, Kisbey area. I so present. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
petitions on behalf of citizens that are concerned about the state 
of our roads and highways. 
 
The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call on federal and provincial 
governments to dedicate a significantly greater portion of 



8 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 1999 

fuel tax revenues toward road maintenance and 
construction so Saskatchewan residents may have a safe 
highway system that meets their needs. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, those who’ve signed these petitions are from 
communities of Balcarres, Sintaluta, and Indian Head. I so 
present. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I join with my 
colleagues here today in bringing forward petitions. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that the Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call on federal and provincial 
governments to dedicate a significantly greater portion of 
the fuel tax revenues toward road maintenance and 
construction so Saskatchewan residents may have a safe 
highway system that meets their needs. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will every pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed the petition are all 
from the Val Marie, Climax, Frontier, Shaunavon area of the 
province. I so present. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present a petition, 
the prayer of relief which reads as follows: 
 

Your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. Assembly 
may be pleased to relocate the intersection of Highway 40 
and Highway 16 in order to alleviate the unsafe congestion 
at the entrance to the city of North Battleford. 
 

Your petitioners come from North Battleford. Thanks. I so 
present. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
my pleasure to represent some citizens, concerned parents, and 
teachers in the province of Saskatchewan with their petition. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide essential funding and ensure the delivery of 
scientifically proven, diagnostic assessment and 
programming for children with learning disabilities in 
order that they have access to an education that meets their 
needs and allows them to reach their full potential. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The people who have signed this today, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Prince Albert and Christopher Lake, Saskatchewan. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on Thursday next move first reading of a Bill, 
The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Amendment 
Act. 
 
Also, additional ones, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on 
Thursday next move first reading of a Bill entitled The Vehicle 

Administration Amendment Act. 
 
I also give notice that I shall on Thursday next move first 
reading of a Bill entitled The Legislative Assembly and 
Executive Council Amendment Act, (FREE VOTES). 
 
And I also give notice that I shall on Thursday next move first 
reading of a Bill entitled The Recall of Members Act. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice 
that I shall on Thursday next move first reading of a Bill, The 
Health Districts Amendment Act, (Fully Elected Health 
Boards). 
 
I give notice that I shall on Thursday next move first reading of 
a Bill, The Saskatchewan Health Ombudsman Act. 
 
I give notice that I shall on Thursday next move first reading of 
a Bill, The Health District Amendment Act, (Block Funding). 
 
I give notice that I shall on Thursday next move first reading of 
a Bill, The Saskatchewan Property Rights Act. 
 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also give notice 
that I shall on Thursday next move first reading of a Bill, The 
Government Accountability Act. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I 
shall on Thursday next move first reading of a Bill, The 
Balanced Budget, 1999 Act; and that I shall on Thursday next 
move first reading of a Bill, The Education and Health Tax 
Amendment Act, 1999. I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on Thursday next move first reading of a Bill, The 
Saskatchewan Regulatory Reform Act. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a number of 
Bills to present to the Assembly this afternoon. I give notice 
that I shall on Thursday next move first reading of a Bill, The 
Crown Construction Tendering Agreement Revocation Act. 
 
The second one is the . . . I give notice that I shall on Thursday 
next move first reading of a Bill, a Crowns Corporations 
Amendment Act, 1999 (Foreign Investment Prohibition). 
 
I give notice that I shall on Thursday next move the first 
reading of a Bill, The Crown Corporations Disclosure Act. 
 
I give notice that on Thursday next I will move first reading of a 
Bill, The Crown Corporations Rate Review Act, 1999. 
 
I give notice that I shall on Thursday next move first reading of 
a Bill, The Crown Corporation Managers' and Permanent 
Heads' Salaries Act. 
 
I give notice that I shall on Thursday next move first reading of 
a Bill, The Crown Corporations Amendment Board of Directors 
Appointment Act. 



March 16, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 9 

I give notice that I shall on Thursday next move first reading of 
a Bill, The Crown Corporations Amendment (Referendum) Act. 
 
I give notice that I shall on Thursday next move first reading of 
a Bill, The Accountability of Subsidiaries of Subsidiary Crown 
Corporations Act. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I have two Bills to present. I 
give notice that I shall on Thursday next move first reading of a 
Bill, The Referendum and Plebiscite Amendment Act 
(Constitution Amendment Referendum). 
 
I also give notice that I shall on Thursday next move first 
reading of a Bill, The Highway Traffic Amendment Act, 1999. 
Thank you. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I shall 
on Thursday next move first reading of a Bill, The Protection of 
Children Involved in Prostitution Act. 
 
And I give notice that I shall on Thursday next move first 
reading of a Bill, The Public Inquiries Amendment Act, 1999. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on Thursday next move first reading of a Bill, The Health 
Waiting List Elimination and Accountability Act. 
 
I also give notice that I shall on Thursday next move first 
reading of a Bill, The Grain Elevators Sales Act. 
 
And, additionally, I give notice that I shall on Thursday next 
move first reading of a Bill entitled The Farm-input Costs 
Monitoring Act. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on Thursday next move first reading of a Bill, The 
Nursing Shortage Elimination Act. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on Thursday next 
as well move first reading of a Bill entitled The Preservation of 
Rural Hospitals Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that 
I shall on Thursday next move first reading of a Bill . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. The hon. member will recognize 
that we’ve moved to a new agenda item. And I’ve called for 
introduction of guests. 
 
I would need to have leave of the House to revert to that agenda 
item. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — With leave to give reading of first . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The Member from Wood River requests leave 
of the House to return to notices of motions and questions. Is 
leave granted? 
 
Leave granted. 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on 
Thursday next move first reading of a Bill entitled Optimum 
Health Care Staffing Act. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — My apologies, Mr. Speaker. I also request 
leave of this House to give notice of a Bill. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that on 
Thursday next I will move first reading of a Bill entitled The 
Regional Hospitals Enhancement Act. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Mr. Speaker, I too ask leave to give a 
notice of written question, please. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 7 ask the government the 
following questions: 
 

To the Minister of Education: (1) what number of 
Saskatchewan children have been diagnosed as severely 
learning disabled in the years 1989 through to and 
including 1998; (2) will the minister provide 
documentation that the funding formula introduced in 
1989, because of the growing numbers of severely learning 
disabled children, has indeed better served the educational 
needs of these children than the old formula; and (3) will 
the minister promptly table research that proves that the 
educational interventions offered in the province of 
Saskatchewan to severely learning disabled children are 
successful with an indication as to what measurements the 
Department of Education is using to determine success. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I note today 
that in the gallery there’s a group of people that I’ve met with 
on several occasions, the widows group, and I would just like to 
ask the Assembly to join me in welcoming them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We also would 
like to join in welcoming the group from the Disenfranchised 
Widows Action Group of Saskatchewan sitting in your gallery. 
 
And I’d like to introduce them individually, and if they would 
stand as I call out their name please: Sharon Walker from 
Oxbow; Monique Fisher from Regina; Adeline Oystreck from 
Yorkton, and her husband Emmanuel; Leona Hertzog of 
Regina; Sharon Harde and her husband Keith from Estevan; 
Helen Marriott and her husband Ray, also from Estevan; Jean 
Martin from Estevan; Kay Clarke from Estevan; Janice 
Wervenuck of Regina; and Marion Ochitwa and her husband 
Ernest from Quill Lake. And also Brian Campbell, whose wife 
is a member of this group, and Judy, and was unable to attend 
today. 
 



10 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 1999 

And I ask all members of the Assembly to welcome the group 
to the Assembly to observe our proceedings. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — On behalf of myself and my colleagues, I also 
wish to welcome the members of the disenfranchised widows 
group to the Assembly this afternoon, and I think it is 
appropriate at this time to also express condolences to the 
leader of that group, Mrs. Rose Polsom, on the death of her 
husband. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
would like to add my good wishes to this group of esteemed 
people who are visiting with us this afternoon, to not only 
welcome them but to say that it’s most appropriate that they 
observe what transpires here since I think that there will be 
some things forthcoming in this legislative session that will be 
of great interest to them and they fought so very, very long for. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Saskatchewan Tourism 
 

Mr. Renaud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and good afternoon. 
The secret is out. Saskatchewan is an excellent place for a 
holiday. Tourism is our province’s fastest growing industry. 
 
At a recent meeting in Meadow Lake and Buffalo Narrows, 
Tourism Saskatchewan informed community members that the 
tourist industry generates more than $1 billion annually, 
employs over 41,000 people, and will continue to grow. 
 
For areas like Meadow Lake and the Cypress Hills Provincial 
Park, the challenge is to promote winter recreation. Activities 
like dogsledding, cross-country skiing, ice fishing, and 
snowmobiling — white gold, Mr. Speaker, things we take for 
granted or might think of as mundane — are exotic to 
non-Canadians. 
 
Last year the Yorkton area saw a marked increase in both 
American and Canadian tourists, and inquiries are still on the 
increase. 
 
Yorkton Tourism has its own Web site with links to and from 
Saskatchewan Tourism. As a result requests for information 
have come from as far away as Sweden and Wales. Nipawin 
and Hudson Bay in my constituency, Mr. Speaker, are a big part 
of the attractions to Saskatchewan. 
 
Tourists are coming here for ecotourism; experience-based 
tourism; learning-based tourism; and culture-based, such as 
aboriginal-based tourism. The authentic experience is what 
visitors are looking for, Mr. Speaker, and Saskatchewan has 
that in abundance. Promote what you have, promote our special 
brand of . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. The hon. member’s time has 
expired. 

Response to Throne Speech 
 

Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I was 
trying to think of a suitable response to yesterday’s display of 
NDP (New Democratic Party) propaganda, which was thinly 
disguised as a throne speech. However Star-Phoenix columnist 
Randy Burton summed it up far better than I could have done. 
 
He said the NDP’s respect for constituents Act is expressly 
designed to deflect attention from the government’s record. 
This Act presumably supersedes the contempt for constituents 
Act in which politicians ask for your trust and then ignore them 
for four years. 
 
He also called on the government to consider passing the 
respect for truth Act in which any minister found lying through 
his or her teeth would be forced to resign. Or how about the 
respect for health care Act under which anyone waiting longer 
than six months for an operation gets all-expense-paid trip to 
the Mayo Clinic. 
 
Finally, Mr. Burton says he’d love to see the end to sanctimony 
Act in which the NDP would swear off pretending it’s morally 
superior to anybody else. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to ask the Premier to take note. Mr. 
Burton has laid out a far more productive legislative agenda 
than the NDP blather we were forced to sit through yesterday. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Education Week 
 

Ms. Stanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
advise the House that this is Education Week in Saskatchewan. 
The theme of this year is most appropriate: Learning Has No 
Limits. 
 
Saskatchewan’s education system is second to none. Together 
with our education partners, we are using innovative methods to 
meet the diverse needs of all Saskatchewan children. Our 
world-class core curriculum is contemporary, it is relevant, it is 
of high quality, it provides the basic skills and knowledge our 
children need now and in the future. Our excellent curriculum 
embraces diversity and technology. 
 
This week a copy of the new Evergreen Curriculum CD-ROM 
is being presented to St. Mary’s School in Yorkton and to 
teachers in training at the University of Regina. Over the next 
few weeks every classroom teacher, education student, and 
professor of education will receive their own copy of this 
valuable tool. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan schools have changed. More than 
ever the school is the hub of our communities. Today’s schools 
integrate a variety of services and community resources to meet 
the full needs of the whole child. By working together we are 
ensuring Saskatchewan children have the skills, knowledge, and 
support they need to lead happy, productive lives now and in 
the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the constituents of Lloydminster have a high 
regard for good education. On their behalf, I recognize 



March 16, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 11 

Education Week. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hospital Occupancy Rate in Carrot River 
 

Mr. McLane: — “What on earth are you people in Regina 
thinking? What are you going to do with the elderly and other 
patients who use this facility?” Those are the first lines of a 
letter, Mr. Speaker, sent to the Finance minister from K. Alfred 
Sauder, president of the Carrot River Legion Branch No. 186. 
 
The Carrot River hospital has an occupancy rate of 10 beds. 
The Health minister has encouraged people to take their 
concerns to the North-East Health District. However, Mr. 
Sauder points out the majority of health board members are 
appointed by the NDP government to carry out the NDP 
agenda. 
 
Local media were told the health board and planning committee 
made the decision to close the Carrot River hospital. However 
Sauder points out in his letter, a letter from former Health 
minister Clay Serby, stating the status quo is not an option. 
 
It is obvious the North-East Health District has no say in the 
matter when it is the Health minister calling the shots in closing 
the Carrot River hospital. However when our veterans who 
fought to defend our country and its freedoms must write and 
plead with the government which sent them off to war, to leave 
the hospital and special care home as they are currently 
operating it, it is obvious the government has broken faith with 
those who defended our country. 
 
I salute these proud veterans and Mr. Sauder for showing the 
courage they displayed in defence of their country and are 
showing again in defence of their communities. 
 
Their sacrifice should not be forgotten or ignored by those who 
serve the public in this House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Congratulations to Shymko Curling Team 
 

Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I’d like to 
extend my hearty congratulations and message to 
Saskatchewan’s representatives at the Edmonton Brier and to 
Gerald Shymko and the team out of Yorkton. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — The team, Gerald Shymko at skip, Gerry 
Adam in third, Arnie Geisler in second, Neil . . . or second 
Arnie Geisler and lead Neil Cursons put on an excellent display 
of curling and sportsmanship. Mr. Shymko was in fact voted the 
most sportsmanlike player by his fellow curlers. 
 
As for curling, well yes they came in third, but overall in 
Canada, Mr. Speaker. And during the round robin they defeated 
the former Canadian and world champion Russ Howard of New 
Brunswick, and Jeff Stoughton of Manitoba. 
 
They defeated Russ Howard’s team again in the playoffs and 

forced the Quebec skip to make a miracle-like draw to win and 
go on to the final. Shymko, known in our part of the world as 
the friendly giant, and as the TSN (The Sports Network) people 
called him, the friendly green giant, announced as his 
nickname, and the rest of his team, put on a tremendous show. 
They gave us much to cheer about and we’re very proud of 
them in Saskatchewan. 
 
And Saskatchewan showed its pride as well. Former 
Saskatchewan residents from as far away as Australia sent faxes 
and e-mails to cheer the team on. Ten busloads of curling fans 
of Saskatchewan made their way to the event of the Shymko 
game against British Columbia. They went to support our team 
and to celebrate the 2000 Brier in Saskatoon. 
 
In the 70-year history of the Brier, no other team has ever 
brought 500 ambassadors to a province for the next Brier. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate Mr. Shymko and the entire 
team in making Saskatchewan . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The hon. member’s time has expired. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
seldom that I agree with the member for Yorkton but I’m afraid 
in this case I have to wholeheartedly. 
 
I would also like to congratulate the Gerald Shymko rink, our 
Saskatchewan 1999 men’s curling champion for their showing 
at the Brier in Edmonton. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Gerald farms in the Saltcoats constituency near 
the community of Calder. Gerald Shymko, Gerry Adam, Arnie 
Geisler, Neil Cursons, and Steve Sobkow went to Edmonton, 
first trip to the Brier, and performed admirably. Not only their 
curling ability and their great shot making, but also the class 
and great sportsmanship they displayed on and off the ice 
whether they won or lost. 
 
I believe the friendly giant, as the media so aptly named Gerald 
and his rink, made me feel very proud to be a Saskatchewanite 
and I also believe made every other curling fan in the province 
feel the same way. Gerald was also named the most 
sportsmanlike curler at the Brier by the fellow curlers from 
every province. 
 
So again I congratulate Gerald, Gerry, Arnie, Neil, and Steve 
for making us all feel good about being from Saskatchewan. 
And I know it will be hard to repeat next year out of 
Saskatchewan, but we are all pulling for your rink, and I know 
you have the ability to win it all. Thanks for brightening a long, 
cold winter. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

National Aboriginal Achievement Awards 
 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to mention 
the sixth National Aboriginal Achievement Awards hosted here 
in the city on Friday night. Since 1993 these awards have 
recognized diverse career achievement by Aboriginal 



12 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 1999 

professionals. 
 
Recognizing initiative, achievement, and selflessness is a 
long-standing Aboriginal habit. The efforts of any individual 
who furthers the well-being of the collective has been respected 
and celebrated from the past to the present. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Belanger: — This year, Mr. Speaker, five of the fourteen 
National Aboriginal Achievement Award recipients were from 
Saskatchewan. They include: 
 
Dr. Allan Sapp of the Red Pheasant First Nation — a nationally 
and internationally renowned artist. He received a lifetime 
achievement award. 
 
Theresa Stevenson of the Cowessess First Nation, founder of 
the Regina’s Chili for Children. Mrs. Stevenson received the 
award for community development. 
 
Dr. Lillian Eva Dyck, of the Gordon First Nation, received the 
award for science. She is a neuropsychiatrist, and a full 
professor at the University of Saskatchewan’s department of 
psychiatry. 
 
Dr. Howard Adams, a Metis, received the award for education. 
Dr. Howard is the first Metis to earn a Ph.D. and has been a 
long human rights activist. 
 
Alika LaFontaine, a Metis, was the youth award winner. At 16 
years of age, Mr. LaFontaine is in his first year of pre-med at 
the Saskatchewan Indian Federated College. His goal is to 
become a cardiologist with a specialty in cancer. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Hospital Closures 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
for the Premier. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last year in this House the Premier of 
Saskatchewan wagged his finger at the opposition — he 
wagged his finger at the people of Saskatchewan. He said, when 
the Plains hospital is closed, not one bed will be closed in 
Regina. Of course that wasn’t true. 
 
Now the Premier is running around wagging his finger and 
saying not one rural hospital will be closed. 
 
Mr. Premier, why would anyone believe you? Your associate 
minister has admitted the NDP plans to close more hospitals. 
All we want to know is which ones are you going to close, Mr. 
Premier. Stand up and tell the truth. Which hospitals are you 
going to close? Which hospitals are the NDP going to close? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, we’re not going to close 
any rural hospitals. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, the minister says they’re not going to close any 
hospitals. Well that certainly is a different story than what the B 
team minister was saying earlier. They’re going to convert 
hospitals though, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I’d like to talk about the NDP record. And the minister 
says, zap, you’re frozen — 52 rural hospitals, zap, you’re 
closed. The Plains hospital, zap, you’re closed. Sixty-four more 
beds in Regina — zap, you’re closed. 
 
That’s the NDP record, Mr. Premier. The people of 
Saskatchewan want to know, who are you going to zap next? 
Are you going to zap the Carrot River Hospital? Are you going 
to zap the Hafford hospital? Are you going to zap the Wolseley 
hospital, or are you going to zap St. Paul’s Hospital in 
Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker? Who’s next on your hit list? Which 
hospitals are you going to zap next? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I do note with some interest that the Tory Party issued a press 
release indicating a number of hospitals that had an average 
daily census of less than 10 hospital beds. What I found so 
interesting, Mr. Speaker, on this list of hospital beds that they 
say are up for closure, I have another list of hospital beds that 
we have improved. For instance I think the member from Wood 
River will know that at the Shaunavon Hospital we are building 
a facility to integrate long-term care and acute care beds. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in Davidson we are going to build an integrated 
facility with hospital beds. In Wynyard we’re going to have 
hospital beds. In Balcarres . . . What’s interesting, Balcarres is 
on this list, and what do you know, Mr. Speaker; it includes six 
acute care beds or hospital beds along with 43 long-term care 
beds. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my point is that we all know we’re getting ready 
for an election, and these guys . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Next question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know why the 
Premier doesn’t get up and answer these questions. The 
Premier, though, seems to be more interested in the 
Saskatchewan Party platform than he is in his own record. The 
Premier should actually read our platform or have Brian Topp 
do it for him. And it says we should take all the new health 
money from Ottawa and put it into front-line services. It says 
and I quote: 
 

This would result in an additional one hundred million 
dollars a year for Saskatchewan health care, money that 



March 16, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 13 

would be provided directly to health districts to improve 
front-line services. 
 

On top of that, Mr. Premier, we would provide a further 
increase to health care funding at the rate of inflation which is 
about the rate of increase you have provided, that you have 
provided for the last seven years. So why don’t you start telling 
the truth about our platform, and start telling the truth about the 
NDP’s record — hospital closures, bed closures, nurses leaving, 
record waiting lists. Mr. Premier . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order, order, order, order. 
The hon. member didn’t get his question on the record because 
he was very long in his preamble. And I’ll allow him just a few 
seconds to put his question on the record. The hon. member for 
Cannington — very, very briefly. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Premier, tell the truth — which 
hospitals will you be closing? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, note what the 
Sask-a-Tory party is advocating — massive tax cuts, massive 
tax cuts. They’re going to cut taxes right across the board. 
They’re going to spend money like crazy they say. They say 
that they’re going to be doing this, they’re going to be doing 
that. Does this sound familiar? Does it sound like the Devine 
Tories of the 1980s? You betcha it sounds like the Devine 
Tories. 
 
Now on health care what the member up there says is this. 
They’re going to expand health care by the rate of inflation 
which means a freeze, Mr. Speaker. Means no increase — it 
means just the rate of inflation. You elect the Sask-a-Tories, 
Mr. Speaker, and I say to the people of Saskatchewan — zap! 
Health care is frozen under the Tories. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I see the 
Premier has his zapping finger out again. I’m afraid for all of 
the hospitals in Saskatchewan. His comments though remind 
me of the by-election in Assiniboia where he and his colleagues 
ran around saying the government of the day was going close 
every hospital in that constituency. They got elected and did it. 
 
Mr. Premier, another piece of misinformation about the 
Saskatchewan Party you’ve been spreading is our opposition to 
the Canada Health Act. Our founding convention . . . the 
Saskatchewan Party members passed a resolution saying that 
we will continue to ensure and enhance the five principles of 
the Canada Health Act. 
 
One of those principles is accessibility. Remember that one, Mr. 
Premier? It’s your NDP government that’s violating the 
principle of accessibility. People are spending months or years 
on waiting lists waiting for critical surgeries. People in rural 
Saskatchewan are hundreds of miles from 24-hour service. 
 
You’re the one who’s violating the Canada Health Act. And 
now your associate minister is promising to close more rural 
hospitals. 

The Speaker: — Order. Order, order. Now the hon. member 
has been extremely lengthy again in his preamble and I’ll give 
him just a very small number of seconds to put his question 
directly. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Minister, immediately after 
question period, the Saskatchewan Party will be calling for an 
emergency debate on the future of rural hospitals. Will you 
allow that debate to take place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the House will decide 
what emergency debates will or will not take place under the 
guidance of the Speaker and the rules of the House, there’s no 
doubt about that. 
 
I have said that the Saskatchewan Party, the Sask-a-Tory party, 
believes in freezing — freezing — any new spending, 
additional spending, to health care. I do so, and it’s proven by 
the very words of the member from Cannington. 
 
But there’s more than that. The leader of the Sask-a-Tory party 
went to a conference in Ottawa, joining his Reform Party 
colleagues of old, and came back and gave an interview — and 
I’ve got the quotation — on CKRM. Here it is. In praising what 
he heard down there, he said the following: 
 

Hermanson also likes one of the new party’s first 
proposals, to have the federal government surrender its 
responsibility for health care to the provinces. 
 

That means zap! — no more Canada Health Act. Zap! You’ve 
frozen out health care. That’s what you Tories stand for. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Nursing Shortage 
 
Ms. Draude: — My question is for the junior Minister Of 
Health. Madam Minister, your former colleagues . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. Now this is . . . 
Order! Order. It is question period and questions are to be 
directed to ministers, obviously, and I’ll ask the hon. members 
to refer to ministers appropriately by their titles. 
 
Ms. Draude: — As the associate minister, your former 
colleagues at the nurses’ union are wondering just what you’ve 
been doing since the Premier bought the Saskatoon Eastview 
by-election for you. 
 
First the NDP buys you off with the promise of a cabinet 
position. Then the NDP buys the by-election for you with the 
promise of 200 new nursing positions. 
 
Madam Minister, please explain to the people of Saskatchewan 
how it is possible that right after being elected on the promise 
of 200 new nursing positions, your NDP government discovers 
that Saskatchewan is facing a massive nursing shortage. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the government and the 
ministers of Health have articulated the posture with respect to 
nursing. The nursing shortage is a shortage which exists partly 
nationwide, I would argue in large measure, due to the fact that 



14 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 1999 

there was a $6 billion cut in the block transfer payments 
occasioned by the federal Liberal government’s approach since 
1995. 
 
But that doesn’t matter. I welcome the fact that under the social 
union we have 2.5 billion now restored back to health care. And 
every penny of Saskatchewan’s share of that 2.5 billion is going 
to go into the health care budget, plus more — on budget day 
the details will be announced. This government is committed to 
doing all that it can in getting the very best of nursing assistance 
for the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, my question has been for the 
Associate Minister of Health. Madam Minister, nurses are 
wondering today if they are getting any value for the money the 
NDP spent getting you elected. In fact, Madam Minister, if 
there was ever a walking billboard for the need of a full 
value-for-money audit of the health care system, I believe 
you’re it. 
 
Madam Minister, just two months ago the Regina Health 
District announced it was shutting down 64 hospital beds. 
Why? Because they were short 150 nurses and they couldn’t 
ensure the safety of the patients. And what was the Health 
minister’s response? She said it was the first she’d heard about 
it. There was no way she could’ve anticipated a massive 
shortage of nurses. She wasn’t sure that there was going to be a 
shortage until the year 2011. And who is supposed to know if 
you don’t? 
 
Madam Minister, what are you doing about the massive nursing 
shortage your NDP government has inflicted on the people of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, as the member may know, there are nursing 
recruitment problems all across the country. And in fact there 
are nursing recruitment problems in North America. And, if you 
watch the Internet, there are nursing recruitment problems 
across the world. 
 
Our government is committed to providing a stable and secure 
nursing workforce in the future. That’s why, Mr. Speaker, last 
spring we announced the $9 million for 195 nursing positions in 
the province of Saskatchewan to assist those nurses in the 
workplace. That’s why, Mr. Speaker, we added 59 spaces to the 
registered nursing program at SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of 
Applied Science and Technology) last September. And that’s 
why we added several spaces to the licensed practical nurses. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the Regina Health District is in the process 
of recruiting nurses. They are advertising; they are going to 
fairs across the country. And I can report to the members that 
the Regina Health District has hired over 34 nurses in the last 
month, and they . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Next question. 

Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I have another question for the 
Associate Minister of Health. So we hear that they’re busy 
recruiting nurses, and we have to ask from where. Alberta? 
They just lowered their taxes again and the government has 
committed $1 billion more to health care. 
 
How about from Ontario? Well here’s a news flash for you. The 
Government of Ontario has just committed to hiring 10,000 
new nurses. And Ontario has the second lowest taxes in all of 
Canada. 
 
Meanwhile back in NDP Saskatchewan, with the second highest 
taxes in Canada and a health care system that’s in crisis 
according to everyone but you, we have a Health minister that 
didn’t know there was a nursing shortage and a government that 
doesn’t know what to do about it. 
 
Madam Minister, how many more hospital beds are in danger of 
closing because of the nursing shortage that the NDP 
incompetence has created in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I’d like to report to the member that in 
fact the Regina Health District has recruited nurses from 
Edmonton, Calgary, Winnipeg, British Columbia, Ontario, 
South Dakota, Vermont, Montana. And they are recruiting 
nurses from California and Texas. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Operating Theatre in Moosomin Hospital 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The community of 
Moosomin last had an operating room service in 1993 when the 
local general practitioner sold his practice to move southern 
Ontario. 
 
After years of work by the community, the Moosomin Royal 
Canadian Legion branch raised money for equipment, and both 
the legion and Moosomin district health care foundation will 
cover start-up and operating costs for the operating room for 
one year. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as the Associate Minister of Health said 
there will be fewer rural Saskatchewan hospitals, we have here 
an example where rural people are willing to help maintain 
services that this government does not want to provide. 
 
Madam Minister, is this just another example of your 
department saying on one hand it’s providing health services 
rural people need, yet when rural people ask for services they 
aren’t getting, your government is refusing to help them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As the 
member probably doesn’t know, I did have the opportunity to 
meet with the Moosomin town council. The member from 
Moosomin is aware of this situation. 
 
We have indicated to the people of Moosomin and surrounding 
area that the decision whether or not to reopen the operating 



March 16, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 15 

theatre was up to the Pipestone Health District. That approval 
has been given. We’ve indicated that we will need to go 
through an evaluation process to determine the quality of 
procedures that are provided on a . . . I believe that they’re 
going to open it for one day for two hours each week. We will 
evaluate that, and at the end of the process we’ll make a 
decision whether or not to continue funding. 
 
The other point I’d like to make, Mr. Speaker, is that the 
physician from Moosomin, as part of our rural physician 
retention program and recruitment program was able through 
the auspices of the provincial government to do a subspecialty 
in anesthesia. And that’s one of the reasons why Moosomin has 
been able to reopen its operating theatre because of the rural 
specialists' program that this government introduced in order to 
get specialists to rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again there the 
government’s going out and talking to people and then just 
ignoring what they’re having to say to them. 
 
The Health minister, Mr. Speaker, is quoted in the Moosomin 
World Spectator as saying funding will come for this project in 
2000-2001. 
 
Madam Minister, why does the Pipestone Health District have a 
file . . . a letter on file from Saskatchewan Health saying the 
department will not consider ongoing funding for the project? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I know that two-tier Arm 
River will do anything he can to get his name in the paper 
because I know that he doesn’t really believe in medicare, so he 
is trying to do a good job of raising issues. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as I said, I met with the town council of 
Moosomin. We had an excellent meeting. That community has 
raised the funds necessary to reopen that operating theatre one 
day a week, I believe for two hours. 
 
This government, through its rural specialists' program, was 
involved in providing funds for that physician in Moosomin to 
get his subspecialty training. Mr. Speaker, we’re pleased that he 
is able to provide those services to Moosomin. 
 
Those services will be evaluated and I could assure the member 
that depending upon the outcome of that evaluation that this 
government will be there to make sure that these kinds of 
procedures are done in the Moosomin hospital. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Mr. Speaker, I believe the rural speciality 
program of the NDP is tearing out all health care services in 
rural Saskatchewan is about what it amounts to. Mr. Speaker, 
the Premier admitted yesterday there were mistakes made in 
health care through insufficient community consultations and 
promised to correct those mistakes in the future. Evidently, Mr. 
Speaker, he didn’t pass that message on to his cabinet. 
 

Madam Minister, can you explain why the Health department 
and district have ignored for six years the demand from 
residents of Moosomin, south-eastern Saskatchewan, and 
indeed Manitoba for an increase in surgical services in 
Moosomin? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — What the member may or may not 
know is that in order for physicians to be involved in surgical 
procedures, Mr. Speaker, it’s important that they have 
additional training beyond family physician status. Now what I 
can say to the member, speaking of our commitment to rural 
Saskatchewan, we have seen a tremendous increase in 
physicians in this province. 
 
For instance, Mr. Speaker, we’ve had some very successful 
programs. And in fact, we have seen more rural physicians in 
rural Saskatchewan today than we did a year ago. And I think 
that’s positive, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, we’re providing bursaries to our 
College of Medicine graduates — bursaries — so that they can 
get their College of Medicine training. And you know what? 
Mr. Speaker, 70 per cent, the largest percentage ever of those 
family medicine graduates, are staying right here in 
Saskatchewan and going to rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have programs to encourage rural physicians 
to go to rural Saskatchewan — and they’re going, Mr. Speaker. 
And we have money for those family physicians in rural 
Saskatchewan to get subspecialties like anesthesia and general 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Next question, next question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, the government has money 
but they have money for all the wrong things. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Pipestone Health District supported an 
application for a provincial bursary for anesthetics training for 
Dr. David Kirsch in Moosomin, yet does not support reopening 
operating room services in Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Speaker, can the minister explain why the health district 
would make such an illogical decision, unless it was to 
encourage Dr. David Kirsch to move away from Moosomin and 
further reduce the number of doctors working there from five to 
four. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I’m going to talk about the $1.8 billion 
that we spend on health care in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, do you know that 4.6 million visits are made to a 
family physician every year in this province — 4.6 million? Do 
you know that there are 925,000 visits to a specialist each year 
in this province. Do you know that we have 9,200 nursing beds 
in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 



16 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 1999 

Do you know that 28,000 people receive home care services 
from the people of this province through our tax dollars? Do 
you know that we have 650,000 emergency room visits each 
year in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
And Mr. Speaker, 72,000 trips by road ambulance and over 800 
trips by air ambulance, Mr. Speaker; 5,000 MRI (magnetic 
resonance imaging) visits, Mr. Speaker, 5,000 MRI visits and 
46,000 CAT (computerized axial tomography) scans; 400,000 
immunizations and over 1.4 million tests. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that is a phenomenal amount of service to 
the people of this province coming from a $1.8 billion budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Plains Health Centre Closure Costs 
 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
questions are for the Premier. Mr. Premier, last October the 
NDP continued its policy of closing hospitals by nailing the 
doors shut at the Plains hospital. Even after the Premier of this 
province wagged his finger at every person in this province and 
gave his solemn promise that not one bed would be lost. But, 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier wasn’t telling the truth, and he knew 
it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, seven weeks ago . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. The hon. member 
will recognize that to accuse another hon. member of 
intentionally not telling the truth is not acceptable in the 
conduct of debate. And I will ask him to withdraw the remark 
and apologize to the House. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — I would withdraw that comment, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — And I ask the hon. member to apologize to the 
House. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — And I also apologize, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, seven weeks ago 64 hospital beds were closed in 
Regina, thanks to the NDP government’s failing health reforms. 
On top of that, the Regina Health District documents indicate 
that the cost of closing the Plains hospital is running as much as 
$40 million over budget — $40 million, Mr. Speaker — 
because of NDP waste and mismanagement. 
 
Mr. Premier, taxpayers deserve to know why. Will you stop 
hiding the truth and support a full investigation into the $40 
million cost overrun the NDP has incurred in closing the Plains 
hospital? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will say this 
to the member opposite. It is true, Mr. Speaker, that the cost of 
consolidating services into the Regina General and the Pasqua 
Hospital will be about $95 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now what the member has failed to add, Mr. Speaker, is the 

fact, Mr. Speaker, that we have a burn unit that’s been added; 
we have a second cardiac lab that’s been added; dialysis, eye 
clinic, diabetes education, nuclear medicine, therapy satellite, 
women’s health centre, Mr. Speaker — all added. We have 
MRIs, mental health. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what I want to say to the members opposite is that 
people in Regina are going to have better health services — 
better health services. And let me say this, Mr. Speaker, one 
man by the name of Gordon Boyd said, I think this facility is 
second to none. When I arrived here an hour after my mother 
came out of open heart surgery I was impressed to see the 
degree of technology, the degree of care. There didn’t . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the hon. member for North Battleford 
on his feet? 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, by leave, to introduce 
guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is with pleasure 
that I ask all hon. members to join with me in welcoming to the 
Assembly this afternoon a long-time member of this Assembly, 
Mr. Eiling Kramer. Thank you, and member for North 
Battleford. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, may I beg the 
indulgence of you and the House just to simply support and 
underline the words of my colleague from North Battleford. 
 
I’ve served in the House with Eiling Kramer. It’s my pleasure 
to . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The Premier requests leave. Is leave granted? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — I’ve served with Eiling Kramer; no 
tougher a debater; no more principled a speaker; no more better 
a politician than Eiling Kramer, and I also want to welcome him 
back to this House. Welcome back, Eiling. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the hon. member for Arm River on his 
feet? 
 
Mr. McLane: — Mr. Speaker, pursuant to rule 46, I seek leave 
of the Assembly to move a motion of urgent and pressing 
necessity. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. The appropriate time for that 
would be under Orders of the Day, and we’re not there yet. The 



March 16, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 17 

request for leave is out of order. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

Mr. McLane: — Mr. Speaker, pursuant to rule 46, I seek leave 
of the Assembly to move a motion of urgent and pressing 
necessity. 
 
The Speaker: — The hon. member for Arm River wishes to 
introduce a motion under rule 46. 
 
I’ll ask the hon. member for Arm River to very, very briefly 
state why he believes that this matter of urgent and pressing 
necessity should come before the House, and to briefly advise 
the House of the motion he wishes to introduce. 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 46 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. If I might read the 
motion, I think that might be explanatory enough for the 
Assembly. 
 

That this Assembly call upon the government to 
immediately stop the destruction of rural health care taking 
place this day through attempts by larger districts who are 
today calling, advertising, and trying to draw rural nurses 
and health workers from their communities, and by the 
great uncertainty among staff and rural hospitals created by 
the Associate Minister of Health’s comments that there 
will be fewer rural hospitals, by firstly adopting a 
comprehensive recruitment strategy to ensure all areas of 
Saskatchewan, both rural and urban, have optimum levels 
of health care staff, and secondly, providing an immediate 
and firm commitment today that they will not cut acute 
care services in small rural hospitals. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I think if we just look across Saskatchewan 
today, the necessity of this debate will be quite self-evident. I 
so move, seconded by Mr. Aldridge. 
 
The Speaker: — Two minor problems. You should ought not 
to refer to the hon. member by his proper name, but also the 
motion cannot be introduced unless leave is granted. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Leave not granted. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today before Orders of the Day to seek leave of the Assembly to 
move a series of routine motions which it is a tradition to move 
after the throne speech and a motion in regards to the absence of 
a member. 
 
The Speaker: — The House has heard the nature of a series of 
motions that the Government House Leader wishes to 
introduce. Is leave granted to receive the whole series of 
motions? 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Referral of Report to the 

Standing Committee on Communication 
 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, 
seconded by the member from Prince Albert Carlton: 
 

That the report of the Saskatchewan Legislative Library be 
referred as tabled in the present session to the Standing 
Committee on Communication. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Referral of Retention and Disposal Schedules to the 
Standing Committee on Communication 

 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, 
seconded by the member from Prince Albert Carlton: 
 

That the retention and disposal schedules approved under 
The Archives Act by the Public Documents Committee be 
referred as tabled to the Standing Committee on 
Communication. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 

Referral of Reports of the Provincial Auditor to the 
Standing Committee on Public Accounts 

 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — I move, seconded by the member 
from Prince Albert Carlton: 
 

That the various reports of the Provincial Auditor as tabled 
in the present session be referred to the Standing 
Committee on Public Accounts. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 

Referral of Public Accounts to the 
Standing Committee on Public Accounts 

 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, 
seconded by the member from Prince Albert Carlton: 
 

That the Public Accounts of the province of Saskatchewan 
as tabled in the present session be referred to the Standing 
Committee on Public Accounts. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 
(1430) 
 

Referral of Bylaws and Amendments to the 
Special Committee on Regulations 

 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, 
seconded by the member from Prince Albert Carlton: 
 

That the bylaws of the professional associations and 
amendments thereto, the bylaws and amendments that are 
tabled in the present session, be referred to the Special 
Committee on Regulations. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 



18 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 1999 

Leave of Absence for Member to Attend Conference 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, 
seconded by the member from Prince Albert Carlton: 
 

That leave of absence be granted to the member for Regina 
Northeast from Monday, March 15, 1999 to Friday, March 
19, 1999 inclusive, in order to attend the Conference on the 
Establishment of a Multiparty National Vietnamese 
Parliament to be held in Hanoi, Vietnam as a delegate on 
behalf of the Canadian Parliamentary Centre and this 
Assembly. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I ask leave of 
the House to introduce motions dealing with substitutions on 
standing committees. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

Substitution of Name on 
Standing Committee on Agriculture 

 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, 
seconded by the member from Canora-Pelly: 
 

That the name of Bob Bjornerud be substituted for that of 
Mr. Bill Boyd on the Standing Committee on Agriculture. 
 

I move, seconded by the member from Saltcoats: 
 

That the name of . . . 
 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order, order. The hon. 
member will recognize that it is not in order to replace a motion 
when there’s a motion before the Assembly. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Substitution of Name on 
Standing Committee on Constitutional Affairs 

 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
member for Saltcoats: 
 

That the name of Mr. Bill Boyd be substituted for that of 
Mr. Ben Heppner on the Standing Committee on 
Constitutional Affairs. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Substitution of Name on 
Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills 

 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, 
seconded by the member for Saltcoats: 
 

The name of Ms. Arlene Julé be substituted for that of Ms. 
June Draude on the Standing Committee on Private 
Members’ Bills. 

 
I so move. 

Motion agreed to. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to ask leave to move 
a motion of urgent and pressing necessity under rule 46. 
 
The Speaker: — The hon. member for Cannington requests to 
introduce a motion under rule 46. 
 
I’ll ask the hon. member for Cannington to very, very briefly 
describe to the House why he believes it’s a matter of urgent 
and pressing necessity to set aside the normal business of the 
House, and then also to very briefly advise the House of the 
nature of the motion he wishes to introduce. 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 46 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
over the course of the last month the assistant Health minister 
has made statements in and out of this building with reference 
to the future of Saskatchewan hospitals. These statements have 
left the people of Saskatchewan confused and fearful that the 
NDP has another round of hospital closures ready to go. 
 
Just to refresh memories, here’s a couple of the things that were 
said by the associate minister. “Eventually we’ll see fewer 
hospitals than we have now”, February 22, 1999. Another 
quote: “What a hospital is defined as now is something we are 
not . . .” 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, Order. It strikes the Chair that 
the hon. member is introducing material which is more of the 
nature of the debate itself that he would get into if the House 
provides leave. 
 
And I’ll ask him to make his final very brief comment and then 
advise the House of the nature of the motion he wishes to 
introduce. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — I believe the people of Saskatchewan 
and the members of this Assembly recognize the chaos that is 
occurring in health care across Saskatchewan, particularly in 
rural Saskatchewan with the concerns about the further closures 
of hospitals, particularly in rural Saskatchewan but not 
necessarily limited to rural Saskatchewan. We believe that we 
need to debate that issue immediately, before further difficulties 
arise in Saskatchewan. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would like to present a motion to that 
effect: 
 

That this Assembly urges the provincial government to 
abandon any plans for further reductions in acute care 
services in the province and further hospital closures in 
rural or urban Saskatchewan. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I have noted the desire of the hon. member 
from Cannington to introduce a motion of urgent and pressing 
necessity, his reasons for that and the nature of the motion. 
Leave is required. Is leave granted? 
 
Leave not granted. 



March 16, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 19 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
Mr. Jess: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to acknowledge 
the honour I am receiving today by being the first to rise in 
debate after the reading of the throne speech. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at the conclusion of my remarks I will be moving 
the acceptance of the Speech from the Throne. I am sure, Mr. 
Speaker, because of your own commitment to the democratic 
process and the respectful manner in which you perform your 
duties to not only this Chamber but also to the people of 
Saskatchewan as you fulfill your duties, that you would permit 
me a few moments to express my respect for the Honourable 
Lieutenant Governor as he performs his role as the Queen’s 
representative. 
 
I have served this legislature for over seven years now, and I 
must say that the hon. lieutenant governors have continually 
brought honour and respect to the institution and the British 
parliamentary system as a whole. 
 
To His Honour the Lieutenant Governor, I thank you for 
providing us with the message of hope that you delivered 
yesterday in the throne speech. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Jess: — Mr. Speaker, as I begin my remarks, I would like 
to take this opportunity to welcome my colleagues, who are 
ready to do the people’s business with dedication, with 
decorum, with decency, and with excellent debate. 
 
I would particularly like to welcome the new Associate Minister 
of Health after her successful by-election victory in Saskatoon 
Eastview . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Jess: — Invite her to her first full session. She follows a 
member and a good friend, Mr. Bob Pringle. 
 
I also want to extend my congratulations to the new member 
from Athabasca. We not only have a new member, we also have 
a renewed member. The member from Athabasca who took the 
proper and honourable path of resigning his seat, seeking the 
nomination of our party, and taking his decision to the voters 
for approval. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Jess: — The right decision obviously since 94 per cent of 
the voters approved. He is the only member twice elected this 
term. And I expect that he will improve his percentage each 
time he goes to the electorate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to take a moment to officially say farewell 
to two members who have honoured this legislature by their 
service and inspired us all by their dedication and wisdom. It is 
exceptional being able to use their names in debate because that 
tells us they are truly retired. 
 

But I do want to say that Ed Tchorzewski and Bob Mitchell 
were dedicated partisans to the principles of the New 
Democratic Party and to the policies of this government, as our 
system demands they be. But in the true parliamentary tradition 
they were adherents of legislative democracy, of the dignity and 
traditions of this House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also like to mention how pleased I am to 
rise in this Chamber as a member of the government caucus to 
once again represent the good people of Redberry Lake 
constituency. 
 
In many ways Redberry Lake is a very typical Saskatchewan 
constituency; one that mirrors the comments of His Honour in 
his speech. It is a constituency that still is dependent on the 
basic industry identified with Saskatchewan — the family farm. 
It is a constituency bordered by urban areas where newer, less 
traditional industries are established. It is rural but the city is 
near; tradition and innovation side by side. 
 
Redberry Lake not only includes the lake but also is spanned by 
the North Saskatchewan River from the Silver Grove district 
east of Leask to west of Denholm. It stretches from Rabbit Lake 
in the north-west to Mistawasis Reserve in the north-east to the 
Monarchvale district in the south-west to the Perdue area and 
the hamlet of Feudal in the south, with Pike Lake Provincial 
Park in the south-east. 
 
I serve over 17,000 people spread over an area of 4,800 square 
miles, that’s including 26 towns and villages, 15 rural 
municipalities, plus Muskeg Lake and Mistawasis Reserves. My 
largest town in the most rural of all rural seats is Langham. My 
office is situated in the town of Hafford, just slightly north of 
the constituency’s geographical centre. 
 
I want to say something about our tradition. Our Saskatchewan 
tradition is based on co-operation as His Honour has said. We 
recognize and encourage the efforts of the individual. At the 
same time we have known from the beginning that in this 
imposing land of great distances and extreme conditions, the 
key to survival is co-operation. 
 
The good people of Redberry Lake are very innovative, whether 
it be developing small business, diversifying their farms, or 
responding to the needs of the elderly, such as at Rabbit Lake 
and presently at Borden as they explore new avenues to provide 
housing for the care of the elderly. 
 
Redberry Lake boasts a large number of Doukhobors and 
Doukhobor descendants. And 1999 marks 100 years of 
Doukhobor settlement in North America. And many of those 
settlers’ descendants reside in my constituency, descendants of 
those who settled in this area a century ago. 
 
(1445) 
 
We also have a wide selection of almost all nationalities 
represented — German, Ukrainian, Polish, French, Belgium, 
Dutch, English, Scottish, Irish, and many others, mostly of 
agrarian background from wherever they came, with several 
Hutterite colonies and two reserves inhabited by First Nations 
people mainly of Cree heritage — a vast mosaic of all people. 
 



20 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 1999 

As I mentioned, not only do these people live in harmony, each 
bringing their own traditions, but also they are innovative. 
Innovation, Mr. Speaker, has been the watchword of the people 
of Saskatchewan and of this government of the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The good citizens of Redberry Lake are proud of their roots 
deep in the fertile grain-growing soil of Saskatchewan but they 
know that those roots have spread and evolved. We are no 
longer just an agricultural community though we are proud to 
have our society still based on our farm economy. 
 
Mr. Burke, a renowned parliamentarian, said, and I quote: 
 

Nothing in progression can rest on its original plan. We 
may as well think of rocking a grown man in the cradle of 
an infant. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the original plan for Saskatchewan in the pioneer 
days gave every settler a quarter section. They brought in turn a 
plough, a strong back, maybe an ox, and the faith and hope 
mentioned in the throne speech. The original plan was good for 
a start and it took us a long way. 
 
But the oxen are gone, the quarter section farm is gone, and my 
back is not as strong as it used to be. The land is changed. 
People have changed. Saskatchewan has changed to meet the 
realities of a changing world. The signs are all about us. 
 
In a minute I want to say a word about the current agricultural 
situation we face — a situation created by international pricing 
far beyond our control. 
 
Mr. Speaker, even ten years ago the downturn in grain and oil 
prices we are now experiencing would have virtually finished 
us off. The old boom and bust cycle we have suffered under for 
most of this century would have ground our economy to a halt. 
But that is not the case. 
 
We are having a tough time for the moment, I grant you that. 
But we are weathering it because, as Burke says, we have 
evolved from the original plan. 
 
Our economy is diversified, and even with the current problems 
we face, it is growing. And it will continue to grow, returning to 
the rapid growth it experienced in the last six years. 
 
We have an active high-tech agri-food industry in Saskatoon 
which is providing jobs and value-added products. We have 
high-tech industries in both Saskatoon and Regina which are 
keeping us in the forefront of the communications era. 
 
In towns and small cities around the province, small and large 
companies are building innovative agriculture implements 
which are being shipped around the world. Farmers are growing 
specialty crops and organic grains as well as wheat. Other 
farmers are raising elk and bison as well as cattle and hogs. 
 
Everywhere you look, Mr. Speaker, our people are using the 
same initiative that created the threshing bee to adapt our 
economy to today’s reality and tomorrow’s possibilities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Jess: — A temporary downturn in one area is not going to 
stop it. What do I base my confidence on, Mr. Speaker? That’s 
simple. On the record of this government and these people and 
what they have achieved since 1992. 
 
During the years between ’92 and ’97, Saskatchewan’s real 
growth averaged 4.3 per cent annually, which far exceeded the 
national average. And the Bank of Montreal predicts that in 
1999 our economy will continue to grow, even with depressed 
farm prices. 
 
During the same time period the manufacturing sector created 
7,300 new jobs. Retail trade increased by 45 per cent, far ahead 
of both of our provincial neighbours. The value of 
manufacturing shipment was up by 76 per cent. New capital 
investment increased by 63 per cent. Housing starts grew by 30 
per cent. Mr. Speaker, year-end figures for 1998 from Statistics 
Canada showed total employment for the year was at an 
all-time high. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Jess: — That number of full-time jobs that increased by 
more than 7,000 over the previous year. I know that the 
members opposite hate to hear this, but all this was 
accomplished while taxes were lowered, the Tory debt was 
reduced, and the budget was balanced five consecutive times. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Jess: — The sixth is just around the corner. I said that too 
fast, Mr. Speaker. Let me slow down a bit. We had started with 
a Tory debt of $14,000 for every man, every woman, and every 
child in this province. Fifteen billion dollars. That figure is now 
well under 12 billion. And that is without the help of Mr. 
Hermanson’s former reform assistant, Mr. Truscott, and his 
taxpayers' federation. 
 
We have cut taxes in every budget since 1992, not just the two 
splashy ones, the two per cent sales tax cut and the two per cent 
reduction in the personal income tax rate. Every budget. You 
can check it out. 
 
We have balanced the budget five straight times before any 
Tory government in Canada, before any Liberal government in 
Canada, and before any separatist government in Canada. We 
were the first to balance it and we have maintained it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Jess: — Some good luck, a lot of good management, a lot 
of innovation, and a lot of initiative. Working together the 
Saskatchewan way — that’s what will get results and it will get 
results this year as well. 
 
As the most rural of rural constituencies, Redberry Lake is 
home to hundreds of farm families, many of whom are having a 
struggle to make ends meet. These farmers appreciate the 
efforts of our agricultural minister in his negotiations to provide 
farm support, not only today but also in the future as we face 
unfair subsidy wars. 
 
I am pleased therefore that we have the Premier we do, that we 



March 16, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 21 

have the Minister of Agriculture that we do, and that we have 
the government that we do as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Jess: — We are responding as a government to help solve 
the current farm crisis just as we acted in the beginning to solve 
the financial crisis left us by the previous Tory government. 
 
Over time the federal government has gone from taking the 
major responsibility for safety nets and disaster type of funding 
to a position of requiring provinces to pay 40 per cent of the 
cost. During the same period of time the federal government has 
taken away major programs that help Saskatchewan, such as the 
two-price wheat system and the Crow rate. 
 
Farmers have in the past and still continue to face a number of 
challenges: international subsidies funded by the national 
treasuries of Europe and the United States, declining margin as 
input costs eat up more of their revenue, and continued 
production and price risks associated with farming. Farmers 
need to know whether the federal government will stand behind 
them or if they have to address these issues on their own. 
 
Farmers also want to know if the federal government will 
continue to download 40 per cent of the responsibility onto the 
provinces. A province like Saskatchewan with a large 
agricultural base and a small tax base is at a disadvantage in this 
environment. 
 
The farm situation has become very tough for some of us — 
most of us in fact — because of the sabotage of our industry by 
Ottawa, approximately 320 million each and every year with 
the demise of the Crow — a cross now borne by Saskatchewan 
farmers alone. Just look at your last grain cheque — the freight 
costs are formidable. And now Justice Estey wants to remove 
the cap. 
 
Somehow this is supposed to help. It will, I’m sure. But it won’t 
help you and I unless we happen to own a piece of CP 
(Canadian Pacific) or CN (Canadian National). What it will do 
is allow the grain companies and the railways the ability to 
finish redrawing the map of Saskatchewan, a map that is only 
for their own economic advantage. 
 
The grain will then have to go to the main line, and only to the 
delivery points chosen by the railways and the elevator 
companies. And I think that’s important enough that I should 
mention it again, that even on the main lines, with the map that 
they’re drawing, none of these communities are safe. They are 
drawing them to the points chosen by the railways and the 
elevator companies for their advantage. 
 
We have nobody to thank for that but successive Liberal and 
Conservative governments in Ottawa. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Jess: — We are told that it is all done in the name of 
efficiency. Efficient? Yes. But efficient for whom? The costs of 
transportation will be ours as farmers, and the costs of the roads 
and the highways will be ours as taxpayers. 
 

Over the last number of years Ottawa has taken away the 
two-price system for wheat, which was one small way that at 
least the flour and the domestic consumer’s bread was paid for. 
That support is gone for good. It has become another victim of a 
cheap food policy. 
 
Ottawa could still be putting hundreds of millions of dollars 
into farm programs without violating their trade agreement. For 
example, the federal government is reneging on the duty to 
farmers to phase out subsidies equivalent to other countries’. 
We could still be receiving the full Crow benefit and not be out 
of step with Europe or the United States, and not in violation of 
any agreement of any kind. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Jess: — Our provincial government’s commitment to 
agriculture is significant. For example, the PST (provincial 
sales tax) exemption on farm machinery and repairs, fertilizer, 
pesticide, and seed, amount to an investment of $127.4 million 
annually. As well as the exemptions on the fuel tax on diesel 
and rebate on gasoline, an investment of 116.9 million annually. 
Plus the tax rebate on intensive livestock and horticultural 
facilities, an investment of $2 million annually. Saskatchewan 
agricultural and food program, an investment of 50 million 
annually. 
 
In addition, the cost of NISA (Net Income Stabilization 
Account) funding, an investment of 40 million annually. Not to 
mention crop insurance, an investment of 75 million annually; 
or grants to the industry, an investment of 8.5 million annually. 
And agricultural research, an investment of 9.1 annually. 
 
(1500) 
 
Saskatchewan has also provided significant funding to 
encourage diversification and innovation in the Saskatchewan 
agriculture and food sector through the $90 million Agri-Food 
Innovation Fund. 
 
The direction laid out in yesterday’s throne speech helps to 
bring hope and optimism to these same farm families. The 
people of the entire province continue to benefit from the 
cautious and sensible approach of the management of our 
province’s affairs by this government. 
 
I am particularly pleased with the emphasis given to 
value-added and job-creating enterprises in the speech. 
Saskatchewan relies heavily on agriculture with no area more 
reliant on farm production than Redberry Lake. But we are 
moving, as the throne speech indicates, into a more diverse 
economy, much of it related to agriculture — such things as 
game farming, hunt farm, outfitting, and related processing and 
manufacturing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Jess: — I see by the local paper that the Yellowhead 
Highway Association is one of the finalists in the 1998 Tourism 
award of excellence. This group is an example of just what 
volunteers can accomplish. This very ambitious group has had 
major success in advancing the upgrading of the Yellowhead 
Route. 



22 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 1999 

Just over one year ago I joined with the federal Minister of 
Transport and the provincial Highways minister when we 
opened the entire twin section of the Yellowhead highway from 
North Battleford to Saskatoon. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Jess: — This divided highway now completely spans my 
constituency of Redberry Lake. I certainly would like to 
acknowledge the contribution of the Yellowhead Highway 
Association. 
 
On February 19 of this year, our Premier spoke at the 
Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation annual convention. He spoke 
about the federal gun control law. He stated, and I quote: 
 

As you know, Alberta’s challenge to the law, a challenge 
we fully supported and endorsed, was defeated in a three to 
two decision in the Alberta Court of Appeal. Well it’s not 
over yet. We are again joining with other jurisdictions in a 
renewed challenge to this unnecessary, costly legislation as 
we appeal to the Supreme Court of Canada. We will argue 
on constitutional grounds that the gun law intrudes on an 
area of provincial authority, mainly provincial jurisdiction 
over property and civil rights. 

 
Like many of you here today, this government believes in 
the responsible use and storage of firearms, but we do not 
believe that a cumbersome system of registration will curb 
crime. We believe that the hundreds of millions of dollars 
on this program would go further if it were spent on police 
officers and crime prevention rather than on giving 
law-abiding citizens new forms to fill out and buying new 
filing cabinets in which to store them. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Jess: — I want to say a few word about health care, Mr. 
Speaker. Medicare is Saskatchewan’s gift to Canada. It began 
here and it is being saved here — two facts; two uncontested 
facts. 
 
I am being very proper today and reserved here, sir, Mr. 
Speaker. So all I want to say at this time is that anyone or any 
political party which tries to say that health care in 
Saskatchewan is in disrepair has their facts twisted. 
 
I don’t want to suggest that someone might be spreading 
misinformation on narrow partisan reasons, because that would 
be impolite of me. But I do have to admit, Mr. Speaker, that I 
get a bit annoyed when I hear people, who look suspiciously 
like the members opposite, say that our health care is in crisis. 
 
As our Minister of Finance said not too long ago, Bosnia is in 
crisis; we are not. But our health system is changed, and it is 
working better than ever. I feel sorry for the opposition 
members who keep insisting the opposite. 
 
How well is it working? Here are a few nice warm statistics to 
show us. 
 
Each day in the province 15,000 people see a family doctor or a 
specialist and the health system serves 35,000 residents a day. 

Each day 4,300 people receive emergency or scheduled care in 
hospitals; 200 people use emergency road ambulances and 
6,200 receive home care services . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Every day. 
 
Mr. Jess: — Yes, every day. Ninety-two hundred individuals 
are cared for in special care homes. Countless people each year 
receive immunization screening, prevention services, mental 
health and addiction counselling, rehabilitation therapy and 
assistance. 
 
How else can we tell how we’re doing? 
 
Well cataract surgeries have increased threefold since 1987-88 
to 11,237 procedures in ’97-98; 240 more surgeries are 
performed in Saskatchewan every day. CAT scan examinations 
increased by over 31 per cent over four years to a total of 
41,830 in 1996-97. That number is expected to be at 47,000 this 
year. Hip and knee replacements have almost doubled in the 
same time frame. 
 
Here’s a very good story, Mr. Speaker. On the news just a few 
days ago — you may have seen it — waiting lists for 
emergency heart patients in Regina have been totally 
eliminated. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Jess: — Totally. With a new cardiac treatment facility in 
Regina General Hospital, immediate emergency service is 
available. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all this is good news, not bad news. Not to 
mention the fact, Mr. Speaker, that we have done nearly all of 
this by ourselves. While we were modernizing the delivery 
system, while we were providing the largest health budget in 
the history of Saskatchewan at $1.7 billion, while we were 
adding an extra 9 million to hire 200 extra badly needed nurses, 
while we were doing all of this, the federal government was 
clearing its throat and thinking about putting some of the money 
it took out of health care back into the system. 
 
It’s a little late. It’s less than they took out, but we appreciate it. 
And the important thing is for Saskatchewan, that new again 
money is not replacement money. We had already replaced 
every cent that they took out. It is additional money for 
increased cancer services, for shorter waiting lists, and for 
women’s health services. 
 
There is more, much more, but I want to mention just one more 
fact. More doctors trained in Saskatchewan are staying in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Jess: — The rural practice establishment grant program is 
helping some of those doctors establish themselves in rural 
areas such as mine. That is more good news. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, speaking of rural health and speaking of 
rumours of a decline in rural health care, let me repeat 
something I said earlier. Let me repeat what the Premier has 



March 16, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 23 

said and what both ministers of Health have said. I say this for 
the people, the community of Hafford, and for all rural 
communities — we are committed to improving health services 
in both rural and urban Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Jess: — Our health districts are working with the people in 
their communities to determine what type of health services 
they need in their local facilities. Many communities like mine 
have converted their small hospitals to health centres which 
provide a broader range of services and are more responsive to 
local needs. Let me repeat that, Mr. Speaker — a broader range 
of services, not a lesser. 
 
These health centres will provide emergency services, 
observation and convalescent services, diagnostic testing in 
health assessment, outpatients, physicians, and nursing services. 
 
Recently, Mr. Speaker, the Tory candidate in my riding came 
through telling everyone that the Hafford hospital was being 
closed. The people in my constituency can read and they could 
see for themselves what is going on. They were not pleased 
with the little Tory who cried wolf, and they told him so. 
 
They also told him they didn’t think much of his leader’s plan 
to freeze spending on health care and to bring in private 
payments for certain non-life-threatening health services. That 
kind of program doesn’t fly with Saskatchewan people. 
 
One more thing, Mr. Speaker. Health care is the single largest 
item in our budget because health care is the single most 
important service that we can provide. We do not take that 
responsibility lightly and we did not make the decision to alter 
the system on a whim. As Robert Kennedy said, one-fifth of the 
people are against everything all the time. I wonder why that 
quote causes the members opposite to come to mind. 
 
(1515) 
 
As many of you know, a few years ago I was privileged to visit 
Great Britain for meetings sponsored by the Commonwealth 
Parliamentary Association. I spent some of my time looking at 
the Parliament Building in London, the Mother of Parliaments 
as it is known. 
 
I won’t try to tell you how I felt wandering through that 
majestic building. A Saskatchewan farmer, a rural MLA 
(Member of the Legislative Assembly) from a legislature not 
yet a century old, present at the sight where parliamentary 
democracy began nearly 1,000 years ago. 
 
I was aware of my relative smallness in the grand scheme of 
things. One legislator among thousands who have followed 
those who first wrote the Magna Carta and those who first stood 
and spoke in this the very first parliament. 
 
At the same time I thought about what I do, what we all do here 
in the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan. It is equally 
significant, equally historical, with our legislative ancestors. We 
operate in a different time, on perhaps a different historical 
scale, but we too are parliamentarians in the grand tradition. I 
was proud, but I was also humble. Touching the stones of that 

great building, where in one sense our history begins, 
crystallized those feelings for me. 
 
I mention my trip for one good reason. The members before me 
who have moved acceptance of His Honour’s Speech from the 
Throne have each referred to our place in the tradition of 
parliamentary democracy. Those were fine words — true 
words. We need to be constantly reminded that we represent not 
only the present, but also those who went before and those who 
follow. 
 
Once more I wish to quote the great parliamentarian Edmund 
Burke, who said, society is an intergenerational bargain 
between the dead, the living, and those yet to be born. Seeing 
the original parliament confirmed for me the truth of those 
statements. We walk in the footsteps of parliamentarians past, 
as we blaze new trails into the future to be followed by 
generations of parliamentarians yet unborn. 
 
Moving the throne speech is a great responsibility. Praising it 
and the government which created it is easy. As His Honour 
said, his speech charts a balanced and visionary course which 
will continue us on our journey into the new century. Because 
of the common sense, faith, hard work, and co-operation of the 
people of Saskatchewan, we have come a long way in a short 
time. The Saskatchewan way, the balanced approach, has taken 
us out of darkness toward the light. 
 
We have much of which we can be proud; we still have much to 
do, for us, for our pioneers, and for our children. 
 
In conclusion, I would like to mention that while I am proud to 
move the acceptance of the Speech from the Throne, proud 
because the throne speech is another piece of progressive and 
responsible record of our government. A record that will stand 
the test of time, a record that will prove that we have been 
successful in reclaiming Saskatchewan for Saskatchewan 
people under the able leadership of our Premier. A Premier who 
has shown himself to be the great leader that this province 
needed for the ’90s and on into the next millennium. 
 
Each time that we’re faced with a difficult situation our Premier 
and our caucus find ways to deal with the matter in a 
responsible, compassionate manner, always with the people of 
Saskatchewan in mind. 
 
We made some hard choices but they were the right choices. 
Right for the budget, right for the system, and right for the 
people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members of the legislature, citizens of this great 
province, I want to state emphatically to you that this throne 
speech is also a guide to the right choices for Saskatchewan 
people, right for the budget, right for the system — yes, right 
for the people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as a rural member of the government, a 
government who truly believes in humanity first, I am proud to 
move, seconded by the hon. member from the Battleford-Cut 
Knife: 
 

That an humble address be presented to His Honour the 
Lieutenant Governor as follows: 



24 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 1999 

To His Honour the Honourable John E.N. Wiebe, 
Lieutenant Governor of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
May it please Your Honour: 
 
We, Her Majesty’s dutiful and loyal subjects, the 
Legislative Assembly of the province of Saskatchewan in 
session assembled, humbly thank you Your Honour for the 
gracious speech which Your Honour has been pleased to 
address to us at the opening of the present session. 
 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Now why is the hon. member for Athabasca 
on his feet? 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Yes, to ask leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you it gives me great pleasure to introduce a number of guests 
that are here today. Maybe just quickly I would ask them to 
quickly stand and introduce them. All the way from 
Ile-a-la-Crosse, which is a seven and a half hour drive from here 
if you drive like me, but more of an eight-hour drive if you 
drive like a normal person. 
 
But up on the far right up there is Bob Desjarlais and Bob 
works with the local housing authority. Next to Bob we have 
Lawrence Corrigal. Lawrence is the housing manager in 
Ile-a-la-Crosse. Next to Lawrence we have Verna Daigneault, 
and Verna is on the housing authority board. And next to Verna 
is Cecile Favel, and Cecile is also on the housing authority 
board in Ile-a-la-Crosse. And next to Cecile is her son Dennis 
Favel. And actually, Mr. Speaker, it’s her husband but he looks 
so young next to her I just thought I’d call him her son. 
 
So it would please me, Mr. Speaker, if I’d ask the Assembly, 
my colleagues here to welcome these fine people from my 
hometown of Ile-a-la-Crosse. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
(continued) 

 
Ms. Murrell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to be 
asked to second His Honour’s fine speech and it is an honour to 
be chosen by the Premier to do so. It is both a humbling and 
invigorating experience. I’m especially pleased to second the 
excellent speech by my colleague and neighbour, the member 
from Redberry Lake. 
 
Having once delivered the address to the throne speech myself 
in 1996, Mr. Speaker, I fully understand the pressure of the 
situation. The depth of talent and eloquence in this caucus 

amazes me anew each session. Of course such an excellent 
speech and a most excellent government record make it easy to 
praise both. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I wish to welcome you back to the Chair and 
commend you on your past handling of this House. It must be 
difficult at times to maintain order and decorum, but you have 
done so in a fair and just manner. I know that under your 
guidance this session will continue in the same way, and I 
would also commend you on the education process you started 
and have continued with education with school children. 
 
I would like to acknowledge the commitment and dedication of 
our former colleagues, Bob Mitchell and Ed Tchorzewski, for 
their contribution to our province and our government. Their 
footprints have gone in many directions, leaving a clear and 
future path for others to follow. 
 
The throne speech is one of common sense, one of balance, and 
one of spring. And these are all vital necessities to regenerate 
hope in my constituency. 
 
1998 was a year that many in the Battleford-Cut Knife 
constituency would like to forget. We experienced extreme 
drought on the west side of the boundary. Because of a grain 
shortage, low grain prices, low oil prices, and high input costs, 
many in the Midwest struggled to preserve their livelihood. 
 
Saskatchewan farmers are some of the most productive and 
internationally competitive producers in the world. However, 
they cannot compete against the federal treasuries of the United 
States and the European Union. We need to protect the future of 
Canadian agriculture. Saskatchewan relies heavily on 
agriculture and we as a province cannot protect it alone. 
 
Mr. Hermanson is quick to pin the fault on this government. He 
never tires of saying that this NDP government has failed to 
meet the changes of a global market; that we discourage new 
businesses because of high taxes; that we in effect do not 
support our rural communities in any way, shape, or form. 
 
First of all, Mr. Speaker, this is the same Mr. Hermanson who 
in 1996, as a Reform MP (Member of Parliament), tried to 
convince the House of Commons to reduce $20 million from 
Agriculture Canada’s 1996-97 budget. 
 
Our Premier and our Agriculture minister have continued to 
pressure Ottawa to address the pressing issue of the cash flow 
problem. A short-term solution has been recognized. Now we 
need to address a long-term strategy. 
 
Our provincial government has shown our commitment to 
agriculture and we will continue to show our commitment to 
agriculture. 
 
For example, the PST exemption on farm machinery and 
repairs, fertilizer, pesticides and seed, $127.4 million annually; 
exemptions from the fuel tax on diesel and rebate on gasoline, 
116.9 million annually; tax rebate on intensive livestock and 
horticultural facilities, Sask Ag and Food programs, an 
investment of 40 million; not to mention crop insurance, an 
investment of 75 million annually; and agriculture research, 9.1 
annually. 



March 16, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 25 

And our Crowns are assisting. Farmers pay less than 80 per cent 
of what it costs SaskPower to provide them with electricity, 
subsidized through higher rates charged to major commercial 
customers. Our SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) 
Crown has allowed people to choose through three- to 
eleven-month terms for their insurance, cutting costs of 
seasonal vehicles like farm trucks. Saskatchewan Agri-Food 
Innovation Fund provides 90 million into this sector to 
encourage diversification and innovation for agriculture and 
food. 
 
The member from Redberry has mentioned the farm situation, 
but in Battleford-Cut Knife constituency this is a rural crisis, 
affecting implement dealers, retail stores, bulk dealers, and 
school enrolments. We are and have been experiencing elevator 
and school closures. 
 
And yet, Mr. Speaker, we are addressing these challenges and 
changes to our demographics. Local farmers have diversified 
from traditional livestock to elk, bison, deer, and other exotic 
species. Others have diversified from traditional crops to peas, 
canary seed, dill, and echinacea. 
 
Randy Sander has ventured into processing echinacea, and the 
Skinners from Wilkie are processing elk horns. Value-added 
processing, local and innovative. 
 
The tradition of co-operation is still at work today. As a 
solution to the situation in which farmers find themselves, they 
are forming co-ops to build terminals, pellet plants, hog barns, 
and feedlots. All these initiatives are positive reactions to global 
changes. 
 
(1530) 
 
Other businesses include the Maverick Tannery, Sifto salt, and 
KD Welding in Unity, Reid Welding in Cut Knife. By the way, 
both welding companies have moved here from Alberta because 
the prospects were better. 
 
There’s Sally’s Restaurant and Wilkie Motel — also residents 
of Alberta moving to Saskatchewan. G L M Tanks in Battleford 
and CCS and Senlac Thermal. Each and every business is 
contributing to employment and increasing opportunities. 
 
My area will also benefit from the Alliance Pipeline crossing 
our fair province, generating jobs for many who have been laid 
off from the oil patch. 
 
There are ads in the local papers for employment at the Macklin 
and Atton’s Lake Regional Parks, and those are resources we 
often neglect to mention. 
 
My area encompasses Macklin, Evesham, Senlac, Unity, 
Wilkie, Landis, Battleford, Delmas, Cut Knife, Neilburg, 
Marsden. And within this constituency there are five regional 
parks, Manitou, Suffern, Macklin, Atton’s, and Wilkie, 
allowing Alberta and Saskatchewan residents the luxury of the 
great outdoors. A place to go, to rest, and to revitalize. 
 
My area is also embedded in history— the Poundmaker 
Interpretative Centre, Government Ridge with the Government 
House, the Dominion Land Titles Building, early century 

homes, the rock of Cloan which served as a landmark for early 
settlers. The tourism potential abounds with opportunity. 
 
I also represent five Indian reserves: Red Pheasant, Mosquitoe, 
Sweetgrass, Little Pine, and Poundmaker, who are working 
together under the umbrella of the Battlefords Tribal Council — 
working together, Mr. Speaker, to deliver health programs, 
social programs, and education programs to their people and 
creating employment and opportunities for their people. 
 
Battlefords-Cut Knife constituents are resilient. We are 
tenacious. We persevere and we do the things the Saskatchewan 
way. Our government has been proactive in this development, 
working with and encouraging local businesses, councils, and 
communities in their pursuit of progress. 
 
This is not all, Mr. Speaker. This government supports the 
women’s agriculture network, PAMI (Prairie Agricultural 
Machinery Institute) research, the beef industry, the pork 
industry, specialized livestock, food processing, specialty crops, 
Ag-West biotech, infra ready products, the U of S (University 
of Saskatchewan) research in the geographical sciences — the 
list goes on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Even before the two-year $140 million contribution to AIDA 
(Agriculture Insurance Disaster Assistance program), this 
province devotes more of its tax base to sustaining rural areas 
than any other provincial government or the federal 
government. In fact, Saskatchewan provides 4.09 times as much 
as the federal government, and 4.66 times the average of all 
provinces. 
 
This support is given because we believe in our rural 
communities. We believe that their survival and their strength is 
essential to us all. We agreed to participate in AIDA because we 
believe in supporting and fighting for rural Saskatchewan. Rural 
communities have been an essential part of our past history; 
they are vital to our present; they will be integral to our future. 
 
And we will not turn our backs on those who have helped this 
province grow and survive. As the speech to the throne 
indicated, we will continue to strive for balance; we will 
continue to have faith in one another and in our ideas; and we 
will continue to support one another as we have in the past — 
as we will in the future. 
 
As I stand here before you, Mr. Speaker, I’m also reminded of 
this building’s heritage, and yet this building’s heritage is the 
heritage of Saskatchewan people. Its past history is our past 
history. 
 
And another piece of history has just been added. The throne 
speech illustrated many positive points and admitted new 
challenges await us in our present year and into the future of the 
new millennium. 
 
T.S. Eliot once wrote: 
 

Time present and time past 
Are both perhaps present in time future, 
And time future contained in time past. 
 

Someone recently wrote to the Star-Phoenix and suggested it 



26 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 1999 

was time for the Liberals and NDP to stop blaming the former 
Tory government for all their problems. The writer suggested 
we leave the grudge behind and forget the past. In other words, 
we should forget the debt. We are not carrying a grudge but we 
are carrying a cumbersome debt. 
 
Besides how can we forget it when they, the old Tories in their 
most recent incarnation, frequently rant that we are driving 
people out of the province with high taxes. If we didn’t have to 
pay our interest — yes, our interest, because we at least are not 
afraid of our responsibility — if we didn’t have to pay our $750 
million in interest on the debt yearly, we could provide tax 
relief. That’s $750 per person, or $3,000 for a family of four 
right off the top of everything we collect in taxes. That’s $750 
million just to pay the interest on our debt. 
 
Yet despite this dilemma from our past, we have delivered 
lower taxes in every budget since we balanced the budget in 
1994-95. We have reduced personal income tax. We have 
reduced sales tax, and as our Minister of Finance says, we will 
not jeopardize our progress by introducing measures guaranteed 
to lead the province back to the days of deficit and debt. 
 
But we will continue to reduce taxes in a responsible, 
sustainable way, when and as we can afford to do so, and 
without risking our balanced budget, important services, or our 
children’s and grandchildren’s future. We will do it this way 
because we recognize that the future does indeed contain the 
past. We will do it this way because it is the common sense 
Saskatchewan way. And we will not forget any part of our 
heritage, the good or the not so good, because that too would be 
a betrayal of our mutual futures. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to spend the next few minutes 
speaking about something essential to our present and our 
future — our health care system. 
 
There is no doubt that health care has undergone many changes 
in recent years. Because of limited resources, we strove to 
ensure that our tax dollars were spent as effectively as possible. 
It makes more sense to use funds to increase the number of 
services, or improve the services, such as the primary health 
services initiatives. 
 
The wellness and community-based health care system 
improves health care for the people of Saskatchewan. His 
government, the Lieutenant Governor, spoke of our goal to keep 
building an education system that keeps our children and our 
youth . . . that gives our children and our youth the tools they’ll 
need to earning a living. 
 
Working with our partners in education — our teachers, our 
parents, our school divisions — together we have made a 
commitment to the equality of education that will enable us to 
move forward on key initiatives facing our school system. 
 
In fact, certain key initiatives for students are already underway. 
These include auto mechanics, autobody, cosmetology, 
commercial cooking, computer technology — such skills that 
introduce students into trades that will benefit both the students 
and our communities now and into the future. 
 
And as the winter fades away and the awakening of spring is 

near, I sense renewed optimism in our province and in our 
constituency. Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank the people of 
Battleford-Cut Knife for their strength, their courage, and their 
support, and I am proud and honoured to represent them. 
 
Yes, spring is a time of hope — for rain, for bountiful 
beginnings, for jobs, for security, for quality of life. And we as 
a government are committed to maintaining hope. 
 
Mr. Speaker, because the Speech from the Throne speaks 
positively of how far we have come and confidently of where 
we are going, I too have confidence — in the people of 
Saskatchewan and in our government. 
 
I am honoured to second the motion in support of this Speech 
from the Throne. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is my 
pleasure to rise in the House to reply to the throne speech on 
behalf of the official opposition. I would like to welcome back 
all of the members and state that my colleagues and I look 
forward to the spirited debate that lies ahead. 
 
I would like to take this opportunity to welcome the new pages 
for this session: Melanie Bratkoski, Darcy Criddle, Dean 
Mulhall, Kris Parker, and Sheena Simonson. I have no doubt 
that your time in the legislature will prove to be both 
educational and meaningful in all of your future endeavours. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to extend a special greeting to 
everyone in the province, particularly those in Canora-Pelly 
constituency. I am sure that they will all be eagerly watching 
the democratic process and all of the proceedings in the House 
over the next few months. 
 
I’m pleased to indicate, Mr. Speaker, that both the communities 
of Canora and Foam Lake now enjoy cable television and have 
the legislature channel to all of those people. And I know that 
there will be many who will taking advantage of that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since the House last sat, many things have 
changed for the better for the Saskatchewan Party. Our 
membership base has grown and the people of Saskatchewan 
are embracing the fundamentals that we have outlined in our 
party’s platform. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the official opposition has laid out a clear plan for 
the future of this province — something the people of 
Saskatchewan can believe in. The throne speech contained 
nothing but false claims for this government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They have not built a strong, sustainable health care system. 
They have not created a conducive learning environment in 
education. They have not maintained an adequate level of job 
growth in Saskatchewan, and has fallen drastically behind in 
agriculture, and our highways continue to fall apart. 
 
The fact that this government has the audacity to claim that they 
have done well is a serious insult to the intelligence of the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 



March 16, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 27 

Our province is in a serious crisis, Mr. Speaker, on all fronts. 
Saskatchewan residents have not heard any solutions from this 
government and are not likely to, because it has become 
apparent that they have run out of ideas. This government’s idea 
of solving the health care crisis is to throw more and more 
money at it and see what happens. Meanwhile, they sit on their 
hands as the farmers in Saskatchewan are in dire straits. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I cannot fathom how this government runs our 
province, but it is definitely time for a change. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I am proud to announce that the official opposition 
will be introducing approximately 30 private members’ Bills 
this session that will help bring about this change. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, the residents of the Canora-Pelly 
constituency have expressed many opinions and have some 
tremendous ideas on what can be done in a variety of things. 
We’ve had people that have come into our office, that have 
phoned me directly with ideas on highways and roads and what 
should be done to alleviate the kinds of conditions that are 
being faced by the rural municipalities. 
 
We have concerns about the infrastructure in Saskatchewan, in 
rural Saskatchewan especially, when we look at the tremendous 
downloading that has taken place over the last seven, eight 
years by this government on both rural and urban 
municipalities. 
 
Many residents have looked at the whole constituency and have 
looked at transportation and have looked at the need to maintain 
railways and rail lines and to look forward to a continued good 
transportation system for all residents of Saskatchewan and 
especially Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the area of health care, that is probably the area 
that I have received the most concerns, the most letters, the 
most phone calls, people wanting to express a concern about 
health care. 
 
And we’ve heard a lot about health care reform over the years. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to spend a little bit if time talking 
very specifically about some concerns that have been expressed 
by people in the Canora-Pelly constituency. 
 
In 1991 during the election campaign, the NDP government 
said nothing of health reform. They said nothing of hospital 
closures. They talked absolutely nothing about acute care bed 
eliminations. And very quickly we heard that 52 — 52 rural 
hospitals were going to close and in fact become something 
else. They were no longer going to offer acute care beds. 
 
(1545) 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that caused tremendous anxiety for people 
back in those early years of the ’90s because people knew that 
the services that they were accustomed to, very close to them, 
and in three very specific communities, Mr. Speaker, in the 
Canora Pelly constituency — Invermay, Norquay and Theodore 
— all three had their hospitals closed. 
 
And as a result some very simple things, you know, simple 
things that might occur in a community during a hockey game, 
where someone has the need to go for stitches, now that no 

longer was something that could be done in a matter of minutes; 
it now had to require a travelling distance of 35 or 40 miles to 
secure that kind of service. 
 
But people looked at the possibility of expanded health care in 
what was referred to as the regional model. People looked at the 
hospitals in Preeceville, in Canora, and Foam Lake and said that 
there would be an expansion of services in those areas. And if 
not in those particular facilities, Mr. Speaker, then at least in 
Yorkton they could expect to receive the kind of care that they 
require. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that isn’t the case. What we see happening 
now is not only the fact that those three communities no longer 
have acute care beds and no longer have hospitals, but we see 
further reductions. In those communities there used to be a 
situation where at least a doctor provided five days service to 
the community, or four. But now we’re seeing that reduced to 
two. We’re seeing the situation occur in Theodore, where now 
blood and x-ray services have been curtailed drastically, and 
now the people have to travel to Yorkton. 
 
What monies have been saved, Mr. Speaker? Well we know — 
minister has indicated very clearly — that we spend $1.8 billion 
on health care. But now the additional costs have to be borne by 
the residents of Saskatchewan because they now have to travel; 
they now have to incur the costs of travelling to get services 
that were provided. 
 
When we start to look at the facilities that are still in . . . the 
hospitals that are still in the Canora-Pelly constituency, we have 
to look at the communities of Foam Lake, Preeceville, and 
Canora. Those are the three hospitals that remain in the 
Canora-Pelly constituency — not a lot of hospital services or 
acute care services. We know that the constituencies were set 
up on a basis of about 17,000 population, inclusive of children 
and non-voting people — 17,000 people to be served by 
approximately 25 or 28 acute care beds in three very, very 
distant locations. 
 
That’s not the kind of service that the people of Saskatchewan 
wanted. Now we hear the minister state very clearly . . . it was 
the associate minister who said some rural hospitals will close. 
Well the first question that people phoned . . . when they 
phoned me, the first question they asked was, is it going to be 
my hospital? There’s only three, so that didn’t take long to 
actually start to look at who would be affected. 
 
The statistics from Sask Health indicate that . . . the numbers 
from `96-97 indicate that two of those three have a bed 
utilization daily census of less than 10 beds. That was the 
criteria that was used in the early `90s for the closure of the 52 
hospitals. 
 
So what we’ve taken a look at is not whether these hospitals 
will close — because I sincerely hope that they’re not closing 
— but what we want to have is a commitment from this 
government, from the Minister of Health, from the Minister of 
Finance, that indeed they are not going to alter the funding for 
acute care beds. 
 
We have some comments from people that have indicated, you 
know, the situation in Preeceville. Preeceville is a growing 



28 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 1999 

community. It’s a lovely community. It has a hospital of 
under-10-bed utilization but it serves a tremendously large area. 
The people in communities, in the small communities of 
Ketchen or Rockford or Endeavour or Sturgis all rely on the 
acute care facility in Preeceville for their immediate needs. 
 
Yes, of course they know that the more complicated acute care 
need is going to be addressed in Yorkton, or for that matter in 
Saskatoon and Regina. But they rely on the facility in 
Preeceville. 
 
The CEO, the chief executive officer of the Assiniboine Valley 
Health District has stated very clearly that the plan of the 
district board is to maintain Preeceville as an acute care facility. 
And I think the residents of the area are indeed comforted by 
that. But there’s always the question about whether or not the 
district health board will receive the required funding to 
maintain that acute care level in Preeceville. Because the fear of 
course is, that on some magic date, the announcement will be 
that no acute care bed . . . funding will be provided for a district 
board where a facilities under a specific number exist. 
 
And that’s the fear, that’s the fear that the people have, Mr. 
Speaker. And the government accuses the opposition, the 
Saskatchewan Party, of fearmongering. Hardly, Mr. Speaker, 
hardly. The minister is the one that has stated that there will be 
fewer rural hospitals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last week I met with one of the councillors in the 
community of Foam Lake and I asked the gentleman whether or 
not the town council was concerned about Foam Lake. And the 
immediate reaction was, of course we are. Foam Lake has four 
acute care beds — four, Mr. Speaker. They serve a large area 
and they also want to have a guarantee. They want to have a 
guarantee from this government that suddenly the rug won’t be 
pulled out from under them. 
 
And as a result they have asked, the town council of Foam Lake 
has asked for the East Central District Health Board, its 
representative of course at the local area, the CEO, to come to a 
public meeting. They have organized a public meeting to ask 
the East Central District Health Board to come forward and put 
its plan before the residents of Foam Lake and area. 
 
I think that that shows leadership. That shows leadership on 
behalf of that council to say we want to ensure the residents of 
the town of Foam Lake and the surrounding area that indeed we 
will have acute care coverage, and they’re going to go forward 
with that public meeting. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there have been a number of letters that 
have been sent by various people to raise their concerns about 
acute care, and I just want to read a paragraph from one of the 
letters that was sent to the minister . . . actually it’s to the chief 
executive officer of the East Central District Health Board. 
 
Foam Lake has undergone tremendous transition. There have 
been closures of 11 long-term care beds and they were moved 
from the Jubilee Nursing Home over to what was still called the 
hospital because it has four acute care beds. And this is a couple 
of sentences that are contained in this letter. It says: 
 

It’s very unfortunate that the seniors of this area have 

become victims of such bureaucratic, thoughtless 
decisions. What a shame. These are the same seniors who 
donated their time and money towards furnishings, 
equipment, etc. because they knew one day they would 
require the facility and its services. They were helping to 
build the security for their geriatric years. 
 
Incidentally, where do the residents of Foam Lake and area 
go when they become ill, are in need of a hospital bed, and 
the four designated beds are already filled? 
 

So you see, Mr. Speaker, that’s a concern that people are 
expressing. They know that seniors have looked . . . they know 
that they will have to have need of acute care. That’s a statistic 
that everyone in Canada is familiar with, but they also want to 
have some guarantee from this government that indeed those 
facilities will be available and that indeed care can be provided. 
 
One of the other things that we have to look at, Mr. Speaker, is 
an issue that has, as indicated today in a lot of comments made 
by both opposition and government members, is that 
Saskatchewan is facing a nursing shortage. No question. We 
know that. It has been there for a long period of time. 
 
I want to quote from the Canora Courier, Mr. Speaker, of 
Wednesday, February 24. This is an article right on the front 
page and it says, “Nursing shortage said on verge of critical.” 
 
The CEO in Assiniboia Valley District Health Board is a 
gentleman by the name of Gary Johnson, and these are the 
comments made by this member . . . or this person. He says, 
“The situation is very close to being critical. It has become a 
very serious concern that began about 18 months ago.” 
 
Eighteen months ago is when Mr. Johnson indicates that they 
already knew and had a nursing shortage. He goes on in the 
article to say this, “We’re using everyone we have on a regular 
basis . . .” explaining that if there are no disruptions or 
situations with a sudden need, the district will be okay. But if it 
ever needs extra staff, it will be difficult. That’s the message 
from the CEO of the Assiniboine Valley District Health Board. 
 
Now as we indicated today, we see examples right across this 
country where Ontario is looking for 10,000 nurses. They have 
already put in place the funding. Alberta is doing the same 
thing. 
 
What we’re seeing happen in the province of Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker, is that the cities, the urban centres — Saskatoon, 
Regina — are facing a critical nursing shortage. They are 
looking at drawing people, so not only will we lose nurses from 
this province to other provinces who have possibly a better tax 
system, but we will then start to see the movement of nurses 
from rural Saskatchewan to urban Saskatchewan. That is what I 
think Mr. Johnson is referring to when he said it will be a 
difficult time. 
 
If nurses are attracted to Yorkton, Swift Current, to Regina, and 
they leave the areas around Foam Lake or Preeceville or 
Canora, there will be a nursing shortage, no question. 
 
Now, if there is a nursing shortage, what does the board do with 
their hospital beds? I think that is what is the most common fear 



March 16, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 29 

amongst people in my constituency. That concern about the fact 
that an acute care bed will not be available for me if I become 
seriously ill. Those are the concerns that are being expressed. 
 
And I think the Minister of Health and the associate minister 
must pay very special attention to this because health care is a 
concern for everyone. I would dare say that any member of the 
opposition or any member of the government would be very, 
very concerned if they had a problem that actually involved 
themselves. 
 
The example given to me last week, Mr. Speaker, and one that I 
think showed just how traumatic it is for families is a certain 
individual from my constituency has been battling cancer for a 
number of years and it has been in remission. But about three 
weeks ago, blood work at the Preeceville hospital determined 
that the doctor didn’t like what he saw in the tests. So he sent 
the individual back to Regina to see a specialist at the cancer 
clinic and to indeed go forward with whatever that doctor 
recommended. 
 
The problem that night when I received the phone call from the 
individual’s daughter was that it would be four to six weeks 
before a CAT scan would be done on this individual. Can you 
imagine? Can you imagine the trauma felt by the family when 
they know that the person has been battling cancer for a number 
of years and now they find out that they cannot really proceed 
with anything for four to six weeks? Tremendous anxiety and 
tremendous pressure. 
 
And those are the kinds of things that this government has 
instituted in this province. Long waiting lists — no one has the 
ability to be dealt with on a very good basis at all. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the other concerns in my constituency of 
course is agriculture — agriculture plays a very, very important 
role in my constituency. And I first want to begin by expressing 
my appreciation to all of those men and women in the 
constituency, in the Canora-Pelly constituency specifically, who 
have taken the initiative, who have taken the initiative to 
organize rallies, who have taken the initiative to form a railway 
abandonment committee to look at the possible closure and 
abandonment of railways; to the individuals in the committee of 
Stenen who are trying to purchase the elevator, the elevator that 
has already been abandoned by Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, and 
are now trying to purchase it as a community elevator for seed 
cleaning. These are initiatives. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, when I spoke to the mayor of the 
community of Stenen he showed me a letter that the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool had written to him outlining what 
they saw as the basis for a deal. And you know, Mr. Speaker, it 
was laughable because the conditions that were put to this 
group of individuals really were conditions that could never be 
met. They were forcing the hand of the local people to say well, 
you’re just going to have to give up because you’re not going to 
be able to meet the conditions to be able to purchase that 
elevator. 
 
And in the end the final statement was that if you are successful 
in meeting all the conditions and you purchase the elevator, 
you’re going to have to move it off the sight anyway because 
we won’t let you keep it on the property. Now laughable, 

laughable, Mr. Speaker, because here is a small community 
trying to save an elevator, not to be in competition with the 
grain companies but to try to save something for rural 
Saskatchewan, for their communities, so they could have a seed 
cleaning plant. And there’s just no one working towards that. 
 
The group that’s looking at the abandonment of the railway line 
. . . and there have been a number of meetings and I want to 
congratulate those individuals in that area, in that north-east 
corner of the province. They’ve been meeting with Manitoba 
people as well, Manitoba farmers, because there’s a tremendous 
concern on the other side of the border as well when we start to 
look at traffic that goes through Arran and Pelly and Norquay 
and Hyas and Stenen, all the way up to Preeceville. That’s a 
line that’s the Canadian National Railways is looking at as an 
abandoned line of the future. 
 
(1600) 
 
There has to be a better way, Mr. Speaker. We cannot just allow 
lines to be abandoned and ripped up and then in the end when 
farmers finally realize that there is . . . there could have been an 
alternative and they maybe would have been able to put 
together something that that system is no longer there. It’s the 
same situation whether we looked at a grain elevator or whether 
we looked at a railway line. We cannot have one get knocked 
down or one ripped up because then the remaining one that’s 
still left becomes useless. 
 
One thing became very clear, Mr. Speaker. Last fall a number 
of farmers in the Rama-Buchanan-Canora area wanted to bring 
the whole agriculture crisis to the forefront to make sure that 
urban people understood the kind of dilemma that farmers were 
facing, and they organized a rally in the community of Canora, 
just outside of Canora, back on December 17, 1998. It was a 
blinding snowstorm . . . there was a blinding snowstorm that 
day, Mr. Speaker, but still well over a hundred people turned 
out. 
 
And I know that the Minister of Agriculture of the current 
government was there, and I think the message that he heard 
very, very clearly from the people who attended that rally was 
that there needs to be leadership, there needs to be leadership by 
government and they felt that this government was not 
providing them that leadership. 
 
Yes, there is agreement. But of course Saskatchewan cannot 
fight the European subsidies and the North American subsidies 
alone as a province. But grain production is so vital through the 
province of Saskatchewan as part of Canada that we must lead 
that charge. We must show the rest of Canadians that indeed 
Saskatchewan stands behind its farmers. And that kind of 
lobbying, that kind of effort was expressed by farmers. Every 
person that spoke at that rally wanted to inform the government 
that they need to get to Ottawa, that they need to bring forward 
a plan. 
 
The concern in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, it’s not just 
for the farmers. I think that’s been overplayed. How many 
people have expressed the fact that urban communities will be 
affected as well? 
 
I attended an urban/rural forum in the community of Stenan 



30 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 1999 

where we heard representatives from Saskatoon come and 
indicate how agriculture has affected businesses in Saskatoon. 
That’s right, Mr. Speaker, how businesses in Saskatoon were 
affected by the agriculture crisis. We can see that already. We 
can see Flexi-Coil layoffs in Saskatoon, we can see production 
cutbacks in Morris farm equipment in Yorkton. These are 
concerns. 
 
This is why the agriculture sector is looking at it saying this is 
not to just provide dollars for farmers. This is to pay bills for 
the fuel dealers, for the chemical dealers, for the fertilizer 
dealers. It’s to be able to pay down mortgage. All of these 
concerns have come about. 
 
But you know, Mr. Speaker, one of the startling things that was 
shown so very, very evidently at Canora at that rally. I had a 
gentleman show me a grain ticket, a grain ticket from the 
mid-1950s, okay, so that’s 40-plus years ago. That grain ticket 
showed that the price received for a bushel of barley was $1.46. 
 
Now if $1.46 was the correct price to receive in the 1950s when 
— as I understand it, before my time — a stamp was 3 cents; a 
gallon I might add, not a litre, a gallon of diesel ranged in area 
from 19 to 21 cents; taxes on a quarter of land were 75 to $80 
on a pretty good quarter of land. Those kinds of costs, Mr. 
Speaker, today are seven, eight, nine times that amount. What 
we looked at then is, if a $1.45 was correct in the 1950s, why is 
$1.50 the price today? 
 
You know I heard the member for Redberry Lake talk about the 
cheap food policy in Canada. And that’s the situation that we’re 
looking at when we start to look at barley and malt barley, we 
start to look at wheat and the production of flour. The prices 
haven’t changed from the ’50s and we’re now moving into a 
new millennium with new costs and they haven’t changed. It’s a 
wonder that farmers continue to exist. 
 
Yes, as indicated, farmers are very industrious. They have 
diversified, they’re growing different crops, and they’re trying 
to cover themselves. But in . . . when crop rotation dictates that 
you have wheat and barley as your only crops in 1998, guess 
what, yields are down. We had a frost in early June, wheat 
midge has affected the wheat production, and as a result farmers 
have come into my office indicating, well you know, I have a 
30 bushel an acre barley crop. 
 
Well urban Saskatchewan might think 30 bushels per acre, 
that’s a lot of barley. Reality is, if they’re going to sell that 
barley for a dollar and a half per bushel, that’s $45 per acre. The 
input costs are in the area of 75, 80, $85 an acre. They’re losing, 
they’re losing on every acre of land that they’ve seeded, Mr. 
Speaker. And those are the concerns that have to be dealt with. 
 
This government has not shown leadership. This government 
has not been behind the farmer when they should have been, 
and people in Canora-Pelly are indeed very, very upset with 
that. 
 
One of the other concerns, Mr. Speaker, that I want to mention 
today is in reaction to some of the comments in the throne 
speech regarding education and where we’re moving as far as 
the K to 12 scene, and its commitment, this government’s 
commitment to education. 

Took a look at the kind of costs that school boards in the 
province have been looking at since . . . all through the ’90s, 
Mr. Speaker. And I want to inform the House that in 1991-92 
— and these statistics are directly from the Public Accounts and 
Estimates — in 1991-92 the total amount of money for 
operating grant for the educational development fund that 
existed at that time and capital grants was $452 million 
approximately; 452 million in ’91-92. 
 
In 1997-98 — of course these are the last remaining numbers as 
far as audited numbers — the same categories, the number is 
397 million. A full $55 million less, Mr. Speaker, less than what 
was given to boards of education in ’91-92. 
 
I then took a look at the brief that was presented to the cabinet, 
presented by the associations, the partners in education: the 
SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees Association); the STF 
(Saskatchewan Teachers Federation); LEADS (League of 
Educational Administrators, Directors and Superintendents); 
and SASBO (Saskatchewan Association of School Business 
Officials); and the documents at the back of this presentation 
included operating costs, total operating costs. 
 
Now I want to bring to your attention, Mr. Speaker, that in 
1990-91 total costs excluding debt and capital — this number 
does not include debt and capital — the total costs of education 
were $821 million; 821. In 1997-98 — 925 million. 
 
So now you see what’s happened with education. We have an 
increase of over $105 million in the cost of education. 
Everything from salaries, cost of living, increases in providing 
technology, being able to have computers installed, has 
necessitated a rise of a hundred-and-some million dollars by 
boards of education. On the other side, the government’s 
commitment to K to 12 education has been a reduction. 
 
And I added up all the numbers that have happened, all of the 
grant amounts that have been allocated since ’91-92, and 
comparing them to that year, the total sum, cumulative total, has 
been 357 million less over those periods of time. 
 
So when you start to look at the throne speech saying, well, 
we’re committing to education and we’re going to ensure that in 
education we’re going to have the safe classrooms and the kinds 
of things — these are concerns of teachers and of trustees and 
of board members every year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Every year teachers and the principal and the boards of 
education look at plans for their school division and say, we 
want to be able to improve our curriculum, we want to ensure 
that there is a safe school for students to be educated in, and of 
course we want to move forward with new technologies. 
 
So what has the government done? Well in the throne speech, 
the government has indicated that there will be a Role of 
Schools Task Force — A Role of Schools Task Force will be 
established to look at the future. 
 
Well you know, Mr. Speaker, I think that the Role of Schools 
Task Force is something that occurs and should occur on an 
annual basis. I was pleased to see that the Minister of Education 
is announcing the Evergreen Curriculum today, which will 
allow us to have changes to curriculum on an annual basis, 



March 16, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 31 

because that’s exactly what’s needed. And maybe then we 
wouldn’t be in the dilemma we are today with the math 
curriculum, and finding out that our math skills just aren’t quite 
up to par. 
 
But you know, Mr. Speaker, in 1992 the document that I 
received from the SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees 
Association) is called The Role of Schools. It’s already 
produced, Mr. Speaker. All that needs to be done of course is 
that we have to re-examine it because very clearly, as was stated 
by people in the teaching profession, the president of the SSTA 
has indicated, schools are changing, no question. They offer a 
greater amount of services. 
 
But one of the comments made by the president of the SSTA 
needs to be looked at, Mr. Speaker, and I quote from the 
trustees’ bulletin of February 28, 1999. It says this: 
 

We need to look at what’s expected of schools; what they 
should and shouldn’t be doing, says S.S.T.A. president 
Debbie Ward. We hope the role can be defined and 
funding can be provided to help with added 
responsibilities. 
 

It goes on to say, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Those added duties haven’t always been followed up with 
additional money, Ward points out. The government 
requires us to do more, tells us what to do, but doesn’t give 
us extra funding to do those things. 
 

So you see, Mr. Speaker, in the area of education, there are still 
concerns out there. I want to inform you, Mr. Speaker, of a 
situation that has occurred in this province. 
 
People in the community of Qu’Appelle know the importance 
of their school. They recognize it from what it does in the area 
of recreation, from what it means to the community as a 
community facility, and what of course it does in many other 
areas, in the Social Services and Justice areas. 
 
That school, I understand, Mr. Speaker, has a enrolment of 
about 195 students. But you know, discussion is taking place at 
that school by the residents and the board of education about 
discontinuing grades 10, 11, and 12. A school of 195 students 
and discussion is taking place about discontinuing grades 10, 
11, and 12. 
 
People in that community have been extremely vocal, and I’m 
sure members, government members, especially the Minister of 
Education, has received a number of letters and phone calls. But 
one of the other concerns that I discovered the other day was, I 
was talking to a gentleman who works here in the city of 
Regina but lives in Qu’Appelle. He has indicated to me, Mr. 
Speaker, that if discontinuance of those three grades occurs, he 
will be, he and his family, will be moving from Qu’Appelle and 
moving to Regina. So another blow to rural Saskatchewan. And 
I’m sure you’d agree, Mr. Speaker, that a school with 195 
students is not a small school. 
 
Yes, when we start to look at another situation very near my 
constituency — and I was asked to attend a public meeting 
there — in the community of Ebenezer, currently a kindergarten 

to grade 6 school with 29 students; 29 students from 
kindergarten to grade 6. Parents, the board, everyone is 
concerned about wanting to maintain that school but when the 
numbers become 29, it becomes very, very difficult, even 
though it’s an extremely good school. A very pleasant school, 
physically the structure is excellent, but now you’re dealing 
with the fact of depopulation and the situation. 
 
(1615) 
 
The people there want to keep that school open at least a couple 
more years but the enrolments projected mean that that 
community, in about three years I think, will be down to 20 
students. So you see, Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of concern about 
education, about the delivery of education, and maintaining 
quality education throughout the province. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, we are moving into a new millennium. 
A new era is upon us, and we need to give the people of 
Saskatchewan new hope. This appalling state of affairs this 
government has put us in is completely unacceptable. The 
members opposite have lost sight of what their role as 
government is, Mr. Speaker, and that is detrimental to everyone 
in this province, particularly our youth, who are getting out and 
getting out fast. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I feel that it is noteworthy to mention that 
statistics are continually showing the youth of our province 
leaving for more lucrative opportunities to the south, the east, 
and the west of Saskatchewan. They are not staying here 
because of this government’s lack of commitment to tax relief 
and broader job opportunities. It is time to stop the brain drain, 
Mr. Speaker, and keep our most vital natural resource at home. 
 
This dismal throne speech, Mr. Speaker, exposes a tired old 
government with no plan and no vision. The people of 
Saskatchewan deserve solutions from the government, not 
propaganda. There are too many examples in which the 
members opposite have had no idea on what is going on in their 
own departments. This is a blatant example of a lack of 
communication with the people of this province and what is 
really happening in Saskatchewan. 
 
Once again, Mr. Speaker, this goes back to my earlier point of 
how out of touch this government really is. The official 
opposition has done their homework, Mr. Speaker. We know 
what the people of Saskatchewan want; we know what the 
people of Saskatchewan need; and we know that this 
government is not going to give it to them. 
 
There is absolutely no excuse for this government’s abhorrent 
display in the health care system, in job creation, in highways, 
in agriculture, and in taxes, Mr. Speaker. Instead of addressing 
the issues, the members opposite choose to ignore them and 
subsequently overstate their record. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is for these reasons that I cannot support the 
throne speech, and I move the following amendment. Moved by 
myself and seconded by the member for Kindersley: 
 

That the following words be added to the end of the 
motion: 

 



32 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 1999 

But regrets that the throne speech showed absolutely no 
vision for the future on the part of the government, and 
revealed a tired government bankrupt of new ideas or 
innovative solutions to the problems plaguing 
Saskatchewan including crushing tax burden, faltering 
health care system, and dangerous highway; and therefore 
urges the government to dissolve this legislature and call a 
provincial election. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The debate on the amendment and the main 
motion will continue concurrently. Is the Assembly ready for 
the question? 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to enter this debate 
on behalf of my constituents and caucus. I recall that on the date 
I was first introduced to this House, I was introduced, of course, 
as the member for North Battleford. An hon. member shouted 
out that I was the temporary member only. Well I have thought 
on those sage remarks and I have come to realize that he was, of 
course, absolutely right. I am a temporary member, so are we 
all temporary members. As we approach an election, we are 
reminded that we are all here for a time, and must sooner or 
later relinquish our seats. All we can hope is that our time here, 
be it long or short, will redound to the credit of ourselves, our 
communities, and our province. 
 
Whether this is my last session or not, I can only say that I 
found it an honour for having represented the people of North 
Battleford constituency. I have learned much from my time 
here, and I’ve enjoyed my associations with constituents, my 
colleagues — even though at times they seem to be always 
disappearing on me — and yes, my political foes. 
 
As an opposition member I have been impressed with the fact 
that behind the scenes all members are able to co-operate and 
work together to advance programs for the general good. And I 
would like to make reference to some of those ministers who 
have assisted me in my work. 
 
When I was elected I made it a priority to do something to 
resolve the situation of the dangerous entrance to the city of 
North Battleford. Specifically I asked that the intersection of 
Highways 40 and 16 be moved from its present confusing and 
dangerous position. I was very happy with the co-operation I 
received from the Department of Highways and the minister, 
and I understand that that project is to proceed this year. That is 
an important improvement. 
 
Constituents came to me about the condition of the River 
Heights row houses in North Battleford. These units, these 
River Heights units, were owned by The Battlefords Health 
District and were being phased out. Nothing but the most basic 
and minimal of maintenance was being done. I thought that the 
solution was to transfer those units from the health district to 
the North Battleford Housing Authority. And I am pleased to 
report that with the co-operation of the minister in charge of 
Saskatchewan Housing, The Battlefords Health District, and the 
city of North Battleford, that the units have now been 
transferred and I understand that major renovations are to 
proceed this year. The residents of those row houses are indeed 
grateful for the co-operation of Sask Housing. 

I have spoken on the Nevada ticket sales issue. The Battlefords 
Health Foundation alerted me to the fact that break-open ticket 
sales throughout the province are being used to finance 
hospitals in Regina and Saskatoon only. In view of the fact that 
80 per cent of Nevada ticket sales are in the rural area, it struck 
me as unfair that the two cities received all of the revenue and 
the rest of the province receives nothing. I was extremely 
pleased when the Minister of Health announced that she is 
reviewing this policy with a view to a more equitable share of 
Nevada ticket revenues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I continue to have serious reservations about 
funding our health system out of the sale of break-open tickets. 
However, as long as we are doing this it is important that at 
least the share of those sales be distributed equitably and fairly 
around the province. And I want to thank the minister publicly 
for correcting this unfair situation. 
 
I also want to publicly thank all ministers and officials who 
have been prepared to meet with me and hear me out and work 
jointly for the betterment of our constituents regardless of party 
label. 
 
This is, as I say, an election year when we are all called to 
account before the voters who will have the ultimate say as to 
whether we have served them well or otherwise. To some of us 
the fact we will not be back may come as a surprise. I won’t 
attempt to speculate as to who those might be. I will leave it to 
the voters to make that determination. 
 
I would however like to pay tribute to those of our colleagues 
who have chosen not to return following this session. The 
member for Regina Qu'Appelle has been appreciated by all for 
her warmth and friendliness. The member for Regina Northeast 
will be bringing to a close a long and distinguished career. 
 
The member for Saskatoon Greystone inspired a generation of 
voters in this province, especially women and — including my 
daughter — people who had become jaded and cynical with 
politics. The member for Saskatoon Greystone brought to this 
House and to the political process generally a sense of mission 
and inspiration which continues to resonate with many, many 
people throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
I was pleased that her work on behalf of the WCB (Workers’ 
Compensation Board) widows has finally brought some results. 
This is an issue she made a personal crusade. These women 
would have been ignored had it not been for her work. I salute 
all members who have decided to return to private life and I 
wish them well. 
 
For myself, I have decided to stand again as a Liberal candidate. 
Some have questioned this decision in view of some of the 
problems we have experienced the past few years. I do not 
attempt to minimize those problems. However I want to remind, 
I want to remind hon. members that our party has existed since 
before Confederation in Canada and since before the creation of 
this province in Saskatchewan. No institution which has lasted 
literally for centuries, with a history that long, has not had a few 
chapters in its story which are not unpleasant and embarrassing. 
 
However may I also say that no institution can possibly endure 
for such a long period unless it has contributed materially to the 



March 16, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 33 

betterment of society and unless it speaks in some important 
and fundamental ways to human need and aspiration. The 
Liberal Party is not only the first and oldest party in 
Saskatchewan, but what is more, it has a philosophy which can 
point this province to a prosperous and a harmonious future. It 
was Premier Blakeney who once noticed and said that the 
cemetery is full of people who have predicted the demise of the 
Liberal Party. 
 
The Liberal Party is a moderate and inclusive party. It believes 
that the surest way to advance this or any society is to bring 
together all groups and individuals in a spirit of mutual respect 
seeking to balance the interests of each group and individual, 
never preferring the interests of one over the other. In terms of 
Saskatchewan, this means we need a moderate and inclusive 
party which seeks to bring together urban and rural, aboriginal 
and non-native, northern and southern, women and men, 
farmers, business people, and wage earners. 
 
Unhappily, Mr. Speaker, not all parties share this view of 
society. The re-election strategy of the NDP seems to be to win 
big in the cities and the North and to ignore the rest of the 
province. In contrast, the new Saskatchewan Party has carved 
out for itself a moderately successful niche in seeking to 
represent rural, middle-class, white voters. 
 
Neither party seems to have a fully inclusive view of this 
province. Both seem to be prepared to carve it up, providing of 
course they receive the larger share. I give the Premier and the 
NDP government full marks in bringing back fiscal integrity to 
a government and a province which was drowning in debt. They 
deserve credit for that accomplishment, and it must be noted. 
 
But that said, I and many other people in this province are 
asking, what now? Where is the plan for the economic 
diversification of the province? Where is the plan to deal with 
the reality that we live next door to the lowest tax jurisdiction in 
the country? How will we keep our entrepreneurial and investor 
class if we continue to charge them among the highest taxes in 
Canada? 
 
(1630) 
 
Where is the concern for our young people, who continue to be 
economic refugees, taking their education and their skills and, 
yes, their taxes elsewhere? Where is the plan to deal with the 
burgeoning Aboriginal population? 
 
Why, I have to ask, is there no sense of urgency to make sure 
that our Aboriginal young people will have the education . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. Now hon. 
members will recognize that they don’t need to call their 
messages across the floor in order to have them heard and put in 
the record. There’s plenty of opportunity to enter into the 
debate. I’ll ask for the co-operation of all hon. members of the 
House to allow the hon. member for North Battleford to 
continue his debate uninterrupted. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. People are asking . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 

Mr. Hillson: — People are asking why is there no sense of 
urgency on the part of this country to deal with the large 
number of Aboriginal young people who need education, 
training, and jobs, to ensure that they will become 
full-participating members in the economy. In short, where is 
the plan for the economic renewal of Saskatchewan? Failing 
such a plan we will never be able to fill the potholes, catch up 
on hospital waiting lists, retire the debt, or repair crumbling 
schools and university buildings. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we were all distressed last year to see that 
Saskatchewan had the poorest record of job creation in all of 
Canada. This is a tragedy not only because of the lost 
opportunities for the young people who are forced to leave our 
province to carve their future elsewhere. It is unacceptable for 
those of us who remain. The Liberal caucus has done a 
remarkable job in focusing on the problems of deteriorating 
government services especially in the areas of health care, 
roads, and education. 
 
The provincial government has responded with two quite 
contradictory answers. First they tell us there are no problems. 
We have the best health system in the world. Everybody is 
happy. When that line is seen to be not working, they tell us that 
all the problems, the problems they refuse to admit exist 
anyway, are the fault of the federal government. If only Ottawa 
gave us more money everything would be fine. Well Ottawa 
will be giving Saskatchewan some 140 million new, extra 
dollars this year. We shall see if this answers the problems of 
nursing shortages, threatened hospital closures, long waiting 
lists, and a system which appears to value bureaucrats over 
front-line health workers. 
 
The contradictory answers of the government extend to the 
areas of highways and education. They say it is Ottawa’s fault 
that the potholes, whose existence the NDP refuse to 
acknowledge, are not getting fixed. 
 
Last year the federal government announced a major new 
initiative to assist post-secondary students. The provincial NDP 
were highly critical despite the fact our senior university in 
Saskatoon is faced with collapsing buildings. Again, the 
provincial government will not admit that the roofs of many of 
our schools and colleges are literally falling in. But if they are, 
then they say the people should blame those in Ottawa and not 
Regina. 
 
The Speech from the Throne delivered yesterday made no 
mention of Saskatchewan’s poor record of job creation. Indeed 
the government appears to think that they are doing just fine 
and everything is great. If you didn’t know better you would 
think that we were leading the nation. You would think we were 
the envy of Alberta instead of trying desperately to keep up 
with Newfoundland. 
 
I wish to speak on the farm crisis. I was concerned last week 
when there were newspaper reports that officials in the 
provincial government were saying that Saskatchewan people 
wouldn’t be able to enjoy a tax break this year because the 
province has had to participate with the federal government in 
coming to the aid of the province’s farmers. 
 
To me this statement could easily be interpreted as an 



34 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 1999 

unfortunate attempt to divide this province and to invite urban 
residents to resent and blame farmers for the high taxes we all 
pay. 
 
Instead of being so slow and reluctant to join in the farm aid 
package, would it not have been better, Mr. Speaker, if our 
government had come together with Ottawa originally to 
attempt to correct some of the unfortunate aspects of the farm 
aid package? 
 
Specifically, I have been disappointed that because of the rule 
about 70 per cent income over the past three years, there are 
many producers in the north-west of Saskatchewan who will be 
unable to receive any assistance because they have suffered 
drought three years in a row and their baseline of income is too 
low to allow them to participate in the farm aid package this 
year. 
 
I’ve spoken to Mr. Vanclief, the federal Agriculture minister. 
He admits there are holes in the program and that more will 
have to be done to address these needs. How much better it 
would have been if our government had joined with Ottawa 
initially to try and correct some of these inequities and some of 
the deficiencies of the program. 
 
Why the NDP found it so objectionable to come to the aid of 
the province’s most important industry has not been explained. 
The closest they have come to offering an explanation was to 
say that the farm aid commodity price crisis is the same as the 
ice storms in central Canada, the floods in Quebec, or the Red 
River floods in Manitoba. They neglected to add that in each 
and every one of those cases, both the federal and provincial 
governments in those provinces involved also joined with 
Ottawa in coming to the aide of their citizens. Even the 
province of Newfoundland joined with the federal government 
to assist its fishers when the cod fishery collapsed in that 
province. 
 
Only in Saskatchewan does the provincial government appear 
to take the position that all assistance must come from the 
federal government and that only Ottawa has a responsibility to 
maintain the family farm, preserve medicare, rebuild our 
highways, save our universities and find a way to spark 
economic growth. I say with all due respect, if the NDP is right 
about this then why would we bother having a provincial 
government at all? 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, I wish to add that if I am critical of the 
NDP for attempting to pass off all its failures and shortcomings 
on the federal government, I am at one with the government on 
the need to preserve a strong federal government. For many 
decades all leaders in this province, regardless of party stripe, 
have agreed on the necessity of preserving a strong central 
government. It is simply and fundamentally not in the interests 
of Saskatchewan to dismantle the federal government. 
 
For this reason, I share the concern of our Premier when Mr. 
Elwin Hermanson said that he thought that we should get rid of 
the Canada Health Act. Mr. Speaker, if we abolish the Canada 
Health Act, we abolish national standards in health care. If we 
abolish national standards in health care, that ultimately has to 
hurt provinces such as Saskatchewan and Newfoundland and 
the other less wealthy provinces. 

Dismantling national standards may work for Alberta but it is 
fundamentally against the interests of Saskatchewan. And 
anyone who says we don’t need national standards in this 
country is pushing an Alberta agenda; he is not pushing a 
Saskatchewan agenda because he is working against the 
interests of Saskatchewan. And I make that comment in the 
most non-partisan of ways because all people in Saskatchewan 
have recognized for many years that a strong central 
government is key to the future survival and prosperity of this 
province. 
 
Well if the NDP seems to have designed its election strategy 
with little or no reference to rural Saskatchewan, the 
Saskatchewan Party appears to think it can win by appealing to 
certain groups and areas while ignoring others. I am especially 
fearful that the Saskatchewan Party will stir up division 
between Aboriginal and non-Native peoples. I hope very much 
that I am wrong. 
 
We all know there are some extremely serious issues which 
must be addressed. Treaty land entitlement, taxation, 
self-government, the rights of First Nation peoples and other 
Aboriginal groups such as non-status and Metis. We all know 
that it is economically and morally unacceptable to have a 
group of our population with far too high rates of 
unemployment, welfare, suicide, crime, and alcoholism. 
 
We all know that the days of white people making the decisions 
for the Aboriginal population are over. It never worked very 
well anyway. 
 
However, as we attempt to empower Aboriginal people to 
control their own destiny, new challenges also have emerged. 
Certainly, it is trading one evil for another if First Nations' 
governments develop into an oppressive system where most of 
the money filters into the hands of a small elite. 
 
These serious issues will have to be approached in a 
non-confrontational manner by men and women of good will on 
both sides. We cannot afford to use these issues as a lever to 
prey on people’s fears and prejudices. We cannot afford to use 
division as a pry to tear our society apart. 
 
Mr. Speaker, divisions exist in all communities. In the Liberal 
view, it is the work of the political process to work through 
these divisions so that society can move forward together, with 
each group and individual confident that he or she is a respected 
and contributing member of that society. 
 
Which brings me in conclusion to the proposed Respect for 
Constituents Act. As I understand this legislation, it would 
require an MLA to remain with the caucus to which he or she 
was elected, or else resign and seek a by-election. It has of 
course been inspired by the formation of the Saskatchewan 
Party. 
 
I understand the emotions behind this legislation, but I still 
question if it is on the right track. Under our constitution voters 
do not elect parties, they elect individuals. Once elected those 
members are charged with exercising their responsibilities 
according to their best judgment of the public interest, and 
according to the interests and wishes of their constituents. If 
they fail in that duty they shall of course pay the price in due 



March 16, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 35 

course at the next election. 
 
I know that government members will salute the fine example 
set by the member for Athabasca. When he could no longer 
support the party to which he had initially been elected, he 
resigned and sought re-election as a member of his new party. 
He is to be congratulated both on the manner in which he 
changed parties and on the historic vote of confidence he 
received from his constituents. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1645) 
 
Mr. Hillson: — I am proud, I am proud to say that the member 
from Athabasca was a personal friend before he left our caucus, 
and I’m proud to say that he continues to be a personal friend 
today. 
 
However, much as one may approve of his conduct, should it be 
enshrined in law? Is it good public policy to attempt to limit the 
actions and conscience of elected members? Is it good public 
policy to say that a member must remain with his or her caucus 
even though he or she no longer believes in the direction it is 
taking or even though it may be on an entirely different course 
from the one the member thought he had subscribed to? 
 
I share the frustration of the NDP with the manner in which the 
Saskatchewan Party was established. In an age when we are 
striving for open and accountable politics it does none of us in 
this Assembly any credit when the official opposition of this 
Assembly was formed when eight people met one night in a 
motel room. 
 
I note with interest, I note with interest that Elwin Hermanson 
said yesterday that the five Liberals who crossed the floor were 
not pressured to resign their seats. I found his choice of words 
interesting. Only the Liberals crossed the floor according to Mr. 
Hermanson. The Conservatives did not apparently cross the 
floor. The Tories did not abandon their party. They did not 
double-cross the Conservatives when they took on a new name 
and passed a resolution saying that the Conservatives would not 
run candidates in the next election. 
 
It was, according to Mr. Hermanson, only the Liberals who 
crossed the floor. The Conservatives were apparently merely 
taking on a bit of camouflage. It is interesting that Mr. 
Hermanson agrees with other members of this House that the 
Conservatives remained with their party albeit under a different 
name and that only the Liberals actually changed parties. 
 
Before I leave this point I want to make one last comment. 
According to The Election Act, 1996, if the Conservative Party 
does not run at least 10 candidates in the next election then all 
trust funds presently held by that party will have to be turned 
over to the people and province of Saskatchewan. 
 
My question is, will the Conservative Party follow through on 
the motion it passed to put forward no candidates in the coming 
provincial election and then remit the slush funds to the 
province of Saskatchewan? Or — or, I ask — will we find that 
in the coming election there will be 10 Conservatives quietly 
nominated, never to be heard or seen from again, 10 shadow 

candidates, so that that party can retain the slush funds for 
whatever other purposes they may have? 
 
But that said, I continue to have questions as to whether the 
respect for constituents Act is the proper way to proceed. As I 
say, I don’t think now at this stage is a time for any of us to 
throw stones. We will all face our voters; we will all be held to 
account. And whether or not we have properly discharged our 
duties, I am prepared now to leave to the electorate. They are 
the ones who are going to pass judgment, and not the hon. 
members of this House. 
 
In conclusion, I want to recall for you an incident which 
occurred shortly after I decided to go into politics. As a lawyer, 
I was told that it is important for politicians to attend auction 
sales. So I went to Kramer Auction and I showed some interest 
in a farm implement, which of course turned out to be a manure 
spreader. 
 
The assembled farmers wanted to chip in and buy it for me as 
they were sure I would need it in my new profession. Then 
someone in the back of the crowd piped up and said he didn’t 
think I needed a manure spreader as I already appeared to have 
the knack down pretty good. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, from some of the statements we have heard 
so far in this House, from my friends and colleagues across the 
way, and I think there will be much more of it in the weeks to 
come, I want to say my hat is off. We are the amateurs. As 
spreaders of manure, you are the masters and we will never be 
in your league. We will simply have to rely on the good sense 
of the electorate to preserve the political future of the Liberal 
party of Saskatchewan. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Renaud: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Today I 
want to stand up in this Legislative Assembly and proudly 
support this government’s road map for this session of the 
legislature of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The throne speech is that road map, Mr. Speaker. It’s a road 
map for the session and the member from Redberry Lake did a 
fine job in moving the Speech from the Throne. And it was 
seconded in grace by the member from Battleford-Cut Knife. 
 
While I was sitting here listening to the member from North 
Battleford and his concern about the respect for constituency 
Act, I just have to say this one comment before I get into more 
detailed response to the speech . . . the throne speech. And what 
I want to say is that it is not the MLA’s privilege to change 
party affiliation in the dark of night, or at any time, without 
going back to the people who elected them. 
 
MLAs represent their constituents’ wishes and their party 
policy, and once and for all we have to end the possibility that 
members would cross the floor and join another political party 
and sit for that new political party without permission from the 
people who elected them. 
 
A few days ago — in fact on Friday, March 12 — I sought the 
nomination for the NDP in Carrot River Valley for a third term, 
and, Mr. Speaker, that was for several reasons. The first reason 



36 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 1999 

was that I wanted to continue to work for and with the great 
constituents I have in Carrot River Valley. 
 
You know, it’s a large constituency, and it’s basically from 
White Fox on the north-east corner; if you drive down and 
across the North Saskatchewan River or the Saskatchewan 
River you’ll come to the community of Nipawin, a beautiful 
community of about 4,500 people. If you continue south, 
there’s the village of Codette, and then if you go east from 
there, you’ll come to a fine community of Carrot River and Red 
Earth and Shoal Lake, two First Nations that I have that are in 
the constituency of Carrot River Valley. 
 
And then if you move south of there you come to the 
communities of Arborfield and you then move east to Crooked 
River, Peesane, Prairie River; Hudson Bay, moose capital of the 
world; Greenwater, a beautiful provincial park to the south end 
of the constituency of Carrot River Valley; and Chelan, 
Bjorkdale — fine communities, fine people, Mr. Speaker. And I 
wanted to represent them again, and so I did seek that 
nomination. And I want to tell the folks of the Assembly here 
that I was successful. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Renaud: — And so I will carry the NDP banner with pride 
in the next provincial election — whenever that might be. And 
you know, Mr. Speaker, even though there will be an Act that 
will say that if I wanted to change political party, that I would 
go back to the people and ask them for their support in a 
by-election, well it won’t have to happen to me, Mr. Speaker, 
because I am proud to be a New Democrat. 
 
I am proud of the policies that they put forward. And I’m very 
proud of the throne speech that we presented here in the fourth 
session of the twenty-third legislature. So that won’t happen to 
me, and I’m very pleased about that. But I do believe it’s an 
important Act that we will be introducing in this session. 
 
The second reason that I sought the nomination, Mr. Speaker, is 
that I was very concerned that the Tories were trying to trick the 
electorate by hiding behind the Saskatchewan name. I really 
wondered if they could succeed in that, and that was a very 
great concern for me. And I thought that I should be here to at 
least let the public know in my constituency that these are really 
Tories, and hiding behind the Saskatchewan name is not going 
to change their policies or programs. 
 
And then the other reason, Mr. Speaker, that I wanted to seek 
re-election and seek the approval of my party was because of 
the priorities and the direction and the leadership that this 
government has given to the citizens of the province over the 
last seven years. 
 
You know we look at Saskatchewan and we think about it for a 
moment. It was selected the best province in the best country in 
which to live and raise a family. 
 
And I think it was you, Mr. Speaker, that brought to my 
attention on one of your visits to a school in my constituency. 
And you were saying to the students that, you know, let’s 
consider this for a moment. I don’t know how many people 
there are in the world — is there six billion or six billion plus? 

— I’m not sure of the exact numbers but that’s probably fairly 
close. Then if you take a look at Saskatchewan, a small 
province in the middle of Canada with a population of a 
hundred . . . 1 million people and the United Nations decided 
that this is the best place in the best country in which to live and 
raise a family, that’s quite an achievement, Mr. Speaker. And 
it’s a credit to the people of Saskatchewan and to the 
government that leads the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to deal a bit about the . . . sort of the third reason before I 
deal with the second reason. The third reason, Mr. Speaker, the 
reason that I ran for nomination . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
That’s right, Mr. Speaker, I see that the time is running a little 
short here and I’d certainly like to continue tomorrow. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would like to now adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the hon. member for Meadow Lake on 
his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I don’t know if I need leave for this. 
With leave, Mr. Speaker, to introduce guests. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Post-Secondary Education 
and Skills Training requests leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In 
your gallery I have a friend from my hometown of Goodsoil, 
Jean Lange, and I’d like all of the members here to welcome her 
here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 
 



 

 


