





























































Hansard: March 15, 1999


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1 
 March 15, 1999 

 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 p.m. 
 
The Speaker: — I wish to inform the Assembly that I have 
received a communication from the private secretary to His 
Honour the Lieutenant Governor stating that His Honour will 
open the fourth session of the twenty-third legislature at 2:30 
p.m. today, the 15th day of March, 1999. 
 

2:32 p.m. 
 
His Honour the Lieutenant Governor was then pleased to open 
the session with the following speech as tabled: 
 
Mr. Speaker and Members of the Legislative Assembly: 
 
It is my pleasure today to welcome you to the fourth session of 
the twenty-third Legislature of Saskatchewan. 
 
It is once again my pleasure to begin by welcoming all those 
citizens of our province who are observing these proceedings, 
both here and in their homes. 
 

THE SASKATCHEWAN WAY 
 
As we gather here today, with spring less than a week away, we 
might consider the wise counsel of the Saskatchewan poet 
Vesta Althea Pickel, who wrote, 
 

‘There is no spring, though all the world is greening, 
‘Unless you see through eyes renewed with hope.’ 

 
So let us renew ourselves with hope, as we join for what will 
likely be the last regular sitting of this Legislature before the 
year 2000. 
 
With spring in the air and a new century dawning, it is a good 
time to reflect on the basic values that have built our province. 
The values of balance, and common sense, and hope. 
 
The women and men of Saskatchewan have used these values 
to build our province. Working together, with balance, hope 
and common sense, is “The Saskatchewan Way.” 
 
In the Saskatchewan Way, we came back from the 1980s, that 
dark winter of division and deficits, and into the bright greening 
springs of co-operation and prosperity. 
 
In the Saskatchewan Way, we pulled ourselves free from the 
perilous quicksand of financial irresponsibility, and stepped 
onto the firm bedrock of financial balance, allowing us to invest 
in our most precious resource, our people, by providing the 
families of Saskatchewan with the jobs, health care and 
education they need. 
 
Those women and men responded by building a province that is 
the best place in the world to live. 
 
A province that is home to artists like Vesta Pickel, the 
longtime Saskatchewan poet with whose words we began today. 
Mrs. Pickel is with us here in the chamber, and it is my pleasure 
to ask her to rise to accept our welcome. 

A province that is home to entrepreneurs, to dynamic 
companies and co-operatives. Home to innovations, in 
technology and social programs. 
 
And most importantly, a province that is home to some of 
Canada’s best communities, where the women and men of 
Saskatchewan are raising their families and building our 
common future together. 
 
We can be proud that we have come a long way in a short time. 
But we have much work left to do, to build our future the 
Saskatchewan Way. 
 
So while the women and men of Saskatchewan expect lively 
debate in this session, they expect my government to attend to 
the people’s business – to the real issues that are important to 
them. 
 
And my government will do just that. 
 
My government will attend to the people’s agenda: 
• Jobs and our economy. 
• Our schools. 
• Our health care. 
• And our community safety. 
 
We meet here to resume the people’s work as the last shadows 
of winter dissolve in springtime’s hopeful sun. To keep 
“renewing our eyes with hope,” so that we might continue to 
enjoy the full greening of each Saskatchewan spring. 
 

JOBS AND GROWTH 
 
The first step is job creation and continued growth. 
 
Together, we have created 30,000 jobs. We will do more. 
 
Step by step, through balance and common sense, we will keep 
building the new Saskatchewan and its growing, prosperous, 
diversified full-employment economy. 
 
A new Saskatchewan that builds on the innovation that is the 
trademark of our province. Where a vital new rural, small-town 
Saskatchewan is breaking new ground in value-added 
agriculture, in forestry, in tourism, in energy and in information 
technology. 
 
A new Saskatchewan where young people stay at home to do 
high-skilled, high-paid work. Where everyone has access to the 
opportunities of economic growth. And where our economy 
thrives on the creativity and knowledge of all its workers. 
 
We’re on the way there. And we’ll get there, with hope and 
common sense, a step at a time. 
 
We must not act recklessly. We have learned through bitter 
experience that we cannot afford to buy our future with 
borrowed money. 
 
The Saskatchewan Way is the balanced way. The sensible 
way. 



2 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 1999 

The people of Saskatchewan recovered from billion-dollar 
deficits in the 1980s and balanced the budget. 
 
And building on that foundation, we are achieving some 
remarkable things together: 
• Our population is steadily growing. 
• Between 1992 and 1997 Saskatchewan led the nation in 

economic growth, and is still growing today. 
• We’re paying down debt, from 70 per cent of GDP to 40 

per cent today. 
• More people are working in good, full-time jobs in 

Saskatchewan today than ever before. Unemployment is at 
a 16-year low. 

• A recent Alberta study ranked Saskatchewan number one 
in youth employment for three years running. 

• Through initiatives like the Northern Dialogue, we are 
building partnerships with Northern and Aboriginal 
communities, working together to open the doors to full 
participation in our economy, and to realize the vast 
untapped economic potential these women and men 
represent. 

• And capital is being invested in our economy. We saw $7 
billion in new investment in 1998 alone – a fundamental 
declaration of confidence in Saskatchewan by the business 
and co-operative community. 

 
Our rapidly diversifying economy is allowing us to weather a 
worldwide economic storm – a decline in prices for oil and 
farm commodities, and an international subsidy war that 
depressed farm prices even further. 
 
Earlier this year, my government acted to help farm producers 
affected by these events. 
 
My government brought in a bridge support program at a 
critical time to assist our hog producers. 
 
A few weeks ago, my government committed $140 million to 
assist producers. We will pay 40 per cent of the proposed 
federal program, to cover 40 per cent of Canada’s farmland, 
financed by just 3 per cent of Canada’s taxpayers. 
 
And my government also announced an $85-million “top-up” 
for NISA accounts. 
 
My government will continue to fight for a national response to 
a national problem — for a national program that will help our 
producers, and is fair to our taxpayers. 
 
These challenges remind us of a hard and sobering fact: Our old 
economy – built on the export of raw unprocessed commodities 
– will always be at the mercy of prices we don’t control. 
 
That’s why we must continue to diversify, into new crops, into 
new resources, and into new value-added services, production 
and manufacturing. 
 
We will not turn our backs on the past. But we must look ahead 
to our future. 
 
The Saskatchewan of today is wheat fields. But it is also 
agricultural biotechnology and food processing and implement 

manufacturing and knowledge export. 
 
It is mining, but it is also robotics and information technology. 
Forestry and forest products processing. And tourism. And all 
the enterprise that our clever and capable people can imagine. 
 
We are building on the old to create a new Saskatchewan 
economy that gives us a fighting chance to ride out boom 
and bust cycles – at last. 
 
In this session of the legislature, my government will continue 
this important work: 
• My government will continue to work with the business 

and co-operative community to create jobs, to promote 
investment in diversification, to further reduce the cost of 
doing business in Saskatchewan, and to expand trade and 
tourism. 

• My government will make education a renewed priority, to 
ensure our young people learn the skills they’ll need to find 
their place in the new economy. 

• My government will continue to work with industry and 
with researchers to expand and diversify research and 
development. 

• And my government will maintain Saskatchewan’s 
balanced budget and balanced approach. Further measures 
to promote growth, diversification and job creation will be 
announced in this year’s budget, and during this session of 
the Legislature. 

 
Finally, since co-operatives are one of Saskatchewan’s most 
important building blocks in our new economy, my government 
will introduce The New Generation Co-operatives Act to help 
them in their work. 
 

EDUCATION 
 
The next step is education. 
 
My government’s goal is to keep building an education system 
that gives our children and youth the tools they’ll need to “learn 
a living”. 
 
They’ll need a new set of basic skills – how to use emerging 
technology, and how to be comfortable using it to keep 
learning. 
 
They’ll need the full support of our communities. 
 
And they’ll need to be ready to learn, in safe and healthy 
schools. 
 
Our teachers and parents are already making real progress 
meeting those needs: 
• Our province last year completed a top-to-bottom review of 

our Saskatchewan school core curriculum. 
• Twenty-six schools in disadvantaged neighborhoods 

already have pre-kindergarten programs, helping our 
youngest students to be ready to learn. 

• Computers are already almost as familiar as blackboards in 
our schools. More than 90 per cent of our schools now 
have an internet connection. 

• Saskatchewan’s Community Schools are helping local 



March 15, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 3 

neighborhoods and communities fully support their 
students in their schools – and received a national award 
from the Canadian Association of Community Education 
last year in recognition of their work. 

• Schools are being upgraded and renovated, and new 
modern schools are being built in growing communities – 
like Lloydminster, Biggar, and Yorkton. 

 
This afternoon, one-fifth of the population of Saskatchewan is 
in school. All of our school-age children will spend their entire 
adult lives in the twenty-first century. Next September, 12,000 
more students will enroll in kindergarten. 
 
They are our province’s future. And as we approach the 21st 
Century, now is not the time to freeze investment in our schools 
and our children’s educations. 
 
My government today renews its commitment to quality 
education in Saskatchewan – and to investing appropriately to 
ensure our children get the excellent, accessible, world-class 
education they will need. 
 
During this session of the Legislature, my government will 
work closely with parents, teachers and school boards, to move 
forward on some of the key priorities facing our school system: 
• Making sure vulnerable children get the best possible start, 

through stronger pre-kindergarten programs. 
• Making sure children get full benefit from their schools, by 

implementing Saskatchewan’s core curriculum and making 
it more accessible to parents and teachers. 

• Making sure students can handle the basic tools of 
tomorrow’s economy, by providing broader access to 
computers and new technologies. 

• And investing appropriately to ensure all our students learn 
in good, safe schools. 

 
As we prepare our classrooms and students for the new century, 
the time has also come to ask what is next for our schools 
themselves in our complex and challenging times. 
 
More than ever, we must see our schools not just as repositories 
of learning for our children, but as social, cultural and 
educational centres for our communities. The local school can 
become the heart and soul of every neighbourhood in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So, in the same co-operative, collaborative way we have built 
our schools, we will launch a Role of Schools Task Force. My 
government will engage in dialogue with teachers, trustees, and 
our other partners, to define the changing purposes of our 
schools, and to determine how we can best achieve those ends. 
 
In this sitting of the Legislature, my Government will introduce 
amendments to The Education Act to help school boards serve 
families better. 
 
But education and training go beyond our kindergartens, 
elementary and high schools. 
 
Saskatchewan’s universities and colleges are as crucial to the 
future of our children as their elementary and secondary 
schools. My government is committed to working with the 

university community to provide world-class post-secondary 
education – and to making sure our students have fair and equal 
access to that education. 
 
And my Government will introduce The Apprenticeship and 
Trade Certification Act to fundamentally reform and improve 
Saskatchewan’s apprenticeship program. 
 
The goal is an apprenticeship system tightly integrated into our 
province’s economy, helping students get directly into jobs. 
Employers and labour representatives will be given a much 
bigger say in management of the program. Over 5,000 
apprentices will benefit from this reform. 
 
We must make learning a lifelong pursuit, and my government 
is committed to making learning a way of life. 
 

HEALTH CARE 
 
The next step is health care. 
 
My government’s goal is to keep building a strong, sustainable 
health system. Health care that is there when people need it, and 
that helps people stay well in the first place. 
 
Our province founded Medicare. In Health Region One in 
southwestern Saskatchewan, people and communities decided 
to work together to provide themselves with the kind of health 
care they needed. 
 
They were determined that no family should go without medical 
care because they lacked the money to pay for it. And their 
determination lives on in us. 
 
We’ve tackled a lot of problems in that same spirit of 
co-operation and common sense. Our people are justly proud of 
Medicare. 
 
Now is not the time to abandon the principles of our health 
system, nor to freeze our investment in our people’s health. 
 
Instead, we are renewing health care The Saskatchewan Way, 
working together with common sense and balance. 
 
And we have made good progress: 
• By building better clinics and health facilities, that 

communities and citizens need and use. 
• By reorganizing 400 local health administrations into just 

32 regional administrations. 
• And by investing in new, better community care – like 

home care, community nutrition programs, ambulance 
services, first responder programs, and other initiatives. 

 
At the same time, we have been moving ahead with advanced 
care: 
• By investing in new, better acute care facilities, like the 

General and Pasqua hospitals, providing world-class 
hospital services for southern Saskatchewan. 

• And by investing in the latest miracles of modern 
technology – additional MRIs and state of the art nuclear 
medicine facilities in our major hospitals, CT services in 
Prince Albert, and satellite renal dialysis in Tisdale and 



4 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 1999 

Yorkton. 
 
None of this has been easy. Mistakes have been made. But it 
has been worth it. 
 
Now we must move forward, and address the continuing 
challenges in health care. 
 
In this session of the legislature, my government will introduce 
measures designed to tackle some of the key priorities still 
facing our health system: 
• Waiting times. A comprehensive plan will be introduced 

to reduce waiting times for key procedures. 
• Cancer treatment. Important improvements will be made 

to our province’s cancer care. 
• Women’s health. A multi-year plan will be introduced to 

address critical needs for women’s health needs – 
including prevention and better treatment for illnesses like 
heart disease, osteoporosis, and diabetes among women. 

• Health providers. My government will work closely with 
health providers to make sustainable improvements to 
working conditions and terms of employment, so they can 
provide better care. We will work to reach agreements that 
are fair to both health providers and to the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan. 

• And even less spending on administration. In the 
for-profit American health industry, more than twenty per 
cent of health spending goes to administration. Our public 
Medicare system spends a mere fraction of that on 
administration – and my government is going to reduce 
that spending even more, by working with health districts 
to further economize on health administration. 

 
This has been an important year for the Canadian Medicare 
system. 
 
For four years, provinces have tried to cope with deep federal 
cutbacks to health care and other social services. 
 
And for four years, provinces have argued that health care 
should be a greater national priority. 
 
As chair of the provincial Premiers for the past eighteen 
months, our Premier helped lead this national fight. And a few 
weeks ago our efforts were rewarded, when Ottawa announced 
it will at long last begin to reverse its health cuts, and make a 
significant national reinvestment into Canada’s Medicare 
system. 
 
Every penny of that new federal investment in Saskatchewan 
will go to improve front-line health care. 
 
And my government, which replaced every lost federal dollar 
over the years and more, will continue to invest substantial 
provincial funds in front-line services as well – shorter waiting 
times, better cancer treatment and women’s health care, and 
better working conditions for health providers so that they can 
provide better care. 
 
This Legislature can make a further contribution – by 
reaffirming and enshrining the principles of Medicare, and by 
strengthening the rights of patients. 

To that end, and as a first step towards implementing the 
recently negotiated Agreement on Canada’s Social Union, my 
government will introduce The Saskatchewan Medicare Act. 
 
This Act will lock in our province’s unconditional support for 
The Canada Health Act – both its principles, and its continued 
application as a national statute. 
 
This Act will also give citizens the right to be informed about 
the quality of their care and how it compares to other provinces; 
and it will give citizens the right to be heard when they don’t 
receive the care they need. 
 
While debating these measures, my government will challenge 
everyone in this legislature – and those hoping to join you here 
– to explain the public positions they have taken on The 
Canada Health Act and our national Medicare system, 
Saskatchewan’s greatest gift to Canada. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan believe in Medicare. My 
government believes in Medicare. Together, we will protect and 
build Medicare, and we will ensure our citizens have the 
services they need and deserve. 
 

JUSTICE 
 
The fourth step is safe communities. 
 
My government’s goal is to ensure that citizens are safe on their 
streets and in their homes, by working together with police, 
prosecutors and communities to crack down hard on the 
handful of criminals who cause most of the crime. 
 
Saskatchewan’s Serious Crimes Task Force is targeting 
organized criminals and gangs, and the Serious and Habitual 
Youth Offender Comprehensive Action Plan is targeting violent 
and repeat young offenders. 
 
To support these initiatives, my government has pressed for 
important amendments to the federal Young Offenders Act, with 
reforms including adult trials for young offenders accused of 
murder, attempted murder, sexual assault and armed robbery, 
and more appropriate sentencing rules for serious offences. 
 
Some progress has been made on these issues last week. But a 
great deal of work remains to be done to strengthen federal law 
on young offenders. 
 
My government will vigorously pursue these efforts, and will 
support them by introducing measures designed to further 
improve police and emergency services. 
 
My government will continue to work with people and 
communities to turn around the causes that lead directly to 
crime: Unemployment and poverty, lack of education, family 
violence, poor childhood nutrition, and tragedies like fetal 
alcohol syndrome. 
 
Replacing poverty and hopelessness with independence and 
hope are noble causes in their own right. They are also key 
elements of any comprehensive crime reduction strategy. 
 



March 15, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 5 

Important initiatives like my government’s fundamental reform 
of the welfare system, Building Independence, and my 
government’s award-winning Child Action Plan, are restoring 
hope to vulnerable families and building safer communities 
from the ground up. 
 
In this session of the Legislature, my government will press on 
with the Building Independence welfare reform, the Child 
Action Plan, and other initiatives designed to build healthier 
and safer communities. 
 
And my government will introduce The Child and Family 
Services Amendment Act (1999). This important measure will 
improve services to rescue children enmeshed in the sex trade. 
And it will substantially toughen penalties for those who 
sexually abuse these children. 
 

OTHER PRIORITIES 
 
Jobs, education, health care and safe communities are the 
people’s agenda and my government’s priorities in this session 
of the Legislature. 
 
There will be several other important pieces of public business 
brought before you. 
 
My government will introduce an important measure to protect 
the integrity of Saskatchewan elections by introducing The 
Respect for Constituents Act (1999). 
 
This act will require Members elected under the banner of a 
party recognized under The Elections Act to resign their seats, 
and to obtain the permission of their constituents in a 
by-election, before they may sit in this House with another 
party. 
 
Citizens have the right to expect that the decisions they make in 
elections will be honoured until they get to vote again. 
 
Other legislation planned by my government for this session 
includes: 
• Several municipal bills to improve provisions relating to 

property assessment. 
• The Local Government Election Amendment Act, to further 

improve the framework for municipal and school board 
elections. 

• The Animal Protection Act, to improve enforcement and 
provide for the humane care of animals. 

• And The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act 1999, to enhance 
wildlife in this province by building upon the more than 
ten million acres protected through the existing act, our 
Parks, and our growing Representative Areas Network. 

 
BUILDING OUR FUTURE, 

THE SASKATCHEWAN WAY 
 
Friends, Saskatchewan is a place we all know and love, a place 
we are pleased and proud to call our home. 
 
But Saskatchewan is also an idea. 
 
It’s the idea that families – whether they live an arm’s length 

apart in the city, or miles apart in the country – can call each 
other “neighbour.” 
 
It’s the idea that all our people should do their very best for 
themselves and their families – but that we must also work 
together, to accomplish those things we cannot do alone. 
 
It’s the idea that come what may, we’ll get through it if we pull 
together. That today’s problem is tomorrow’s opportunity. 
 
It’s the idea that we can build our future, a step at a time with 
optimism, balance and common sense. And that our future can 
offer something to anyone who wants to pitch in. 
 
It’s the idea that there is a way. The Saskatchewan Way. 
 
We can build our future the Saskatchewan Way, because the 
Saskatchewan Way is about faith – in ourselves and in one 
another. 
 
The Saskatchewan Way is about hope – that the seeds we plant, 
the businesses we open, and the families we nurture will grow, 
and prosper, and bloom. That the cold and dark of winter will 
give way to the warmth and promise of a new spring. 
 
In her poem Spring In Saskatchewan, Vesta Althea Pickel urges 
us all to keep that faith and to live with that hope: 
 

‘Reach out and feel the air and smell the earth, 
‘For Springtime here is life, new hope, rebirth.’ 

 
Good luck, God bless Saskatchewan, and God save the Queen. 
 
His Honour retired from the Chamber at 3 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Pro Forma Bill 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
a Bill respecting the administration of oaths of office be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill read a first time. 
 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

Introduction of Pages 
 
The Speaker: — I wish to introduce the pages for the session 
to the members of the Assembly. I’ll ask that the pages will 
each stand as I introduce them: Sheena Simonson, Melanie 
Bratkoski, Kris Parker, Darcy Criddle, and Dean Mulhall. Hon. 
members, your pages for the session. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

TABLING THE SPEECH FROM THE THRONE 
 
The Speaker: — I also wish to inform the Assembly that in 



6 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 1999 

order to prevent mistakes I have obtained a copy of the speech 
of His Honour the Lieutenant Governor which I now lay on the 
Table. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Speech from the Throne 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, again, Mr. Speaker. I 
move, seconded by the Deputy Premier, the member from 
Regina Elphinstone: 
 
 That the speech of His Honour the Lieutenant Governor be 

taken into consideration on Tuesday, March 16, 1999. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Printing of Votes and Proceedings of the Assembly 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
Minister of Economic and Co-operative Development and 
House Leader, member for Saskatoon Idylwyld: 
 
 That the Votes and Proceedings of this Assembly be 

printed after first having been perused by Mr. Speaker, that 
he do appoint the printing thereof, and that no person but 
such as he shall appoint do presume to print the same. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I move this House do 
now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — Before putting the question on the 
adjournment motion I have a few announcements to make. 
 
First I would like to thank all the guests and members of the 
public for joining us here today. 
 
And now I want to welcome the Central School choir from 
Swift Current. I will be calling on them in just a moment to sing 
for us immediately following the adjournment. 
 
Following the choir selections I would like to invite everyone 
here to join their Honours, the Premier, the Leader of the 
Opposition, the Leader of the Third Party, and members of the 
Legislative Assembly at the Speaker's tea which will take place 
immediately following the Chamber ceremony. The tea will be 
in two locations — room 218 in the west wing and room 255 in 
the east wing. 
 
It has been moved by the Premier that this House do now stand 
adjourned. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Speaker: — I would now like to welcome Central 
School’s grades 4 and 5 choir from Swift Current, under the 
direction of Marilyn King and accompanied by Mildred Friesen. 
The choir will sing two selections for us this afternoon — the 
first appropriately entitled, “Legislature Has Opened”. They’ve 
been waiting for years to perform that I believe. And then 

“Music in My Life”. Ladies and gentlemen, the Central school 
choir. 
 
(The choir sang.) 
 
The Speaker: — Well friends, I had the opportunity and the 
pleasure of meeting this very talented and very polite group of 
young men and women earlier this afternoon. On behalf of all 
of us present, I would like to thank the choir, Marilyn King and 
Mildred Friesen for the very fine performance. 
 
Students you bring here this afternoon an extra touch of class 
and remind all of the hon. members of the Assembly of the 
importance of considering future generations in their 
deliberations and we thank you for your performance today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The song so beautifully performed by our 
choir “Music in My Life” reminds us that the theme of 
Commonwealth Day celebrated one week ago on March 8 with 
a celebration of music. 
 
I invite members and guests to view the Commonwealth Day 
display in the rotunda today. Along with the poster displays, 
there is a collection of musical instruments from various 
Commonwealth countries. The musical theme was chosen as a 
fitting way to celebrate the 50th anniversary of the modern 
Commonwealth. 
 
In her Commonwealth Day message, Her Majesty the Queen 
noted that: 
 

“. . . music knows no difference of language, no national 
boundaries. And because it has become such an important 
part of our cultural lives, it is a universal means of 
communicating with each other. The variety of music 
illustrates our diversity; its common tones and harmonies 
brings us together. Just like the Commonwealth.” 

 
And so it is that Central School Choir has done today. The choir 
will also be performing for us later this afternoon in the rotunda 
and please take a moment to listen to them again at that time. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 3:14 p.m. 



 

 

 


